Book Nine to Twelve]

tvameva mata ca pita tvameva 
tvameva bandhusca sakha tvameva 
tvameva vidya dravinam tvameva 
tvameva sarvam mama _ devadeva

Rendered into English 
by

—. C. L. Goswami, M. A., Shastri ied

[565] B.M. Part II—29

Eleventh Reprint 2010 4,000 
Total 44,000

“ Price : Rs. 150 
(One Hundred and Fifty Rupees only)

Printed & Published by :

Gita Press, Gorakhpur—273005 (INDIA) 
(a unit of Gobind Bhavan-Karyalaya, Kolkata)

Phone - (0551) 2334721, 2331250; Fax : (0551) 2336997 
e-mail : booksales@gitapress.org website : www.gitapress.org

[565]

Number of Discourses

1. The story of King Sudyumna, son of Vaivaswata Manu ...............cccseeccccceseececsssecenseeseneess 1 
2. The posterity of Karusa and other four sons of Vaivaswata Manu ..............csscccecceseeeeeeees 5

3. The story of the sage Cyavana and his wife Sukanya; the posterity of King 
Saryatli -.ccccsccevesctcgusssiavvecesoceeetvses axnesiluvecoTe gouache nae Ie Nimes Bet es eee pe 8 
4. The stories of Nabhaga and King AmbarisSal .............. cee cceeccesecenneccesecceeccereceecccccesscnsceeeeees 12 
5. The story:of Ambarisa (Concluded):.......::c0.ccsscsevescsecssccesnsccensscaccuceeel eusssusesdanecescesseenWecnrone 19 
6. The posterity of Ikswaku: the stories of Mandhata and the sage Saubhari .................... 22 
7.The:story.of the King HariScandra-ccc.cevcccsccccke rece as enetunecessntenceee= ens: oxteet seu sbawens sens seen seco 28 
8. The. story: Of King: SAGalras.cccssccerceccvesecevecescsocedscsosccsnuceceoustenvastys spasscoscenaccssenenuneet hes meamet anaes 31 
9. The story of King Bhagiratha: the descent of the holy Ganga .................csssecessseesceeeeesens 35 
10:Aniaccountiof:Srii Rama's) pastime sires:sccessceseecsceceessescensesesseenree neuen nance nee tees erenenaoe 39 
14. Theiother, pastimesiof-Sriittarnelersscescreseseeees cerns sare es ety soe eevee areca 46 
12. The genealogy of (the remaining kings Of) IkKSW@KU'S JING ..............0..secseeeeceenscecceceeeceeenees 50 
13: The posterity of Nimi:descnbed:...5.........cc20-c.scooseeee- asus tencnmeeceee mensre ten smeenas cetmeesacanadeteaee te 51 
14.A brief survey of the Lunar Dynasty ................sseeeccsssececccsececcnsescccsccescsscensessecensccansseceners 54 
15. The stories of Rcika, Jamadagni and ParaSurama...........ccceseesseseseeeceeesscecceeeesseccceneneeeeees 58

16.Extermination of the Ksatriyas by ParaSurama: an account of the posterity 
of the sage VISWAMItIas:.... << sccscsseeenstensccccrnstenaneciontns ocasnvetnnsusgnsesekterscaettnececpcceceeueratesaraneaas 62 
17. The posterity of Kings Ksatravrddha, Raji and others of the Lunar Dynasty ................... 66 
18: The: story’ Of Vayatl corse... cccctecsee+,anscaqertteneneencenctesee sana needs ace sans sasennsaatattewcasends tears caemeemees 67 
19. Yayati's REMUNCIALION .........cccseccccesccsssceccecccccccccncccasscccessnassssessesessensecenccancessaeauseeserscusasaen= 72 
20. The posterity of Piru and the stories of Dusyanta and Bharata ...............ccccseceseeereeeeeneees 75 
21.The posterity of Bharata and the story Of Rantideva ..............:ccsssseeseesseseeeeeeseeeeeeereeseesenes 79 
22. The genealogy of the Pancalas, the Kurus and the kings of Magadha ........................... 82 
23.An account of the posterity of Anu, Druhyu, TurvaSu and Yadu..............:sccssececcsseeeeeeeeees 87 
24.An account of the posterity Of YACU...............csceseecesseeeeees atte Herel code Pee 91

1. The Lord reassures Mother Earth; Vasudeva marries Devaki and Kamsa despatches

the: six SonS Of DOVAKE .ccéccecicccsocvadcczcdesectaessoaceutabagtus «an sadacanasanivans<chson cadeubsextacewsusteocescemmeeess 97 
2. The Lord enters the womb of Devaki and is extolled by the gods ....................ccessseseeseees 104 
SB: Advent of Lord:StiiKrSmad: ssicaecasccvecesce<oecosdvassesegalacngen eataee escent eee seat x oee sc tmeene eee 109

[2]

4.Slipping from the grip of Karnsa, Yogamaya ascends to the heavens and

UTTETS A PLOPNECY .......ccceeesscceecesscecesssnceesssneeeesessseecentssenseeesesessnnsssaeaseeseesensusneeeeaesseeeeeeeees 
5. Festivities connected with the Birth of Lord Sri Krsna at Gokula ...........ccc:cccsseeeesseeeeeeees 
ammaBES IT SPES TAL TTSESETT UTS T Leda ca esa os eee erences wes sneer teccccrcncccrsitscsccenccvesssnecacccessecavenencecnecssceses 
WADEHUGTATICOION ING GEMOMN TIMAVAMNA <..2c.c.ccc ees eccncoceveccencecnncccccccccccccsccscccnseccccscccccssscceen sees 
8. The Naming Ceremony of the Lord and His Infantile Sports .............eessesssesneeseeesseeeeeees

9. Grace (Showered) ON YASOdA.............:..ccccsssscececeesssesssneceesneeneceeseenssceeeeeesseseecessauaceseeeeesees 
10. The imprecation pronounced (on Kubera's sons) by Narada (and their consequent

FECTION) iecaeeeeeccerceeneccves snares caters prcedercceneesccccrcvactasscecccdcdedccsaccconvscevsssesscasnansscncsonscsseserse 
11.Destruction of Vatsasura and BakaSura ............. eee eeeeeeceseceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees POS ASCs iueeseree 
TPM OIVELAMGCCLOMAG Mal SU lel beeen s acee- nce sate teecerarcerecnavecuneccc--ccecseattectesccbocnssdsacccscccseccecssescees 
13.Brahma is seized with and ultimately rid of infatuation ......:............ceeeeeesceseeeeeseeeeeeeeeeeeeees 
SES TAM IIALC XTOIS IDC Me ON Ol eceeaaccssccserpereercnedesccoevvasredocdcrcctectentebeccecnesescavccscndcccccccccccccecassarsccess 
15. The demon Dhenuka Slain .................ccescesecceccnsceseeccnseeesenseneees Pee R OS oci vis dvedevescovdecse 
TO MIO MOCHVELANCE Ol Wall Vclecesececsnscecscctecscascccesccdessccnccoccssctercccerccesscccescocscceccccscccevccsecsssoncoess 
17.The Lord rescues the inhabitants of Vraja from @ WiIIC fire ............ceecsssesceeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeees 
18. The Lord slays the deMON PralamMba..................cccceseecessscceseccnseccccceneceseeceecseeeeeeeeeeseeeeeeens 
19. The Lord swallows up a Wild fire (AQAIN).................csccesecesccsscceeceescnscnsceeccecnceeseusoeeeeeesones 
20.A description of the Rains and Autumn ..................cccsecceseccseccnseceeccsccesccesaneccceseeesaeceeeeees

CAINE ESONGUNSDINEG DY ING FIULC! cio c..cc..cosccosccceccosccedesssccvsccesnoctocsecscectevccecuscdscevocsceovecdveses 
22. The Lord steals away the garments Of Cowherd MAIS ...............2ccesecseccseeceeccescnscesceecneree 
23. Redemption of the wives of some Brahmanas engaged in a SaCTifiCe ................s0ccceeeeees 
24. The Lord stops the sacrifice to Indra ........ ee Bee Ene owns ens occ cécobccdescccencaceds

Zener lifts) Up) MOUNT GOVard ian dkeeescrercteecceeeetereecersscfesssverssateccccccasesccscescocesecovectecceeeces 7

26.Nanda’s conversation with the cowherds about Sri Krsna's QIOry ...........:cscccecccsseessseeeees 
PHL NRL PEA SN ACOSS Sha A CARIN, sense eEe 
28.Sri Krsna rescues His father from the realm of MANU Aimnceetememen tres ees cosavs diccoai cnesececoscos 
29.A description of the (celebrated) Rasa Play (of the Lord) ............::.ccssccscsssccessscecesssceeseeees 
30. The Gopis' Quest for Sri Krsna during the RAS@ Play .......cccccccscscscsssssssesecsececececeececeees. 
31. The Gopis' Song (at the Lord’s disappearance) during the Rasa EW Aaa ene ree 
32. The Lord comforts the Gopis during the Rasa Play ............::.cccsccccsecessssececsesceeeececceeeeeeeee

35. The Gopis' song in pairs Of VOrS@S (5. .iiv.<ccas5ss00sei.teestorsse tL eee 
36.Karnsa sends Akrdara to Vraja to bring Sri Krsna and Balarama to Mathura ...................

37. The demon Vyoma slain (by the LOL) .............:ccccccscsssescesssesssecssscsacccccecscccscecesscecscesanencs 
38: Akrura's arrival: (in! Viala) sctenntscr-scoce ast cecsctesttepescagestseescostscresieartsteeceertam reer ete ea rete 
39. Departure of Sri Krsna and Balarama for Mathur ............:s:ccsscessesscessssscessenseessenssenusenees

ANyAKriirals GUlogy: (Of the LOM) race eac- aa seta ne scat rearsn codons -aedoresdaccs ter -aosersuecertsrsesstvesclagtisiuane 
41. Entry into Mathura (of Sri Krsna and Balarama).......sc-ssssesssssssssssessesssessssssssssessenseenseneenses

[3]

42.A description of the amphitheatre for wrestlers (set up by Karna) .............cccccceeeeeeeeeeeeee 
43. The elephant Kuvalayapida killed (by the LOrd) ............csssssssccsscsssessescccececessenenssneececeesese 
44. Karnsa_ slain (by the Lord) ..i..cc.....0scccescecesuce vccdeseasvsecdsegseaecels Ge ee 
45. The Lord brings back His preceptor's son (from the abode of Death) ............cccceeeeeeeneeees 
46. The Lord relieves the agony of Nanda (by despatching Uddhava to Vraja with a 
Message Of ENdOAMMeENh) ...c05.:.sccoccsscssscecseoacaccccosscvseersnscccbveresecessecssecse TeCEREET eee Eeyore 
47.Dialogue between Uddhava and Gopis and ode to a black be@............-02eseee000e- ecard 
48. The Lord pays a visit to Kubja (the hunchbacked woman) and Akrira at their 
FESPECHIVE PIACES ............ccceccccessccencsecscccodensccncesssecesecescsacedesee sued ttecds See darnaaeaneT =e a== aaa 
49. Akrira's ViSit to Hastin@pura ......5.:<2.0...ccssssescccensscnssccvbcoscnesecocccccbiedsacds Consett Ee ease Rese E aE eEaeEEn

50. The Lord ensconces Himself in a fortress (built by Him in the western sea under

the name of DWwaraka) ...25..5.5... cece ease cae levees aan deaneten lhcdse te ous oven teeueeeeeeereame 
51.(Kalayavana gets burnt and) King Mucukunda glorifies the Lord ...................:..ceeeeeeeeeeees 
52. Sri Krsna's withdrawal to Dwaraka; Balarama's marriage; Rukmini sends a

Brahmana with a message to Sri Krenaesi3 28a) SE Ree 
53: Sri Krsna carries:away, Rukmintizsek pti co ek See Ph ss ee 
54. Discomfiture of Sigupala's allies and Rukmi and the Espousal of Rukmini by

Sri Krsna solemnized 62275 ek SE Re ee ee ed BI SEO ES 
55.The story of Pradyumna’'s birth (and the destruction of the demon Sambara) .........000.+- 
56. The story of the Syamantaka gem; Sri Krsna weds Jambavati and Satyabhama........... 
57.Syamantaka stolen; Satadhanva killed and Akrira recalled to DWArakA o...ecseesececeseeseeeee 
58. Sri Krsna's espousal with (the rest of) His eight principal Spouses ..................:s2ssss00e0e00 
59. The Lord snatches away (by force) a Parijata tree (from Indra's paradise) and

kills the demon Naraka (the son of Mother Earth) ...................:cssecceeccseconescecensereceeeecseeeees 
60.A dialogue between Sri Krsna And RUKIMIN ...........:.ccecceeeecesceeceeceeeeeceneeeececeeceseeaceasensees 
61.(A description of the Lord's progeny;) Rukmi killed (by Balarama) during Aniruddha’s

WONG) «.cc0002ccsesssuccccduaass tepeetuetedteee remeneneus nn cotecds Cadua dea sa= ates ccs sata ast esaanwaet aan ate eee era 
62. Aniruddha made. Captive’........cccccccstttvarcnennsacsss-cravecaccexecenstevssuaccseteearastataeat a: uuseceestauamenentas 
63. Aniruddha brought back (to DW@raka) ..............ceeeseecceeeeeeeessceeeeccesessesseccansceecceescananeseesecees 
64. The Story Of KING: NIGa> oc. siess.setecescecsccosceendecceccascncecrecuccecanccsdasaseeantensentssnncuecsqasseata=scmacwaw=s 
65. Baladeva triumphantly diverts the river Yamuna from itS COUISE ...............esseeeeceeeseeeeeeeee 
66. Paundraka and others Killed .........cccsccceeeceecceesssssssssecnsenescesececesenseseereceeeeeacoonaerseecaneeeoeens 
67. Dwivida killed (Dy Balar@rma) ...........cccccscssssseeecceeenseeseesccceceeusnseceeceeueeenseseseusseecensceseeeesscees 
68. Triumph of Sankarsana—in the form of dragging Hastinapura ................ceeccecceseeeeeeeeeeees 
69.A Glimpse into the household life Of Sri KrSma .......cesscecccceseececeececescecessestcaceecsecensencateatees

70. Sri Krsna's Daily Routine; Kings taken captive by Jarasandha send their messenger 
£0: SITKPSIVE woe cseccne cece ceucdssdcsavescclatescseee eed aes cuc to URICET Snes tee er 0 a Oe ea oe 
71.Sri Krsna goes'to Indraprasthal 2.i..cs-.cscicsessslotesccectescncntecasaseassusa decbbucassastansea gee attitseteyacacts

72. JAFASANMGHAN Kill .......... eee ceeeccceneeecccceeeecccceneeseeecneceeteeceeeeseesusecucusecansccuansensesensesseeeeeaueeees 
73.Sri Krsna and others return to Indraprastha .........ssccceseceseeeeeneceeseseeeesessessaceneseeesessens 
74. SiSupala killed (by Sri Krsma) .....ccssssssssecssesssseecssssescsessecssenensneneneseseaeacscseesensnenenseeeseneneneens 
75. Duryodhana’s Humiliation ..............:csccsssscecesssseeeessseeeeaceensssssseeaeeeseseersssssnanceseeeceusesceneneees 
76. Salva's Encounter with the YAGAVAS ........cccccsccesecsssecsssscsseeseeecsacseseeesseeeeeeeeseeeesaeeneaseessnes 
=e Bevwece Dei oo 
78. Deliverance of Dantavaktra and Vidiratha; Suta killed by Sri Balarama during His 
PH QTIMAGE .......ceeceeeeceessccensceeesseeeesensncenssneceesnaeecessneesecesssaeeeocaesessecsuceucussanseeseesnaaaaeeseeenaees 
79.An account of Balarama's PilQrimage ................ccceeeeeseecessessnerecesceeceseeeneccnsecceeeeeseeeeeeetens 
BMmS cll Krsiia SiR OCepTOMOn SUG eececereesercvercscetcertrecereoeccecenecvavarssscceesenceceevscccenesncerseseerees 
81. The story of parched rice brought as a Present (for Sri Krsna) by Sudama...............++++ 
82. Meeting of the Vrsnis with the Gopas and Gopis (of Vrnd@bana) .............:ccceeeeeeeseees 
83. Conversation between Bhagavan Sri Krsna's consorts and Draupadi ...........::ssceereeeeees 
84.An account of the pilgrimage (undertaken by Lord Sri Krsma) ........scsssscceceeesesseseneeeesters 
85. The Lord brings back (from the abode of Death) His (six) elder brothers (throttled 
PVs eAIMI Sel) meseree tip came eee dies sesnatreccdeissscecccsusaercacavosssscccnucsscccchasteccunssscsscaassssscncsscccsesccccssene ns 
86.(Subhadra carried away by Arjuna;) the Lord's Grace on Srutadeva ice tie aa 
87.A Song of Praise uttered by the Vedas (in their living form) 
BST FOLOHAUGarESCUCGGI (NOM) (OUDIG) aacicaseccsstesccsescsssvevccsscsdecovsdarserccoscveccsecoccocceccesccesccecseues 
89.(The three chief gods put to test by the sage Bhrgu;) the Lord brings back the (dead) 
MSOISTOIEARED Cell ul iclidcl Saeetasestce tac ccaovss tse co luc doctue tous oen eek cote pncunen ene ane ae au aei a eeab dec rcendetuaeetdcaeebees 
90. The Story of (the amorous sports of) Sri Krsna narrated

“1. The curse of the Rsis invoking the destruction Of Yadu'sS aCe ............ccesesceesssssesceceeesseess

“2. Narada visits Vasudeva and reproduces the dialogue between King Janaka and 
‘the nine YogiSwaras

3.A Description of Maya and the means of transcending it; an exposition of Brahma and 
the Path of Action

5. The Fate of non-devotees; different methods of the Lord's worship according to the 
different Yugas

6. The gods entreat the Lord to return to His divine realm and Uddhava approaches 
Him on the eve of the Yadus' departure for Prabhasa.............-0.ccccccsesecccoccecesccoocesccceceeees, 
7. The Legend of an Ascetic—the Story of eight (out of twenty-four) preceptors (from the 
earth to the pigeon) recOgniZed Dy NIM .........ccsscsccsscccrssssonsusnresccasscssccsrsssencscessececcccrececencs 
8.What the Avadhuta learnt from the nine preCeptors, ...............csssssccccsesconseseccesecsscaesscorseees

9. Story of the seven preceptors, the osprey and others; and the end of the Avadhitas 
discourse

[5 ]

10. The emptiness of earthly and other-worldly enjoyments CxpOSed .................seccceeesneeeeeees 557 
11. The characteristics of bound and liberated souls as well as of devotees ...................----- 560 
12. The Glory of Satsanga; how to perform one's prescribed duty and how to

POMIMQUISH 1? ooo cccs ceececntctesesoccccce sou udaactesceccbcebocten eee canoe nt TORE ey enn 566 
13. The teaching imparted by the Lord in the form of the Divine Swan to the sage

Sanaka‘and his’ three’ brothers «:.............c-sesecccssececcecsesscesseucetenecnecunctestnaeee enna tee terete naa 570 
14.Glory of the Path of Devotion and the Process of Meditation described ...............ssccs+2+s 575 
15. Names and characteristics of the various Siddhis (mystic powers) acquired

TNKOUQNTY.0G a) ......00s.ccstscccesccvsscnanccassbeucevscccnveccudrccausecccucescove cancel ss ttre tTTEneTET aE nea 580 
16. Glorious manifestations of the Lord enumerated ...............ccccseccssseceseeccneseceecensccnsscnrccesaces 584 
17. The duties pertaining to the four Varnas and four ASramas ............sc:ceccsssscececeesecceceeeeeeee 589 
18. The Duties of ANChOriteS AN reClIUSES ................ceseceseceencccenccenceccecenscecscesanecesceecceececarsuecs 595

19.A Dissertation on Devotion, Spiritual Enlightenment and Yogic disciplines in the form

of the five Yamas, the (five) Niyama€@s ANd SO ON ..............cecccesecccesccceseceseeceecccsecessceeeccess 601 
20. JNanayoga, Karmayoga and Bhaktiyoga analySed ................cessecessceeeseceseccesccesseeeseeeeeees 606 
21. The process of determining what is good and what is evil and the secret

UNCEMYING it... ..0c.00.scccecveessseccnsscnnnsscoatecetonnrdsrccncconssensienusserenesecn sareetns tases rae an => eeeaaneie Cae aeaeena 610 
22.Categories enumerated; Distinction between Prakrti and PUruSa .................0sssceceeesseeeees 616 
23. The Episode of a forbearing Branmana...............csssseccccsecscccessescceseseuscecscessesteneceeeesecseeeass 623 
24.A Dissertation ON SANKNya-YOGA............cceeccceeccssscescccnescnsccsscceseccececcecseussscucecucenansscesecens 631 
25. The operation of the three GUNAS GESCTIDE ...............seseesecccccessscscecensnscccceneessceseeaneesesnnes 634 
26. The Utterance of Purtrava bearing on Aversion for the pleasures of sense.................... 638 
27. The Yoga Of Formal Worship ...........cc.ssssssssssssceceseeceesesesnenecacceeeeeeereessnsesesetenseeessnseesnersecens 642 
28. The Highest Truth Discussed ..................00++: Satine sonn onaundavebeeie rere cevensgans-saeseseeteceesecmmedeaaees 648 
29.Courses of conduct pleasing to the Lord; Uddhava's departure for Badarikasrama ....... 654 
30. Holocaust'of Yadu's' RaACe:s.cssseserserestensowcerees = ccncecdeet stents pacanduacecusestes=sansacuavaancsnecavascnencesees 660 
31.The Lord's Ascent to His Divine REAIM ...............:ceeceescccercceccsccecnercnsseescnscssccasccessccensceeees 664

1.Lines of kings of Kaliyuga ; 668 
2. The Evils Of Kaliya ..........--scccsesssssceesesssssssesceceesensneereceensssnereenssneceecescecaunessanacccaesesecsanens 672 
3. Vanity of kings; righteous conduct for every Yuga; the means to escape the evils of 
Kaliyuga—tioud chanting of the Divine NAG ik Sidevcdeus aeeteeeent cos eases egeeet essa had ganna teeat 675 
4. The Fourfold Pralaya ..........sssccccsssccereeecessssanceceecersesscneeqeeesneacersessneeeneeeeseceeseucenseesansoeeeneees 680 
5. The (Final) Teaching (of Sukadeva) concerning Brahma ...............sscssesssersseeseseeeneesteneeas 68-4 
| 6. (Pariksit attains the supreme goal and Janamejaya commences a snake-sacrifice;) 
Classification of the Vedas into so many SAkh@s Or SCHOOIS ...........:cceseescesersescesssenceesees 6865 
7. Different Schools of Atharvaveda and the Characteristics of the Puranas ...................... 69-4

8. The sage Markandeya embarks on a course of austerities and receives a boon............ 697

[6]

9. The sage Markandeya witnesses the Lord's MAYA ...-sscsscesssessescecsseceesuececsueceecesseeey sensoeces 702 
10. Lord Siva confers a boon on Markandeya .......ssscesssceceseceseseseeesesesesseeaeseeees Seas ere 706 
11.The significance of the Lord's own limbs, attendants and weapons and a

description of the retinue of the Sun-god (changing every month in the course

GDI es

a

STO Aa:

STA erTadse rao,

AQG: the:

€.

SI Weasel:

Discourse I 
The story of King Sudyumna, son of Vaivaswata Manu

Tani dalftt aaret aah Aidavarddda ge pai ale | 
asd Uda aa weiddasa: iad alsdidecard SH geedaari 2 | 
a & faaea: wt aqudiielt an ade As saH IGA FT: | 3 | 
Vat at GM Ae aeaqakats Al ata versed et Bseat fe a: 1 x | 
a am a vans saws 21 det a: qaaidiat adat aq fanart & | 
The king (Pariksit) submitted : The accounts of all the (six) Manvantaras (divisions of 
a Kalpa or day of Brahma, presided over by a Manu), as well as of the heroic deeds 
performed in them by Sri Hari of unlimited prowess have been heard by me as told by you.(1) 
| have (further) heard from you that the same royal sage, Satyavrata by name, the (then) ruler 
of the Dravida territory (in South India), who attained spiritual enlightenment through 
devotion to Sri Hari (the supreme Person) at the end of the previous Kalpa was, born as 
(Sraddhadeva) a son of Vivaswan (the sun-god) and became Manu (in the present 
Manvantara). The names of his sons, Ikswaku and other kings, told by you, have also been 
heard. (2-3) To us, who are indeed ever eager to hear you, O holy Brahmana, (pray,) narrate 
their line as well as the doings of those belonging to that line, O highly blessed one ! (4) 
(Kindly) recount to us the deeds of valour of all those kings of sacred renown—those who 
have gone by, those who will follow and those who are ruling at present. (5) 
Ud sald :

SH wife TT Gefa selefearigs: sara wiawen: umedfaci « | 
Sita resumed : Thus requested by King Pariksit in that assembly of (great) exponents 
of the Vedas, the divine Suka, who was well-versed in the cult of Devotion (the highest

religion of mankind), proceeded to speak (as follows). (6)

MH SATA

sjaat wal aq: sredor win werd feet ag aden | © |

TUES TAT «a: eS: ON: 1 a WaTeifed fad Heurdsaa fens | ¢ |

Tea AIM: Gavad valet frida ANT Ways: | < |

Ta «ACS Re: | aTeMavat adisiget faaeayadl Wa: 101

: l\aRerd get a at a aia fay: 1221 
Sri Suka began again : Hear an account of the posterity of (Vaivaswata) Manu in its 
important aspects, O chastiser of foes! It cannot be narrated in extenso even in the course 
of hundreds of years. (7) During the period of (final) dissolution Lord Narayana (the supreme 
Person) alone, the inner Controller and Sustainer of (all) created beings (high and low), 
represented this universe; nothing else existed (at that time). (8) From His navel sprang up 
the calyx of a golden lotus and in that calyx, O great king, appeared the four-faced Brahma 
(the self-born). (9) From the latter's mind came forth Marici and from (the loins of ) Marici, 
again, appeared the sage Kasyapa. And of Kasyapa by Aditi, a daughter of Daksa, was born 
a son, Vivaswan (the sun-god). (10) Of the latter by his wife, Samjha, O scion of Bharata, 
was born Sraddhadeva, the Manu (presiding over the current Manvantara); and through (his 
wife) Sraddha, the high-minded King Sraddhadeva begot ten sons—Ikswaku, Nrga, Saryati,

Dista, Dhrsta, Karisaka, Narisyanta, Prsadhra, Nabhaga and Kavi. (11-12)

asta Tat: Ga afast sam foi fares somes wy: 123!

TA Agel Wal: Ut Bat waaradicheaiqurra sua wala ies!

Sfadiseadon sat eee Waatled: | fate area aa agen Woes: 1241

Vaasa! ae AMA BME! ai fasted Aq: We AlftepAal WHEL 126 |

wie fafae aid wd at saafea faudanet HS Aa we nafafmar ew!

wai uatacdl areca aefenfam: iad: dnewasenqd faaeafya ect

Waa aaa Wa «Ode: | eldeiftmad areal ae tate 12e

Wid, Racwara ede attend: | aa aes A Ene Masta 120!

Wa Safad Wer War A Aen: | stedeterfeqeattena: eae 1221

we SES qt wea aie: icafaemad a4 Waa: yeads: 1221 
In the beginning (before Ikswaku and others were born) the glorious and powerful sage 
Vasistha (the preceptor of the solar race), it is said, conducted a sacrifice in propitiation of 
the gods Mitra and Varuna* for the sake of a son to the Manu, who was (yet) issueless. (13) 
During that sacrificial performance the Manu's wife, Sraddha, who was subsisting on milk 
alone, approached the priest invoking the gods and reciting the Rgveda and, falling prostrate 
vefore him, humbly requested him to conduct the sacrifice in such a way as to ensure the 
birth ofa daughter. (14) On the oblation to be poured into the sacred fire having been taken 
in the hand (for being thrown), the Brahmana officiating as the Hota, who was thinking (all 
the time of the request made by the queen) and repeating the mystic word 'Vasat', propitiated

the fire with a fully controlled mind by means of that oblation, as directed by the 
Adhwaryu.(15) Due to the aforesaid deviation made by the Hota the offspring turned out to

* The Sruti recommends the performance of a sacrifice in honour of the gods Mitra and Varuna for those desiring to have

a son in the following words :— ‘Haraevifate paid Yaar: ’ |

Dis. 1']\: “°° BOOK NINE™"’

We SCRE REBT RR KER Te Me Re BE RE RE ROR RH Be Re RE Me Re Ree Re Re RE Re Re He Re Be Re eRe Re Re Bee Ree Re Be Re Re eRe Re Re Re Re Re Ree eRe He Re Re eRe Se He Re Re Re Re Ree Re See Be Re

be a daughter, who was named as Ila. Not much pleased at heart so see her, the Manu 
submitted (as follows) to his preceptor (the sage Vasistha) :—(16) "O glorious sage, how has 
this ritual conducted by you, exponents of the Veda, yielded such a contrary result ? Oh, what 
a pity ! Such a reversal of the fruit of the Vedic Mantras should not have taken place. (17) 
You are (all) well-versed in the (proper use of ) the Mantras and (thoroughly) disciplined and 
have (all) your impurities burnt by austerities. How (then) could this frustration of your 
purpose be expected as untruth in gods (which is impossible) ?" (18) On hearing this question 
of Vaivaswata Manu the glorious sage Vasistha (the grandfather of my grandfather”) came 
to know of the deviation made by the Hota and replied (as follows) to Sraddhadeva (son of 
the sun-god). (19) "This frustration of you purpose has been brought about by the contrary 
intention of the Hota. Yet by virtue of my own spiritual glory | shall confer on you the privilege 
of having a good (male) progeny." (20) Thus resolved, O king, the glorious sage (Vasistha) 
of extraordinary fame, extolled Lord Visnu (the most ancient Person) with the desire of 
transforming Ila into a male child. (21) Pleased with him, the almighty Lord Sri Hari bestowed 
on the sage Vasistha the desired boon (of manhood for Ila). (And) thereby Ila (the daughter 
of Vaivaswata Manu) became Sudyumna, the foremost of men. (22)

@ Url wens faa grat atiad: aidan G2te11231 
wy Seat ad Mis WAR! cadisayT at sm fear iexi 
a want at Aen wads giaad wnaesal wan: welt iru 
dha, sis ward ae: uwdkel! sasaq fama a agar qa 1RE! 
aa daqm: wad siefeefandai esr faaqaisyad aterm: a1 R01

Taking up a charming bow and most wonderful arrows and protected by an armour, and 
surrounded (accompanied) by a few followers, the hero (Sudyumna) rode a hunting on one 
occasion, O great king, through a forest on (the back of) a horse of the Saindhava breed 
(peculiar to Sindha) and proceeded in pursuit of a game in a northerly direction. (23-24) The 
aforesaid prince, itis said, entered a forest at the foot of Mount Meru, where Lord Rudra was 
carrying on (amorous) sports with (His divine Spouse) Goddess Uma (Parvati). (25) The 
moment Sudyumna, the slayer of hostile warriors, made his way into that forest, he found 
himself (turned into) a woman and his horse (into) a mare, O protector of human beings. (26) 
Similarly all his followers felt disconcerted to see the transformation of their sex, and stared 
at one another. (27

(27) :

mova ka: St al Wea Ha: yA Warsea at alae fe A: 1221 
_ The king (Pariksit) submitted : How could there be a land possessed of such a 
(wonderful) potency (of changing the sex of an individual as soon as one entered It) and by 
whom was it rendered such O worshipful sage? (Kindly) answer fully this question (of ours); 
(for) great is our curiosity (about it). (28)

* The pedigree of the sage Suka has been clearly delineated in the following well-known couplet in biaise of 
Vedavyasa :— 
Sad Sfaeran We: WAAHCHAA | WARIS Ae Yad THAT 
"I bow to that storehouse of asceticism, the sinless Vedavyasa, the great grandson of the sage Vasistha, grandson of Sakti 
(Vasistha's son), son of Paragara (son of Sakti) and father of Suka."

PRR RRR Re RRR HR Re CRINCUEHRGAVATA .. cicsvnctewewcawerddcusneees 
Hy Fa 
Una frit SSAA aa: | feat ferferPrrareat: Had: ACUPTAT 12S I 
ar famtaniaen tet fare sifser yar Ate aaa attaraa waded 1301 
says daldler was ware: | fad: TATRA ATATARTAUTISTA, 138 t 
ame sma fran: freer eH @: sfalead a ot atieg wefefe 1221 
da mea ad we a yee alata fel a aga fare ae 447133 | 
ay GIaSTaaY Ae | ASIA Se: Ufigal alas aA WTA AM: 1361 
aia ad dea ay: aad Waa del SAAT YRCAAITT 134! 
wd ain: Gat AMA Faia ager afagtit BAA 13a! 
Gaal at cat eel Hu Yyarilfed: | qaMeMaal = GRaqaMad WEAN! 
Pea a wag anaaqial a aga pdfaane fagnad 3c! 
a Yar a Alaa Aes Sl aa Mas: | seal aT HT Aaaisad Ae 1381 
BAAS HI SAA URS AAT | aA SAT ANAT A A ST: 1So | 
daichel Wal wer fares gare: | afaonoennsrt ayqudaaeT: 121 
dd: Uhura aie sfasmaft: sy: 1 Gea Set TM Ga Al a 1<2! 
Sf serrad FeqUel TRASH Sika Tae SHORE Hertsea: ka

Sri Suka continued : Once upon a time sages of sacred vows repaired to that land

(of llavrta) in order to see Lord Siva (who ordinarily lives on Mount Kailasa), driving away 
darkness as well as (all other) light from.the quarters (by their superior splendour). (29) Much 
abashed to see them, Goddess Parvati (the Mother of the universe), who was uncovered 
(at that time) sprang immediately from the lap of Her Consort (Lord Siva) and put on Her 
raiment at once. (30) Observing the fond union of the (divine) Couple, engaged in (amorous) 
sporis, the sages too withdrew from that forest and proceeded to the hermitage of (the divine 
Sages) Nara and Narayana (which is altogether free even from such outward display of 
sexuality, the very sight of which is tabooed in the eyes of celibates and ascetics). (31) 
Thereupon, in His eagerness to please His beloved in Spouse (who was greatly disturbed 
in mind by-having been seen in dishabille by other males), Lord Siva uttered the following 
(words):—"Whatever male enters this reserve shall (forthwith) become a woman." (32) From 
that time onward indeed males shun that forest. Sudyumna, for his part, who was (now) 
transformed into a (young) woman, roamed about from forest to forest in the company of her 
attendants (also likewise transformed). (33) Perceiving that excellent young woman 
roaming in the precincts of his hermitage, surrounded (accompanied) by (other young) 
women, the glorious god Budha (son of the moon-god, presiding over the planet of the same 
name, now known as Mercury) conceived a passion for her. (34) That pretty damsel (of 
charming brows) also (in her turn) coveted the said son of King Soma for her husband. (And) 
he begot a son, (known as) Purtrava through her. (35) Having thus attained the form of a 
woman, King Sudyumna, son of Vaivaswata Manu, remembered the sage Vasistha, the 
preceptor of his race: so have we heard. (36) (Thought of by her and instantly appearing in 
person before her by dint of Yoga,) the sage was sore oppressed with pity to see that 
(changed) condition of Sudyumna and desiring the latter's (restoration to) manhood, 
(mentally) approached (prayed to) Lord Sankara. (37) Pleased with the sage (Vasistha) and 
in order to secure his gratification and (at the same time) to justify (maintain the truth of)

Dis..2 ]- «> BOOK:NINE:.--

Lease ceetet iat kiLecrt ce ceterte re eRe tert Ere TP eet atte eee ee eee

His utterance*, the Lord (Sankara) spoke as follows, O protector of the people:—(38) 
“Sudyumna, born in the family of your proteges (the solar race) shall be a male for one month 
and a female during another (by turns). Let him protect the earth with pleasure according to 
this arrangement." (39) Having regained manhood, the object of his desire, (of course 
subject to this condition) by the grace of his preceptor, Sudyumna protected the earth (as 
its ruler). (Since, however, he remained in hiding out of shame every other month,) the people 
did not approve of him. (40) Three sons—Utkala, Gaya and Vimala—were born to him, O 
Pariksit ! They became rulers of the southern region (the Deccan) and were (great) lovers 
of virtue. (41) Then, in the ripeness of time King Sudyumna, the ruler of Pratisthana (the 
modern Jhusi, a town situated near the confluence of the holy Ganga and Yamuna, on the 
left bank of the Ganga, opposite to Allahabad) retired to the forest, relinquishing (the 
sovereignty of) the earth in favour of his son Purdrava (begotten by Budha through his 
feminine form). (42)

Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the story of Ila, in Book 
Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Discourse Il

The posterity of Karusa and other four sons of Vaivaswata Manu 
HYP SAA 
Wai ast Wah Adqdae: Wal ges aa wd AAT: 1g | 
Tiss «== «BR AYA Seas, Alc aaa, car | 2 | 
Gaee Wal: Gat wWalet WSO sa: | Waa WM AM Wat akaaad: | 3 | 
Weel wifaae we ander fr adfaiaarmt Ta sera de awyqset | x | 
Uni VANE ASAT, A BRIT AAMT | eed Hat Bat Fas gl & | 
wg ae seem Ari sia aut: RR: Wee! « | 
erst qaustamt fiteratedetd: | Maer yet dict we af aaa | 9 | 
TIA «ea OSG: «| ONENST | Salata eat AY Sorat Pr g:faa: 1 ¢ 1 
aq Waa ena: HaMEMeHmd: 1A aay: Bard HAO afar! < | 
UW WA We sere Heale: | semaq ad ak setter giiraq 1201 
area owmaft «Mate | ater! Walid TY NaS Ta yTMec TA: 12k 1 
feuds: wre damascene: \aqwatraat «He AAT: 1221 
Sea «Aga: «= fed: fare «AeA «= eT eraifertepfa: 1231 
Wa ai val ae daria iam wa sm at yf: 12x!

* Vide verse 32 above.

ela: arta frag fieel fagea wed we sayfa 
Raga fad geq wifar fads deteaa: ut ma: 124! 
SOMA ABM: AMA: | SGM Wear wefan: 1261 
qe MEAy a Ae wa fatiqra aa: guiadacatfrerd aq: ie 
am: niet 8 stvarteataa| aa deat am qesla sare amieci 
fret aRerdigeee 86 arsed der dleated: at sadaqq aq: 12¢! 
Sireraearsead, TH TATA SY sere: «YMA = Baaendissa 1201 
adistiasat warts: aay Ue: | rit sit fect stqenval aersfe: 1221 
at sage waeniesa zaiafteraa: sit fesasma: STO 1221 
Kavi, the youngest (son of Vaivaswata Manu), who was free from (all) craving for the 
pleasures of sense, quitted his kingship as well as his kinsfolk while tender of age; and,

installing in his mind on the self-effulgent supreme Person, he retired into the forest and 
entered the Supreme. (15) From Kardsa, (another) son of Vaivaswata Manu, the families of

Dis. 2] .. BOOK-NINE

the Ksatriyas known as the KarUsas took their descent. Devoted to the Brahmanas and 
(themselves great) lovers of righteousness, they became rulers of the northern regions. (16) 
From Dhrsta sprang up the Ksatriya clan called the Dharstas, who attained Brahmanhood 
on (this very) earth (during their lifetime). Nrga's son was Sumati and Sumati's son was 
Bhutajyoti and from (the loins of) Bhutajyoti Vasu was born. (17) From (the loins of) Vasu 
sprang up Pratika and Pratika's son was Oghavan, who was the father of (a son of the same 
name,) Oghavan. A daughter (too), Oghavati by name, was born of Oghavan. (A certain) 
Sudarsana married her. (18) Citrasena sprang up from (the loins of) Narisyanta and Daksa 
was the son of Citrasena. The son of Daksa was (one) Midhvan, of whom Kurca was born; 
and Indrasena was the son of Kirca. (19) (Again,) Vitihotra was born of Indrasena, whose 
son was Satyasrava. UruSrava was the son of SatyaSrava and Devadatta was born of 
Urusrava. (20) From (the loins of) Devadatta sprang up a son Agnivesya (by name), who 
was no other than the glorious Agni (the god of fire). It was he who came to be known 
(afterwards) as the great seer Kanina or JatUkarnya. (21) From Agnivesya originated the 
race of the Brahmanas called the Agnivesyayanas (scions of Agnivesya), O protector of men! 
The posterity of Narisyanta has (thus) been told; now hear (an account) of the line of 
Dista.(22) 
Tarn fesuisa: mado agadi Wa: | Merc: Ware acasitfasiorear 1231 
aesit: Ud: weed waft fag: 1 aia: sacderemmeasisa fafaarht: 12x! 
fafaaiagat wa: wisise afte: iam wert deniers 971241 
weed, Gait sa aedsHachy| dada a aA ngMarafsx-da: 12e1 
Teta aM Ua A AMR HA | Aa fans aria ad fois MAA | 29! 
sores: dea afaonitfgsida: i aed: akan fadeat: area: 12¢1 
Dista's son Nabhaga, who is other than the one going to be mentioned hereafter, was 
degraded to the position of a VaiSya on the ground of his pursuits (such as agriculture etc.). 
His son was Bhalandana, of whom Vatsapriti was born. (23) Vatsapriti's son was Pramsu; 
the learned remember his son as Pramati. Of Pramati Khanitra was born; from (the loins of) 
Khanitra sprang up Caksusa and from Caksusa, Vivirnsati. (24) Vivimsatis son was 
Rambha, whosé son was the virtuous Khaninetra. (And) Karandhama, O great king, was 
the son of the last-named, O protector of human beings. (25) His son was Aviksit, whose son, 
Marutta, became an emperor—the same Marutta whom the great Yogi Samvarta, son of the 
sage Angira, helped to perform a sacrifice . (26) No sacrificial performance of anyone else 
was so grand as that of Marutta. Every utensil etc., was actually of gold and whatever else 
there was in his sacrifice was commendable. (27) (In that sacrifice) Indra (the ruler of the 
gods) felt inebriated by (draughts of) the Soma juice and the Brahmanas were sated with gifts 
of money. The (forty-nine) Maruts (wind-gods) performed the duty of serving up food (to the 
invitees), while (the class of gods known as) the Viswedevas (actually) took part in the 
deliberations of the assemblies. (28)

Te Sa: WAEteneie Usaadha: | aafrercad Sat Alea AL Aa: 1281 
TAA: HAOMM IYA, Aaa: | TeTATAG AL Wifsrqdsaia: 1301 
aq fasorger At aeMaUIeaA | aura Ga: UI: HT Uslaertad 1321 
vere «fase ee ami wea fae aaraattend fag: 1221 
fre: WER wads AA: | faarest agape TT Aaret FAA qe 133 | 
Ss: AAR MART AIT: | AAT, WT PAT: Tecat: 13¥1

SUA PranisyE asaisikseaerl! ser YETTA Aes arte: 1241 
drei gate wai | sMeyengufsrdeiaten: 136 
of sieerrad FEE RAST Sfecrat Tas fecitetseaa: 121

Dama was the son of Marutta and Rajyavardhana, of the former. Sudhrti was born as the 
son of Rajyavardhana and the son of Sudhrti was Nara, (also) called Saudhrteya (son of 
Sudhrti). (29) His son was Kevala, of whom Bandhuman was born; and from (the loins of) 
the latter sprang up Vegavan. His son was Bandhu, of whom (the famous) King Trnabindu 
was born. (30) A heavenly damsel, Alambusa, the foremost of celestial nymphs, chose for 
her husband Trnabindu, who was a repository of qualities worth acquiring. From their union 
were born a number of sons as wellas a girl. Idavida (by name). (31) Through her the sage 
Visrava begot a son in the person of the god Kubera (the lord and bestower of riches) after 
receiving the highest knowledge (of the Self or of Brahma) from his father, the sage Pulastya 
(a mind-born son of Brahma and a master of Yoga). (32) ViSala, SUnyabandhu and 
Dhumraketu were the sons of Trnabindu, (Of these,) Visala, who became a king and 
continued the ancestral line, built the (famous) city of Vaisall. (83) Hemacandra was the 
son of Visala and Dhimraksa, the son of Hemacandra. (And) of Dhtumraksa's son, 
Samyama, was born Krsaswa alongwith (his younger brother) Devaja. (34) From (the loins 
of) Krsaswa sprang up Somadatta, who, having propitiated the supreme Person the Lord 
(Bestower of the fruit) of sacrifices, through (a number of) horse-sacrifices and depending 
on the Lord (the Master of all Yogas), attained the highest goal (viz., the divine state). (35) 
Sumati was the son of Somadatta and Sumati's son was Janamejaya. These were the kings 
born in the line of Visala, who preserved the glory of Trnabindu. (36)

Thus ends the second discourse, in Book Nine of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa Samhita.

FISTS Cee

BA Telatseara:

Discourse III 
The story of the sage Cyavana and his wife Sukanya;

the posterity of King Saryati

MY SAA 
walkie wen ses: A AYA slat a siferat aa faitase aera 2 | 
Gea AA Ta Pa SAS | AM AT ATA WIASASANTL 1 2 | 
a waite: okgm fates ati acted deat welt sa waft 3 | 
a ceretiem ster satientt awed a1 afer Yara dt aE I ¥ | 
WE ArIeasad, Ae A Acq! Weterqarses Gear faferdtsaite & 1 
sas A aeisabiem fadisiagh arf sere qamemesori « |

Wea se fat sitar fH qd aa = satfadt siren Aftia wueda a1 | 
Glee, aa: spat alfasicareaa: 1a seemed aederdied Basic | 
_ Re T STATA Mele, gfedt WA: | Hera OE ae, Gad: 1 eI 
Sri Suka resumed : King Saryati, another son of Vaivaswata Manu, they say, was a 
master of the (highest) Truth, forming the subject-matter of the Vedas. It was he who 
authoritatively advised the ritualistic course of the second day at the sacrifice performed by 
the scions of the sage Angira. (1) His daughter, Sukanya by name, had eyes beautiful as 
a pair of lotuses. Gone to the forest (one day) with that girl indeed, he happened to visit the 
hermitage of the sage Cyavana. (2) (While) remarking the trees in a grove (of the hermitage), 
surrounded (accompanied) by her girl companions, she perceived in the hole of an ant-hill 
a pair of bright things like two fire-flies. (3) Impelled by destiny, the girl in her childish 
innocence actually pricked the two bright things with a thorn and (lo!) a good deal of blood 
flowed from them. (4) That very moment there ensued on this side the obstruction of stool 
and urine among the troops (that had escorted the king to that place). Astonished to discover 
this (phenomenon) the roval sage spoke to his men (as follows):—(5) “Has any injury been 
wrought by you to the sage Cyavana (son of Bhrgu) ? Obviously his hermitage has been 
profaned by someone amongst us." (6) Seized with fear, Sukanya (Saryati's daughter) 
submitted to her father, "Something (wrong) has been done by me. Ignorant as | was, two 
bright things have certainly been pierced by me with a thorn." (7) Fear having been roused 
in him, on hearing that report (confession of his daughter), King Saryati gradually propitiated 
the sage buried underneath an ant-hill. (8) Coming to know (from the drift of the sage's talk) 
of the latter's mind, the king gave away (the hand of ) his daughter to the sage. Saved from 
the scrape (thereby), he asked leave of the sage and returned to his capital more cautious 
than before. (9) 
Gea wad sma uff umeroaqi storm faa sedate: 1201 
Ha BA BoM AWM i dt Ysiaeat Stara aal A ancient ie 
we wast ara at aera: | fad A aat wt sAaMi aditady 1221 
aegis feat | fast sare ee faafatatic 1231 
SaaS ea: | Be arcisPasat «= acitufediafsa: 1ex' 
unr «Seber afi: | Usrest: Husleteeae: aa: 1241 
am fitter aula aaa, qada: | sind off aredt otfert aot aat ect 
aifcar aft ad ufaaada difadti mira sagas fifasazieel

Having obtained the most irascible sage Cyavana for her husband, Princess Sukanya, 
who had come to know his mind, and was (very) careful (too), tried to please him with her 
services. (10) After the lapse of some time hence, the two Aswinikumaras (the celestial 
physicians) called at his hermitage. Receiving them with respect, the sage submitted, 
"Capable as you are, (pray) bestow youth on me. (11) | shall bear you both a cup of that juice, 
€ven though (I know) you are not entitled to a potation of the Soma Juice ina sacrifice. Be 
pleased (therefore) to make my age and exterior such as may be coveted by young 
women."(12) Gladly accepting his prayer with the word “Amen” the two foremost physicians 
(of the gods) said to the Brahmana (the sage Cyavana) “Plunge you into this pool created 
by the Siddhas." (13) Cyavana, whose body was stricken with old age and who was covered 
all over with (protuberant) veins, (nay) who was forbidding on account of his wrinkles and 
grey hair, was made to enter the pool by the twin Aswinikumaras, after they had spoken in

these words. (14) (Presently) there emerged (from the pool) three very lovely males of like 
appearance, captivating to women, adorned with wreaths of lotuses and ear-rings (of gold) 
and finely dressed. (15) Finding them possessed of similar forms and a lustre resembling 
that of the sun, and failing to recognize her husband, that virtuous lady (Sukanya) of 
charming limbs sought the two ASswins as her refuge (invoked their help in distinguishing 
her husband by standing apart). (16) Pleased with her vow of fidelity, the two gods showed 
to her her husband and, asking leave of the sage, returned by their aerial car to heaven. (17)

aemisa | galagerarensrt oa: ieeet sled: Te yee Galatry iect 
Tei deat we PAUCMASAT| SGT | ATs «FA NR 
faatida & fiafee ufaeae sefied) oleate Af: | 
a a wedded fae at wTeSqAEAT 1 RO! 
wi Uesadam wi Herd seq faq 
faufl owe aaa ape fas Ads Tae: 1221 
wa gai fiat wan Alef isart da WAT aag YTS: IRV 
aaa fa aq ed adteaiiesm fafa: cesta afte 1231 
Intending to perform a sacrifice, King Saryati visited the hermitage of the sage Cyavana 
(once more) some time afterwards and saw by the side of her daughter (Sukanya) a male 
possessing the effulgence of the sun. (18) When she bowed at his feet, the king, who was 
not much pleased at heart as it were (to see her) and did not pronounce (on her in return 
for her salutation) his benedictions either, reproached his daughter (in the following pungent 
words):—(19) "Whatis it that you intended to achieve, O vile lass (by this unworthy behaviour 
of yours)? Your husband, a sage adored by the (whole) world, has been betrayed by you in 
that, having deserted him, stricken as he is with old age and (therefore) not liked by you, you 
wait upon this vagabond asa lover! (20) How has your reason embraced a wrong conclusion 
in that bereft of (all) shame, you (have taken it into your head to) harbour a paramour ? This 
is indeed a stain on your family, O girl of noble pedigree ! (By this reprehensible conduct of 
yours) you will (surely) hurl the family of your father as well as that of your husband into 
hell. (21) To the father, who was talking in this strain, that girl of innocent smiles smilingly 
replied, Dear father, he is (no other than) your son-in-law, the delight of the sage 
Bhrgu."(22) She (then) related to her father the whole story—the way in which her husband

had regained his youth and acquired a charming appearance. Astonished and supremely 
gratified (at this), the king (lovingly) hugged his daughter. (23)

ae ase, at ae Be ae! seeder: Ba dee 1ex!

ei met at wetted: aes were wafer ania: 1241

stasiteid: Ad We aaa arts: i faesttata ad ya arate afeerdt 1261 
The sage Cyavana (then) enabled the heroic king (Saryati) to propitiate the Lord through 
a Soma sacrifice and by dint of his ascetic power bore a cup of the Soma juice to the two 
Aswinikumaras, even though they were not entitled to drink it. (24) Full of indignation, Indra 
(who gets enraged in no time) took up his thunderbolt to kill the sage. (But) Cyavana (sen 
of the sage Bhrgu) paralyzed the arm of Indra, holding the thunderbolt. (25) From that time 
forward all (the gods and others) consented to a cup of the Soma juice being given to the

two Aswins, who being physicians had heretofore been precluded from a share in the 
offerings of Soma juice. (26)

Dis. 3 ] BOOK NINE 41

We Fe Ke Ge Ke Se Gr Ke Ke He We He We Hr Hr Ve Be Se We wr He Hr Se We He He We He We We Ve He Ke he Ge HY He Me Pee Re YB Te Be Be Be Re eA EAHA AOA HAMA ET

Sate yor st 86 wa: | aaa UN snaale Yadiswad 1201 
Tiswags wt fatrata SUVS | sikerdisyern fasaamaldarer 1221 
wa at wet 3 amepfeedgqran Heit tadt aeat eres fasy aa: 1291 
wae UR sAelerHAUad i anadam Ware ferdlsoslequr: eT 130 | 
Tet SATA ATT ACT eA ATA HE EAT THAT FIR 
oe TOM, Feat wrest ee a ge: AgatlargM wary A A UHR aR 
eporent sfererret era Terr Tee eth fea: \qa, Tes cada aedcal aga: 1331 
Sanaa Ue Aas ee WM: i yet waa wa wastes: 13x 
saat ate) Quasraurentta: | senfepisfiterenst = 4u: MU: | 
Rh WUasarae Wighacerafera: 1341 
Ut camangt sem aeanfed | acahket wat Us ay ANTAUTSAT 1261 
gia sPErTaa AS GRAS Becta Aare qdaisena: 131

Uttanabarni, Anarta and Bhirisena—these were the three sons of Saryati; from (the loins 
of) Anarta sprang up Revata. (27) Having built a city called Kusasthali (Dwaraka), inthe heart 
of the ocean, and ensconced in it, the latter ruled the Anarta (the modern Gujarat) and other 
territories, O subduer of enemies ! (28) A hundred excellent sons, of whom Kakudmi was the 
eldest, were born of Revata. Taking his daughter, Revati (with him) Kakudmi went to 
Brahmaloka (the highest heaven), which is uncovered by the sheaths of Rajas (passion) and 
Tamas (ignorance), in order to ask Brahma (the highest ruler of this material world) about 
a (Suitable) match for the girl. As (however) music was going on (there), Kakudmi failed to 
get an opportune moment (to broach the matter) and tarried a while. (29-30) At the end of 
the performance he bowed low to Brahma (the first created being) and spoke out his mind 
(to the latter). Hearing his submission, the glorious Brahma (the creator) heartily laughed and 
spoke to him as follows:—(31) "Oh, (dear) king, whoever might have been thought of (by you 
when you placed your foot here) have (all) been swept off by Time. We hear no more even 
of the races of their sons, grandsons and great grandsons. (32) Time computed at (the figure 
of) thrice nine (twenty-seven) revolutions of (all) the four Yugas (Satya, Treta, Dwapara and 
Kali) has (since) rolled by. Therefore, go; there is (now) the mighty Baladeva, a part 
manifestation of the supreme Deity. (33) Give away this jewel of a girl, O Kakudmi, to that 
jewel among men. For removing the burden of the earth, the almighty Lord, the Protector of 
created beings, the very hearing and chanting of whose glories and names is sanctifying, 
has (Himself) descended (on earth) alongwith His (aforesaid) part manifestation (Lord 
Balarama)." Thus instructed by and bowing to Brahma (the birthless one), the king 
(Kakudmi) returned to his capital (Kusasthali), deserted (already) for fear of Yaksas by his 
brothers, staying here and there (in various quarters). (34-35) Giving away his daughter 
(Revati) of faultless limbs to the powerful Balarama, the king retired to the hermitage of the 
(divine) sage Narayana, known by the name of Badarikasrama, in order to practise 
austerities. (S36)

Thus ends the third discourse, in Book Nine of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ste Be Be tect de Se te te Be te Be te Be Be Be Re Be er Be RR EA RARER EEE AAA LAA AAALAC SEES Be Br kr Hr

BIA Ad*Aseaa:

Discourse IV

The stories of Nabhaga and King Ambarisa 
Hyp SAAT

> a ad dd Wet: wad aay aM aa Hereford | ¢ |

gimistien fe Aa aera frat dal at Anatase Yah dalget: | 2 |

SX oafewa: Ganeds GaN 1Ws wpMdere aa aha wafer 3 |

died sida Gm 2 awed neea:1a adet at aaah: | x |

areaha ASA AIRS AM S HAL aAM | aS aa aq: ST aA aaah & | 
Sri Suka resumed : Asonof Nabhaga (another son of Vaivaswata Manu) was Nabhaga, 
to whom, the youngest (of his brothers) and (most) learned—(just) returned (from the house 
of his preceptor after an unusually long period) as a religious student—his (elder) brothers 
assigned (the maintenance of their (aged) father (Nabhaga) for his share of the ancestral 
property (which they had already divided among themselves, leaving nothing for Nabhaga, 
who they thought would remain a lifelong celibate). (1) "Brothers, what have you set apart 
for me ?" (he said.) "We (hereby) allot our father to you," (they replied). (Nabhaga then 
approached his father and said,) "The elder brothers have given you as my share, O dear 
father !" "Pay no heed to their word, dear child !" (he replied). (2) "These (neighbouring) 
Brahmanas, scions of the sage Angira, are performing at present a (big) sacrifice. Coming 
(however) to the ritualistic course for every sixth day, the wise ones commit errors in that 
course, my learned son ! (3) Teach those noble souls a couple of Suktas (hymns) in 
propitiation of (the gods called) the Viswedevas. While ascending to heaven (on the 
completion of the sacrifice) they will bestow on you (all) their wealth that may be left after 
the sacrifice. Therefore, approach them." Then he did in the same way as he was told and 
the (said) Brahmanas rose to heaven having bestowed on him whatever was left after the

sacrifice. (4-5)

a cia Gteier Ges: HwOlega: | saraswat ANd ach aq « |

Coming up from the north, a certain dark-looking person (who was no other than Rudra,

the god of destruction) said to Nabhaga while he was about to appropriate that wealth, "(All) 
this wealth left on the sacrificial grounds is mine.” (6)

meqieentia ae A AMa:1 eat a feat wa: gam fiat aati © | 
warm eadykesqwa: wladiagpidunt wa a ta: adadft | 
TUR Sorae dag faa adel sae A faa wae wl waread i @ | 
ad a fadtace at at a Tel Wea cat A AE A AE Bama 1201 
Terr xeaut ad eA Ulett saqaardied Sal WTA Aatae: 122 | 
a Ud Ae Mat: Aa aA qaatied: | wfavdata aagt aft Ba qenssar: 1221 
ATA S AST TaA: Sal | Age Hes BA afte: HPL 123 |

Nabhaga (the scion of Vaivaswata Manu) thereupon returned:—"This is mine, (inasmuch 
as it has been) vouchsafed to me by the sages (who performed this Sacrifice).” "Let our 
question be referred to your father !" (Rudra rejoined.) Nabhaga (approached and) asked his

. = 4S

DIS: Sivas ei, POOR NINE, eee 
father (Nabhaga) accordingly. (7) (Nabhaga said,) "At some sacrifice (performed of yore by 
Daksa a lord of created beings) the sages determined everything left on the sacrificial 
grounds as a share meant for Rudra; hence that god deserves all that wealth."* (8) 
(Returning and) bowing low to Rudra, Nabhaga said, "The wealth left on the sacrificial 
grounds is undoubtedly yours, O lord: so says my father, O holy one ! With my head bent 
low (therefore) | pray for Your grace (apologize to You)." (9) "Since your father", (replied 
Rudra), “has spoken what is right and you too have uttered the truth, | (hereby) impart to 
you, the seer of Vedic Mantras, knowledge which is the same as the eternal Brahma (the 
Absolute). (10) (Please also) accept (for your subsistence) the wealth left after the sacrifice 
as a gift from Me." Saying so, Lord Rudra, who is (so) fond of truth, disappeared. (11) He 
who with a fully concentrated mind reverently remembers (mentally repeats) this story (both) 
morning and evening becomes alearned man as well as a knower of (the meaning of ) Vedic 
Mantras and attains his goal (in the shape of final beatitude or God-Realization). (12) From 
(the loins of ) Nabhaga sprang up Ambarisa, an eminent devotee of the Lord and (highly) 
virtuous (too), on whom even the punishment (in the form of the magical fire known as the 
Krtya) inflicted by a Brahmana (the sage Durvasa)— a punishment that was not frustrated 
anywhere before—had no effect. (13)

weedeat wwe stad: 1a sy aa Fret sweleuSt axa: 12x 
The king (Pariksit) submitted : | long to hear the story of that royal sage, (so) full of 
wisdom, against whom the scourge fully released by a Brahmana—which is (so) difficult to

avert—did not prove effectual. (14) 
My Sa

Ta «= AeTMIT: «aAaluad! = adh! sera a fret wae fata alae Yfa 1241 
Aas Gat wd ad wae! fagM favataiot amt fasria ad War 188 | 
area waft day A AIIM Wa wt fad ae wiead way 1201 
a a wa: qMMENiachtdaifa agvuoqurqauis | 
at witacnsifag ait 9 aeniereqtaenatad 1k! 
Yqrafeqimaaatt qa ACA TACTS AGA | 
eT MS EE ICCC CICC ME Cr? MCC CC cae 
ua am: aauaqadtt faa eitnamafwac | 
ad ad aa a d wearer aaa fa: 120! 
wa wal amore: asia = arate | 
watarna 46s faeerceifat) «=o afasfesnittfad: «= RTA RI 
Sasanenhragttat Trerferqaraterar yaar: 
Aad 122 1 
Ta CT Mate: wae fast SAT: AISI SAI AAT: 123 | 
aif a mRitt ae wasenire: | qwafaeomatcedseetetigad =| 18 1 
andafa aa arm: aRaahetad: igen aie feet dee ee aad: 1241

* The ‘Sruti also says:— SOIT J eH"!

@ su wuksaha ala urfeia: | aedur st MU SSM, Galso-tstat 1261 
Tey ag aay ay fgaraaeretansarg |

SAAT AUTEM ag A age aT TA 1X91 
AS |stats «| NeeeaTae! Wears et years RCI

Sri Suka replied : Having inherited (the dominion of) the (entire) globe with its seven 
divisions (Dwipas) and (alongwith it) an inexhaustible store of wealth and unequalled power 
and luxuries, the highly blessed Ambarisa regarded all that as equal in value to (no more 
valuable than) objects seen ina dream—even though it was most difficult to attaininthe eyes 
of men (of the world—knowing as he did the perishableness of (all) wealth, through which 
man falls a prey to infatuation. (15-16) He had attained that supreme devotion to Lord 
Vasudeva and His pious devotees by virtue of which (all) this (untold) wealth was regarded 
by him as (no better than) a clod of earth. (17) He fixed his mind exclusively on the lotus-feet 
of Lord Visnu (the Enchanter of all); he employed his words (eloquence) in recounting the 
virtues of Lord Vaikuntha, his hands in sweeping the temple of Sri Hari and so on, (and) his 
auditory sense in hearing the excellent stories of the immortal Lord. (18) He employed his 
eyes in seeing the idols and temples of Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) and his 
tactile sense (pervading all the parts of his body) in touching the limbs of His servants 
(devotees); he devoted his olfactory sense to the fragrance of the blessed Tulasi leaves 
derived from (the contact of) His lotus-feet and his sense of taste to the food etc., offered to 
Him. (19) (Nay,) he employed his feet in repairing on foot to the tracts of land (Mathura and 
SO on) consecrated to Sri Hari and his head in bowing to the feet of Lord Visnu (the Controller 
of our senses) and coveted the offerings (such as wreaths of flowers, sandal-paste, scents 
and dainties) made to the Lord not with a desire to gratify his senses (only) but with a view 
to (attaining) His service (as a token of His grace). And he did all this (merely) in order that 
attachment may be conceived (in his mind) for the servants (devotees) of Lord Visnu 
(enjoying excellent renown). (20) Thus resigning from day to day all his round of duties to 
the supreme Lord, who is above (all) sense-perception and whose worship excels all other 
sacred observances, and practising devotion to Him with his entire being, he ruled the earth, 
it is said, as instructed by Brahmanas (like the sage Vasistha) devoted to Him. (21) He 
propitiated the almighty Lord presiding over sacrifices through (a number of) horse- 
Sacrifices conducted by Vasistha, Asita, Gautama and other sages in a desert land facing 
the stream of the Saraswati river—sacrifices that had all their limbs as well as sacrificial fees 
(paid to the priests and other Brahmanas) supplemented by abundant riches. (22) In his 
Sacrifices the Superintending priests as well as the priests officiating at the sacrifice and 
other men (assembled there), who were (all) richly dressed (and adorned too) and were 
gazing with unwinking eyes* (in wonder), looked alike in appearance with the gods (present 
there). (23) (Even) the celestial region, beloved of immortals, was never solicited by his men 
(much less by the king himself—), who (constantly) heard and chanted the stories of Lord 
Visnu (of excellent renown). (24) (Nay,) pleasures of sense which were not easily attainable 
even to the Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystic powers from their very birth) 
did not delight the aforesaid men—who (always) perceived Lord Mukunda in their heart— 
eclipsed as_ they were by the bliss of Self-Realization (enjoyed by them). (25) Thus 
propitiating Sri Hari through the practice of Devotion coupled with asceticism, as well as 
through (the performance of) his (sacred) duties, the aforesaid king gradually gave up all 
attachments. (26) With respect to his houses, wife, children and (other) relations, excellent

eee 
* The gods too are believed to possess eyes which never wink.

Dis. 4 ] BOOK NINE 15

elephants, chariots, horses and foot-soldiers, inexhaustible (store of) jewels, ornaments and 
weapons etc., as well as regarding his endless treasuries he developed the notion that they 
were (all) unreal. (27) Pleased with his exclusive devotion and love, Sri Hari delivered to

him His own discus (SudarSana), the terror of His adversaries and the protector of his 
servants.(28)

srkuetag: get afeen gqeariteariam: alacat al ae glesitaa12e1 
Fara abiiies arf fat aatiia: | ara: ether enferat eft agersead 130 1 
Hertseen fate Ratan | afaftrearrentaecrteraeaeuniara: 1321 
Tee =| STAT HATS STAITIN MTT fegiatata afna: 1321 
Tet VATSTONAT TSSOP | Wal: Biter AATCC TA, 1331 
sient, crafeseal zee =a waist fienmaat wrest TWoreadtaAy 13% | 
OSTA: URUTaaSHA | Te aelfetft: rate Catal WAM 134 |

Intending to please ( the all-enchanting) Lord Visnu, the heroic king (Ambarisa) 
undertook (in right earnest) alongwith his wife, who hada similar disposition, a vow to fast 
on every Dwadasi (the twelfth day of either fortnight of a lunar month) fora whole year.* (29) 
On one Dwadasi day (the day following the fast) during the month of Kartika, the king, who 
had duly fasted for three (previous) nightst and bathed in the river Kalindi (Yamuna), 
worshipped Sri Hari in the (sacred) forest of Madhuvana (on the site of which was built the 
city of Mathura later on). (30) Having bathed Lord Visnu (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva) 
according to the procedure (laid down in the scriptures) for a royal bath, requiring a rich 
variety of accessories (Such as sandal-paste and flowers for scenting the water with), he 
worshipped Him with his mind absorbed in Him by offering raiment and ornaments as well 
as sandal-paste, flowers, water for washing the hands with and other articles of worship, and 
(similarly) honoured with reverence the highly blessed (devoted) Brahmanas even though 
they had (all) their objects accomplished (and thus did not seek any honour). (31-32) He 
(then) gifted so pious Brahmanas and sent to their houses sixty crores of cows endowed with 
(abundant) milk, good disposition, young age and a good appearance and accompanied by 
their calves and (necessary) appendages (which are usually given alongwith a cow, such as 
a vessel for holding milk while milking a cow) and which had their horns plated with gold and 
hoofs with silver and were covered with excellent pieces of cloth. He first gave the 
Brahmanas delicious and most excellent food to eat and, permitted by them, when they had 
received all their desired objects (such as presents of money), he set about concluding the 
fast (by taking his meal). That very moment there appeared before himan unexpected guest 
in the person of no less a personage than the glorious sage Durvasa. (33—35)

aaa «9 YA: «| AIRMATETE I: | ares aaenTa WeIeTIrTa: 1361 
ofaasl BW deren wdalasach wa: | Praast ged Aad Sllerdtateres YA 1391 
Vediafafisrat qexat uret siti fermara «sit fastetatterge 1361 
ATS «AS SAAT ASU | Se eM MAT A TGA AT TAT AL 1B

* Although every Vaisnava or votary of the Lord Visnu is enjoined to fast on the eleventh day of either fortnight of each

lunar month throughout his life, Ambarisa obviously took this vow for a period of one year only and that too in Madhuvana in

order to impress on the people the advisability of fasting on this day.

+ Anyone observing a fast on the Ekadasi day is expected to have one meal only on the preceding as well as on the the 
following day and to observe a total fast, abstaining from all food and drink including water, on the Ekadasi. It is in this sense 
alone that King Ambarisa should be taken to have fasted on three consecutive nights.

ah }

sa HaSaA HAST AaUTROTLI erorarot fas aie at A Ad vol 
Sau: SRA INBREA TAE sees SES fara a: Ise 
gale GaAIend ATaeI MTA: | Uasabadarea gan uated feet ise

TIA | Salevia ypepleara: | ayfads = ad HUB SANAT 12 | 
sat ate yataer firateter uaa deci = fete: 1s 
St wmahtraanmeaa fra alata yatta ded ald Horse 
wa gam spa wel tofadiita: a a fria aet Hat HOMO SE | 
aad 4 saediafaeet del Yai aud agqgied A Adie Ualya: Isl 
wifes Seaaat GSAT ARIAT! aale Hel al ash Hallera Aah: 1¥c! 
defaced aT aS ehemi gaan gaat dict feat snort xe

wana Wass i aarfregaereat aanter, |

aaah Afaiemmont det fafaa: waa Ad: 14ol

feat au: eat fears aagiewier aueifafead wa: a: |

wat ait oat aa WA UR gue eat Iu

aoe: A al pasa Aaatferatscomann: |

ca) fait Came )SOs faenaerenaisiradsral «ATT 1421

(Putting off his meal,) the king honoured the newcomer by rising from his seat, offering

a (high) seat and other articles of worship and, approaching (bowing at) the soles of his feet,

prayed him to dine. (36) Having gladly accepted his prayer, the sage went (out) to finish his

routine work (for midday, viz., bathing and devotions) and, fixing his mind on the Infinite,

plunged into the sacred water of the Kalindi (for a bath). (37) Since (only) half a Muhtrta (or

twenty-four minutes) was left of the twelfth day (and it was necessary to conclude the fast

during the hours of the Dwadasi itself), Ambarisa (who knew what was right) began to

deliberate with the Brahmanas on the question of concluding the fast in the face of such a

moral crisis (conflict of duties). (88) (He said:) "Since there is sin in showing disrespect to

a Brahmana (by inviting him toa dinnerin the first instance and then taking one's meal before

feeding him) and there is (also) sin in not concluding one's fast (for the Ekadasi day) within

(the hours of) the (following) Dwadaégi, pray, tell me a course of action consequent upon

which good may betide me and sin may not touch me. (39) (Then, arriving at a conclusion

in consultation with the Brahmanas, he said to himself,) Since to take water—so declare the

Brahmanas—that is as good as taking food (for the purpose of breaking one's fast) and at

the same time it is no eating, hence | shall break my fast with water. alone."* (40) Having 
thus taken water and contemplating on the immortal Lord with his mind, that royal sage 
(Ambarisa) only awaited, O jewel of the Kurus, the return of the Brahmana (the sage 
Durvasa). (41) Having gone through his (midday) routine, the Sage Durvasa (too) returned 
(inthe meanwhile) from the bank of the Yamunaand, (even when) greeted by the king, came 
to know his act (of drinking water) by intuition. (42) With (all) his limbs shaking through rage 
and with a face (looking) curved due to a frown, the sage, who was (feeling) extremely 
hungry too, spoke (as follows) with reference to the emperor, who stood with joined palms 
(before the sage):—(43) 'Oh, look at the violation of Dharma (the principles of righteousness) 
on the part of this cruel monarch, intoxicated with fortune and lacking in devotion to Lord

* The Sruti also says:-' Aswad qaanferd Taraferry |

Visnu, and looking upon himself as all-powerful, in that having invited me, arrived (at his door) 
as a newcomer, to accept his hospitality, has broken his fast without offering food to me ! 
(Turning to the king himself,) | shall forthwith show you as such the consequences (of your 
un righteous act). (44-45) Speaking thus and pulling a matted lock (from his head), the sage, 
who was inflamed with anger, created by means of it a female evil spirit (Krtya), akin to the 
fire seen at the time of universal dissolution, in order to get rid of Ambarisa. (46) Though 
clearly perceiving her overhead, emitting flames and rushing (toward him), sword in hand, 
making the earth quake under her feet, the emperor did not stir from his place. (47) Already” 
told off by Lord Visnu (the supreme Person), the universal Spirit, for the protection of His 
devotee (King Ambarisa), the discus (Sudarsana) burnt the aforesaid Krtya (even) as fire 
would burn an angry serpent. (48) Frightened to see over his head the discus rushing 
towards himself (after burning the Krtya) and his own endeavour (to kill Ambarisa) 
infructuous, the sage rad in his anxiety to save his life in different directions. (49) Sudarsgana 
(the discus of the Lord) pursued him (even) as a wild fire with its flames thrown upwards 
(by the wind) would chase a serpent. Observing the discus close upon his heels as aforesaid, 
the sage fled in his eagerness to enter a cave of Mount Meru. (50) (Flying in this way) 
Durvasa betook himself to (all) the quarters, the sky (the aerial region), (the various parts of) 
the terrestrial world, the subterranean regions, the (seven) oceans, the (different) spheres 
as wellas their guardians and heaven (too). (But) Whithersoever he fled, he saw (at his back) 
in each such region the formidable Sudarsana. (51) When (however) no protector was found 
by him anywhere, he got frightened at heart and, seeking an asylum, approached the 
glorious Brahma (the creator) and prayed (as follows): “O maker (of the universe), O Brahma 
(the self born), protect me from the might (in the form of the discus) of Lord Visnu (who is

conquered by none).” (52) 
STENATA

We wudad agama misma =feaueat

qugaan fe dewalt: arent ae fertsfeertt 1431

ae 48 HAN STATI: THMYAAA ASM: |

aq aq afad sam aqeifit coeefed ae: 14x!

yearend fakea faepetcaita: | gata: anol ara: ae orearfary 1441 
Brahma observed: After a period of two Parardhas, when the pastime (of the Lordin

the shape of creation etc., of the universe) is over, my sphere alongwith (the rest of) the 
universe will surely vanish as a result of the mere contraction of brows on the part of the Lord 
in the form of the Time-Spirit, eager to burn away (all) this (objective universe). (53) Myself, 
Lord Siva (the source of the universe) and others with Daksa and Bhrgu at their head—the 
foremost of Prajapatis (lords of created beings), Bhutapatis (the lords of ghosts and other 
evil spirits) and the chief of the gods (such as Indra)—we all submissively obey His Law, 
beneficial to the (whole) world, as a burden placed on our head. (Hence we are unable to 
protect you against His wrath). (54) (Thus) refused by Brahma (the creator) and scorched 
by SudarSana (the discus of Lord Visnu), the sage Durvasa sought as his shelter Lord Siva 
(the Destroyer of the universe), who lives on Mount Kailasa. (55)

Hee SATA 
ai a ama saa we afer wseseniilacnten: 1 
gata wie a waht deem: eee at Ad WAT: 141

“ Vide verse 28 above.

4 
q 
Wr

° SRIMAD BivAtGAVATA T Dis. 4

3é WAAR AR was: | Hfretsardy want ad sight: 1491 
Tiassa faeean: Unealal: | facia A ad Ga Gaal Aaaissqal: 1&2! 
aa faders we edad fe aia wet aie efter at freed 149 
aad frat gale: ug wadt aati aquoret aqearet sitfrara: Brat Ue 1&0 | 
aegaristrrracte 89 amas tt: | aT | 
ee «Aaihtad s Hara wa fe faavaq ee! 
aad «NCO CTC: TOT 
faafe daenafafa famadeala aaragfed areenisft 1g 
Sri Rudra remarked : "We have no power, O dear son, over the infinite (all-pervading) 
Supreme, in whom indeed other universes too—as vast as this—forming the body of Jivas 
(embodied souls) in the person of Brahma (the birthless creator) appear in thousands at the 
appointed time (the time of creation) and (then) cease (merge in Him at the time of final 
dissolution)—universes in which we (Brahma and Myself) are being tossed about (like tiny 
insects). (56) Myself, the sages Sanatkumara and Narada, the glorious Brahma (the 
creator), Lord Kapila, the sages Apantaratama and Devala, Dharma (the god of piety), the 
sage Asuri and other omniscient lords of Siddhas (inspired seers) headed by the sage 
Marici—we are all unable to penetrate (the veil of) His Maya (deluding potency), enveloped 
as we are by that Maya. (57-58) Since this is a weapon of that Lord of the universe and 
therefore hard to resist for us, (please) seek Him alone as Your protector. (1am sure) Sri 
Hari will bring you security." (59) Having no hope (of help from any other quarter) left, the sage 
Durvasa went from there to the Lord's (own) realm, called Vaikuntha, in which resides Lord 
Visnu (the Abode of Sri) alongwith (His divine Spouse) Sri (the goddess of fortune). (60) 
Being scorched by the fire of Sudarsana (the missile of Lord Visnu, who is conquered by 
none), the sage fell shuddering at the soles of the Lord's feet and said, "O immortal and infinite 
Lord, sought for by the righteous, O Protector of the universe, (kindly) do protect me, an 
offender (that !am). (61) An offence has been committed by me against those beloved of You,

ignorant as | was of Your supreme glory. (Pray,) wipe off that sin, O Director (of the universe)! 
By the (very utterance of Your Name even a denizen of hell gets liberated.” (62)

ATTA TATA 
ae ut geadat sa fest araficieecal Weta: 163 | 
TETRA Meh: Weafeda | Bra creda we Bat we oe Ex! 
& eRMIRYATAM, STO, feat ae fear at aU arat: Het aA 1641 
af = feigece: 9 area: «9 Wagar: | atten At sae aise: Tea aT 1661 
Aaa sid a AetaMeaqead| Awa daa yu: grits arehIEML 1g | 
wera eed el A ee AL He a OA OA ae Aral aT ec 
set afer dat fax apy ddl st mentee aaa ag a var | 
May sed Ast: Ted: Hosta 163 | | 
at fat a fast f:staaet atid wa efit aedat anes iwol 
meee eS VR A AMMA FOI aaa vst aa: anfPasifaerhr 12 | 
elt Sead Ae US Medal Aaa AaesemA: 1

Dis. 5] : BOOK NINE 19

Br Br Sr Be Hee He Be We Be He He Be He Ke He Be Kr He Be Br Ke Kr Ke He Ke Kee Ke Ve Kee Ge Ke Ke Ke Re Kee Ke Ke We Ke Be eH Be Ke He He Be Re He Bee he Re Ke Be Be he Be Be Be Be Ree eRe eRe PRA GRR RE RCE

The glorious Lord said : My heart having been (completely) taken possession of by My 
pious devotees, | am really subject to the control of such devotees like one who is not self- 
dependent, O Brahmana. And | am the (only) beloved of My devotees. (63) As apart from 
My piaus devotees, to whom | am the highest goal, | covet neither Myself nor Goddess Sri 
(My Consort), who is eternal (like Myself), O holy sage ! (64) How dare | forsake them who, 
having renounced (all attachments for) their wife, house, children and relations, (nay,) their 
(very) life and wealth and (their welfare in) this and the other world, have sought Me as their 
protector? (65) Pious souls who have fastened their heart on Me and look upon all with the 
same eye enthral Me by (their) devotion (even) as virtuous ladies enthral their virtuous 
husband. (66) (Feeling) sated through Devotion, they do not desire even the four types of 
final beatitude, beginning with Salokya or residence in the same heaven with the Lord (the 
other three types being Samipya or close proximity with the Lord, Sardpya or similarity of form 
with the Lord and Sayujya or absorption into the Lord), though attained (actually) through 
service rendered to Me. How (then) can they covet anything else (such as the position of 
Indra) which is subject to the ravages of Time? (67) Pious souls (devotees) are My (very) 
heart (most beloved of Me), while | am the (very) heart (the most beloved) of the righteous. 
They do not cognize anything else (dearer) than Me nor do | know in the least anyone else 
(dearer) than them. (68) | shall (however) point out to you a means of escape (from this 
calamity), O Durvasa ! (Please) hear it Seek him alone because of whom this violence 
perpetrated by you has actually (recoiled on you and thus) proved to be an act of self- 
immolation. Force employed against the righteous brings harm to the striker (himself). (69) 
Asceticism and worship (offered to a deity) are both conducive to the highest good (final 
beatitude) for Brahmanas (endowed with humility and other virtues). In the case (however) 
of a doer who is lacking in modesty, those very practices lead to contrary results (prove 
harmful). (70) Therefore, O Brahmana, may good betide you; approach King Ambarisa (the 
son of Nabhaga) and seek the forgiveness of that highly blessed soul. Then (alone) willpeace 
(of mind) come (to you). (71)

Thus ends the fourth discourse, forming part of the story of Ambarisa, 
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ISSR OD

31 USAISeAa:

Discourse V 
The story of Ambarisa (Concluded)

RH SAI 
wa oo wmaatsset «- gafarsrmanfia: i oratteqarger denet gfardisrdtd | ¢ 1 
aa aed dle Ueerataehart: | Stedrealel, atta HoT aifSct ye 1 zt 
Sri Suka resumed : Thus directed by the Lord and scorched by His discus (Sudarsana), 
Durvasa came back to Ambarisa and, full of sorrow, clasped the latter's feet. (1) Observing 
the endeavour on the part of the sage (to seek his forgiveness), Ambarisa, who was much 
ashamed at the sage's touching his feet and sore stricken with compassion, began to extol 
the aforesaid missile of Sri Hari (in the following words). (2)

' * * 
Se Se rte Be Bete Ber Be te Oe dr te Be Be Pe Ree Re Re A RAE AAR E EA EAA EAA LEAL LALA NOSES SEL EG eB tr

STRIY SAAT

aufina adied at safrat oft: | aad farfreaia argaiatsenfor a1 2 
aelt owaqEl 4 deere ira! wafernies fara waft yer yoerd | ¥ | 
@ oie wa @ adishamanya | a Clenae: water a ae: Utee TTT

aa: Gaaikawanada wadaitongryacnda |

Saami faqeada wiarrgqedor yrigt

aaa aida ded aa: Nes gl AeA

eee ode fet ut aaaadd ead WaT! © |

aq fageeamea a ac wfasisita cuanat|

Aaa SS ANaTTT qaurastat wet farsa i ct

a a wem waosea feta: «adeet veryar!

fara: oped «fate «Reet fe 1 8 
Zaha eas at wert al Maid: | He at fancd de fest sad facan: 1201 
ae at War Sd Un: aay: | adyaesead fet waq faraz: 1221

Ambarisa prayed : You are Agni (the god of fire) and the glorious sun-god; You are 
Soma (the moon-god), the lord of the (other) luminaries (lunar mansions). You are water, 
You are the earth and the sky, the air, the (five) objects of senses (viz., sound, touch, sight, 
taste and smell) and the senses (themselves). (3) Hail to You, O Sudarsana, endowed with 
a thousand spokes and beloved of the immortal Lord! O Destroyer of all (other) missiles, 
may You be propitious to the Brahmans (the sage Durvasa), O Protector of the earth ! (4) 
You are righteousness; You are truthful and polite speech as well as the faculty of regarding 
all with the same eye; You are the Deity presiding over (all) sacrificial performances as well 
as the Enjoyer of all sacrifices. You are the Protector of the worlds and the Soul of the 
universe; (nay,) You are the transcendent effulgence of the supreme Person. (5) (Altogether 
unable to glorify You,) O Sunabha (a discus with a beautiful nave), | simply address the 
exclamation "Hail" to You, the Upholder ofall virtues, a veritable fire to destroy demons given 
to unrighteousness, the protector of (all) the three worlds, possessed of purest effulgence, 
quick as thought and credited with marvellous deeds. (6) By Your splendour, consisting of 
righteousness, the darkness (obscuring the vision) of great souls is dispelled and their light 
preserved. (Nay,) this (entire) creation, (both) manifest and unmanifest, high and low, is 
illuminated by You (in the form of the sun, the moon and so on). Unfathomable is Your glory, 
O Ruler of speech ! (7) When, hurled by the Lord, who is (wholly) untainted (by ignorance 
etc.), You actually enter the force of the Daityas and the Danavas, O invincible One, You 
shine brightly in battle while unceasingly lopping off their arms, trunks, thighs, feet and 
necks. (8) As such You, O Shield of the world, have been detailed by Lord visnu (the Wielder 
of a mace) for the extermination of the wicked, capable as You are of resisting all. Therefore, 
in order to bring good-luck to our race, (kindly) grant Safety to this Brahmana (the sage 
Durvasa); for that would be an act of grace to us (in that it would save us from the sin of 
being an instrument in the death of a Brahmana). (9) If gift was (ever) made (by us) ora 
sacrifice (duly) performed or our allotted duty satisfactorily performed, and if our race has 
looked upon the Brahmana as a deity, let the Brahmana be relieved of his distress (as a

, reward for such a gift, sacrifice or the due performance ofa duty). (10) (Nay,) if the Lord, (who 
is) the one abode of all excellences, is pleased with us by virtue of our looking on all living

‘Br Or Br Br Br Br Be We Be Ke We Br Be Be He Ke Be Hr Hr Hr LRP Pete seeeseeeeLLiLirirrn es Br Be Be Ke Ke Be He Sr Ke Be Ge Be Wr He Hr Hr Ke He He Br Ke Be Be BCE He Be Be Be Ve Br Hr Be Hee

beings as His own embodiments, let the Brahmana be rid of his trouble. (11) 
Mya Sara 
sit Hegadl Tat faapecs asian steer weal fst wege TsTaTEST 1221 
: a el gate: wafetaredd: | sarta qdqaiat aaa: aise: 1231 
: sri Suka continued : While the emperor (Ambarisa) was thus hymning Sudarsgana, the 
said discus of Lord Visnu, which had (hitherto) been scorching the Brahmana (Durvasa) on 
all sides, cooled down at the king's entreaty. (12) Rid of the (burning) heat of the fire of the

missile (Sudarsana), Durvasa now felt relieved and applauded the emperor (in the following 
words), pronouncing the highest blessings on him. (13)

| gale Sara 
Se SAMA Heed gear A Harrah aq ue Ager Galea 1k! 
Ga: cl TAA Gast aT ASSL a: Uae TEM Gages Bie: 124 
aaagianan gam wafa fide: ide didae: fe a aeammafsre 126i 
TetaAT Tela se AAU | Heal USA: seal so aashafar: 1291 
Durvasa observed : Ah, the glory of servants (votaries) of the infinite Lord has been 
witnessed by me today in that you, O emperor, strive for the good even of him (myself) who 
has wronged you. (14) Indeed whatis there hard to accomplish for benevolent souls and what 
is there difficult to forswear in the eyes of the high-souled, by whom Lord Sri Hari, the 
Guardian of devotees, has been lovingly installed in their heart ? (15) What could there be 
wanting on the part of servants (votaries) of that Lord of hallowed feet, through the very 
hearing of whose Name a person is rid of all impurities? (16) O king, | have been (greatly) 
favoured by you, an extremely kind-hearted soul, in that my life has been saved by you, 
overlooking my offence. (17) 
UM adadeR: Waal away Wa Aaa 122! 
Sishraissqqamicataed arent Tara Wait sre Beret aevy 1k! 
Sidiseaqyaisha da aad al agirergitrentaisareraere l2o| 
aalacaadd A Weta w:feet ye: lal aeeat a aif yar 1221 
The emperor, who had not (yet) taken his meal (ever since) in the hope of the sage’s 
return, sumptuously fed him after gratifying him (in the first instance) by clasping his feet. (18) 
Sated at heart after partaking of the (rich) fare (appropriate to a guest)brought to him with 
reverence and gratifying every wish (suiting every taste), Durvasa politely said to the king, 
"(Please) take your food, (19) | am really pleased and obliged by the sight, touch and talk 
as well as by the hospitality—offered with a mind fixed on the supreme Self—of a

(great)devotee of the Lord in you. (20) Celestial ladies will repeatedly celebrate this 
blemishless deed of yours. Nay, this earth (itself) will loudly proclaim Your most sacred

glory." (21) 
SHR SATA 
ua date wart gate: ofidtfia: iat fagrrenssra aEMTHAe THA Iz 
SARUM Wag Aaa ALTA Td: | APY Weatsaiat AYA E122! 
nm oa) gaffe «| Misa fistedhnfeafeorrem 
wetter eT AA ete TET, 1

wanam: a wt Wet meet =| ages 
frase: waae wih 9 aassfafoar Masa Iku! 
STATA Tea src ETC. fagea ant: 
ee

sad. QUARTET ATT ayaa: | Maldaarqearet, Aral Waa AAT 19! 
sft serrad FE GRASS Sedat AaePASAsaG A VarIseAa: 141

Sri Suka resumed : Having thus acclaimed the king and asking leave of him, Durvasa, 
who was highly gratified, rose through the heavens to Brahmaloka (the region of Brahma), 
attainable (only) through disinterested action. (22) A (whole) year had elapsed before the 
sage, who had gone out (in search of a quarter to Brahmaloka and other regions), returned 
(to the capital of Ambarisa). And, longing for a sight of the sage, the king—so the tradition 
goes—subsisted on (mere) water (all these months). (23) And, when Durvasa left, the said 
Ambarisa ate the (remnant of) food that had been rendered most holy by being partaken of 
by a Brahmana (the sage Durvasa). And perceiving the evil plight and (ultimate) redemption 
of the seer (Durvasa), as well as his own firmness in remaining without any food for a whole 
year), he thoughtit (all) to be a glory of the Supreme. (24) Possessed of many such qualities, 
the said emperor (Ambarisa) practised devotion to Lord Vasudeva, the supreme Spirit and 
the ultimate Reality, through his multifarious duties (that stood offered to Him)—by virtue of 
which (devotion) he regarded (all) blessings including the position of Brahma (the creator) 
as (no better than so many) forms of damnation. (25) Now, leaving his kingdom to the care 
of his sons, who were (all) possessed of a disposition similar to his own, the wise Ambarisa 
retired to a forest. (And) fixing his mind on Lord Vasudeva, his own self, he (eventually) had 
his round of births and deaths brought to a close. (26) Anyone reciting and repeatedly

musing on this aforesaid sacred story of Emperor Ambarisa bids fair to become a devotee 
of the Lord. (27)

Thus ends the fifth discourse entitled "The story of Ambarisa," in Book 
\ Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

GIGS CS

HAZ UBS:

Discourse VI 
The posterity of Ikswaku : the stories of Mandhata 
and the sage Saubhari

ferea: HUSA TA TAA: | SI, BNA, ATE weit: 1k 
Timea artat crdasiiid: | sR sara weradthaa: GarL 2 | 
Ud ga SE a UAeaea: war: 1 velar Wau: aadat fee: 1 3 | 
aang wrist gaatguins: Ea: ce waste feefiahitrevean: 1 |

BOOK NINE * 23

wat | |6URMevaaaiad §=«yor | qa usfdaia: use wal wel utsaa: 1 & | 
A UhdsHeg sete: UMM | aaa Het HA wes afar! & 1 
aah A at Te WIM eet Frater! say quad diz: wet aequeyfa: 1 1 
we Megara fit a a dane: lates: sewn esdaeedtanci ¢ | 
Wel US ad ad qeonfafed yu: 1 tenfasanarmra wd ela wari e | 
a oq fas dae wd wrae! Baal Boat anit a Aaa Ad UAT Igo! 
fargraseter feria: «oferta erect aft aa: arene sft fae: 1221 
Rats ET SaaTe Seite: | Hep sia aH: GUT are Haifa: 1221

Sri Suka resumed : Virupa, Ketuman and Sambhu were the three sons of Ambarisa. 
From (the loins of ) Virdpa (the eldest of the three) sprang up Prsadagwa and the latter's son 
was Rathitara. (1) Prayed to for progeny (to continue the thread of Rathitara's line), the 
(celebrated) sage Angira (a mind-born son of Brahma) begot through the wife of Rathitara, 
who was issueless, (a number of) sons invested with a glory resulting from the knowledge 
of the Vedas. (2) Though born of the wife of Rathitara (and therefore deserving the family 
name of Rathitaras), they actually became known as Angirasas (those sprung from the loins 
of Angira). They were (recognized as) the foremost of the Rathitaras (the other progeny of 
Rathitara and their posterity), being Brahmanas endowed with the (martial) qualities of 
Ksatriyas. (3) From the nostrils of Vaivaswata Manu, even while he was sneezing, sprang 
up a son (called) Ikswaku. Of his hundred sons, Vikuksi, Nimi and Dandaka were the 
eldest.(4) Of those (hundred sons) twenty-five became rulers (of small provinces) in the 
eastern quarter of Aryavarta (the sacred* tract of land lying between the Vindhya range and 
the Himalayas), O Pariksit, and as many (another twenty-five) in the western region; three 
(eldest, named above) in the centre, and the rest in other parts (viz,. in the north and 
south).(5) Once on the occasion of a Sraddha (a rite performed in honour of the departed 
Spirits of one's deceased relations) during the Astakas (the seventh, eighth, ninth and 
thirteenth days of either fortnight of a lunar month) Ikswaku peremptorily said to his son 
(Vikuksi), "Vikuksi, go and bring (me some) flesh fit for being offered to the manes. (Please) 
do not tarry." (6) Saying "Be it so!" the heroic prince (Vikuksi) went to the forest and, having 
killed (some) animals fit for (being used in) a religious rite (Sraddha ceremony), 
thoughtlessly ate of (the flesh of) a hare (after roasting it), fatigued and hungry as he was.(7) 
He gave the rest (of the flesh) to (his father) Ikswaku; but the latter's preceptor (the sage 
Vasistha), when requested to sprinkle it with water (and thus consecrate it) said, “This has 
been contaminated (by being eaten of beforehand) and is (thus) unfit for Sraddha.” (8) 
Having come to know of the aforesaid (sacrilegious) act of his son as told by his preceptor, 
the king (Ikswaku) in an angry mood exiled from his country his son (Vikuksi), who had 
abandoned the practice of good men. (9) The king then held a talk (on the ultimate Truth) with 
the sage (Vasistha), his preceptor. As a result of such talk he became established in 
Jfanayoga (the path of knowledge or realization of one's identity with the ultimate Reality) 
and on casting off the body attained (oneness with) that which ts higher than all. (10) His 
father (Ikswaku) being (now) dead, Vikuksi returned (home) and, while ruling this earth, 
Propitiated Sri Hari through (a number of) sacrifices and became known as Sasada (the 
devourer of a hare). (11) His son Purafijaya (the conqueror of a city), was nicknamed as 
Indravaha (the rider of Indra) andalsoas Kakutstha (one whorides the hump of a bull). (Now)

ee Rees hs fee Jesper ema ie Mineo Nr 
* Salad: wrayer fa-eatearral: |

hear by (virtue of) what deeds he earned these (three) names. (12) . 
Sard are GAN Aart WE ara: | fiat sat at gaderrafsia: 1231 
aaa tacae fawiticarcn: WW: | aetA «Fae AYSst | Aalgu: ex 
a tal watered fakrahedt! Waa: Aad WI: ccple fered: 1241 
Asaisseifad fait: Gert WI: | udteat fefar Serrat =reuret Breet: TERE | 
Sa aN OES AMO! aT woot ear, asaq7e 191 
awa 89—|- Afahrateawr| fags SeACa SAAT: ATH RC 1 
frat Ui oH ad ih aU | yaad a Tae ATAsAtad: 12k 
(In those very days) there was a conilict of the gods with the demons—a conilict which 
(all but) wiped out the (entire) creation. The hero (in the person of Purafjaya) was enlisted 
as an ally by the gods, (that had been) vanquished by the Daityas. (13) Desired (by 
Purafijaya) for the role of a mount to him, Indra assumed the form of a gigantic bull at the 
instance of Lord Visnu, the god of gods and the soul of the universe. (14) Protected by an 
armour and taking a celestial bow and sharp arrows, Pu rahjaya, who was eager to fight, rode 
on the back of the bull, while being praised (by the gods), and took his seat on its hump. (15) 
Invigorated by the strength of Lord Visnu, the most ancient Person and the supreme Spirit, 
he besieged with the help of the gods the city of the Daityas in the west. (16) His fight with 
the Daityas was very close and thrilling and he despatched with his arrows to (the abode of) 
Yama (all) the Daityas that encountered him on the battle-field. (17) Quitting the range of 
flight of his shafts, which was hot as the fire at the time of final dissolution, the Daityas, who 
were being (severely) struck (all the time), fled to their home (Patala). (18) Having conquered 
the town (of the Daityas), (so) full of splendour, as well as all the wealth (contained in it), 
that royal sage made it over to Indra (the wielder of the thunderbolt). It was for these reasons 
that he was called by a number of names (Indravaha, Kakutstha and Purafijaya). (19) 
ages OISYeaTeea: «=: I faafeaaast «= aay) ae: 1201 
Meet a Wee AAA yti geead Welker: HacaaH: 121 
a fereigge spt acti gaameafiee aeeatede dd: 1221 
on sit Wide A sede: | gta ad wa vwaraatfad: 1231 
qa: alteras wera sit Mal aeragat eat frarsrecqa: Ba: 12%! 
TTA PEM PUMAsaea ai! FaaaAsvad AA Pisa aA Wa: 1241 
Tara Sr AMS FMiea: | Se I adasieest A aaarfee: 1261 
Shell Seta oaaieiea ida Pf afta: | apr area fee Oot Haase TT 1 RVI 
ube aly ae Het WAU: HA Hla dtd Gat Wer 12! 
vat aiqara «Safed «Agama «aAaER «6 aaa AGA 12S | 
iat Ie SUT ret fitter een qa | aaa! «so «= -& 1301 
2 area a wrt Waa FAL At MAT aA AT Veh SfartNT 138 
AU qe fascaeled: | genase axa amet fafgaom 1321 
oe Sq face 77 Ta a1 See, Aah Big Bay Waunea: 1331 
aera pee amacet WY: | MAgtradtcn: Waardasay 13% | 
et a aa mafaiae yfefat: adda 868d | Gatmenadifeer 34

holds Ganga on his head

‘

Entreated by Bhagiratha Lord Siva

ew 
pee 
id 
oe

-_ 
Ded '> 
é Se fr... x 
~ -% 
—

y 
te

7 —

—_ 
rm 
’

a ee

We 60 Ce en ete s ree en me

ia | 
eet: . - 
ey

ahiges

ait

ui

eo seal a 1h ae:

i Ot peg gi 1 ae 
=~ I. WH a ‘ 
:* ne . ‘ P

: = : ~ 
we 
- ; ° hen — mt , 
"Sy ee 
lat oe es me woes

Taleearaa war sf

Lord Rama

SUT EE TLL

Peas a

wre =

—

, . 
: fe 
ee ao er

titi etesosgwareair 
Jy s

7 
sei » Ox 
F ae TG _ £ 
- 2 fw ~~ ies @ . 
eee we ow 1 ee ee we ee he oe eee

L

apurusottama

the Maryad

detetidindintsen tt eee ws @4 6 608

eee ee ine ne Rs eee ee 
boat are

hi Yrane wager 4 y 
Sse) isseaioe i} 
one ” s

owe Tiasge dt 2” wOE Vg 7 MOTO =/

ed

77 ~

. 
. . 
if “Se x 
} } x 
~ 
- Sal

as

| Gres 2

y Siliigiire,

i 
i 
as : +" ‘e) 
ry ie

op

i :

Bbtut

ad 
f

+ il +y

at

: a“, pl ors

i) 
Ad

iy 
at) Pa

batho

7 
ay eg THY, 
“Se anpae

~ 2 Wades os Se nee

> = — Ae 
(oda

Pi

(A)

ri Krsna

2

Childly pranks of Lord S

Liberation of Dantavaktra and Vidtratha

NEY ak. FY,

Restoration of dead sons of Devaki

' 
‘ 
' 
| 
‘ 
| 
| 
| 
' 
| 
a 
'

lation of Yadu dynasty

I

ye 4 
SCD Pee

: (

on 
rn, 
——e

coh ae 
wT

er 8

% 
a 
aw"

Curse for the ann

— ~w 
3

Seems Fone

-- _s 4 
of ol

Vas 
at oS 
aft aw 
bees

The glimpse of final departure of Lord

e 
= 
- 
_ ——" 
a ee ee

Dis. 6 ] BOOK NINE 25

Wr Br Be Br Be Br Ke Be Wr We Kr Br

The son of Purafijaya was Anena (the sinless) and Prthu was the son of Anena. From 
(the loins of ) Prthu sprang up Vigwarandhi and Candra was born of Vigwarandhi: and 
Yuvanaswa was the son of Candra. (20) The son of Yuvanaswa was Sabasta, by whom the 
town of Sabasti was built; while Brhadagwa was the son of Sabasta and of the former, 
Kuvalayaswa was born. (21) With a view to obliging the sage Utanka, the powerful 
Kuvalayaswa, Surrounded (accompanied) by his twenty-one thousand sons, killed a demon; 
Dhundhu by name, and (thereby) became known as Dhundhumara (the slayer of Dnundhu). 
(Almost) all the aforesaid sons of Dhundhumara, however, were burnt up by the fire that 
issued from the mouth of Dhundhu; only three, viz., Drdhagwa, Kapilagwa and Bhadraswa 
were left (alive), O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata)! Haryaswa was the son of Drdhaswa, while 
that of Haryaswa was called Nikumbha. (2224) Barhanagwa was the son of Nikumbha; 
Krsaswa, of Barhanaswa; and Senajit was the son of Krsaswa. senajit's son was Yuvanaswa. 
Being issueless and (therefore) full of despair, the latter (however) retired to a forest 
(hermitage) alongwith his hundred wives. The sages (of that hermitage) were (very) 
compassionate by nature. Lo! with (great) concentration of mind they conducted on his behalf 
a sacrifice intended to propitiate Indra (the Lord of paradise). (25-26) Feeling thirsty at night, 
the king (Yuvanaswa) entered their sacrificial hut and, finding the Brahmanas (in charge 
of the sacrifice) asleep, drank the water (that had been) consecrated with Mantras (and 
reserved for the principal queen) himself. (27) Seeing the (sacrificial) pitcher without water 
when they got up (in the early hours), Oking, the priests now enquired (of the king) whose 
work it was that the water capable of producing a male child had been quaffed. (28) Having 
presently come to know that the water had been drunk by the king (himself) as impelled 
by Providence, they offered salutation to the Almighty Lord, saying: "Oh, the power of 
destiny (alone) is (the real) strength !" (29) Then, when the time came (i. e., after a period 
of nine months) a son, (who was) destined to be a rular of the (entire) globe, was born, 
splitting open, itis said, the right pelvic region of king Yuvanaswa. (30) When the babe cried 
much (for being suckled) and the Brahmanas anxiously inquired: “Whom will this prince 
suck?", Indra put into the babe's mouth his index finger (dripping with nectar), saying “The 
babe will suck me (Mam Dhata); do not cry, my child !" (Hence the babe became known as 
Mandhata). (31) The father of the babe did not die by the grace of the Brahmanas and the 
gods (even though he had his pelvic region split up). (Nay,) he forthwith attained perfection 
(final beatitude) in that very hermitage through asceticism. (32) Indra for his part gave him, 
O dear Pariksit, the name of Trasaddasyu (the terror of miscreants) inasmuch as villains like 
Ravana (the demon king of Lanka, who was subsequently killed by Lord Sri Rama, born in 
that very line) were (much) afraid of him and felt (greatly) agitated (because of him). (33) 
Powerful through the might of the immortal Lord, Mandhata, son of Yuvanaswa, ruled the 
(entire) globe consisting of the seven Dwipas (main divisions) as its one supreme Lord. 
(34) Although a knower of the Self, he propitiated Lord Visnu (the Deity presiding over 
sacrifices)— who not only represents all the gods (on His person”) but embodies all and 
is above sense-perceptionby means of (a naumber of) sacrifices in which liberal Daksinas 
(or presents of money) were given (to the Brahmanas). (35) (As a matter of fact,) the material 
(to be used in a sacrificial performance), the sacred texts (uttered in the course of a 
sacrifice), the procedure (laid down for conducting it), the sacrifice (itself), the sacrificer as 
well as the priests (officiating at the sacrifice), Dharma (religious merit resulting from a virtuous

f a sacrificial performance—in fact, the whole universe

deed), the place as well as the time oO fort 
Beis body. (Itwas such aLord whom Mandhata worshipped through the aforesaid

[565] B.M. Part lI—30

Re Fr Sr Fe He Ve Br Hr Fr 
See Re Re RRR RAL EA LE AG ER RB TES, Re Re Re We Me He Re Ar Sr He He Hr

sacrifices). (86) The whole extent ofland from the point where the sun rises to the point where 
it sets is called the territory of Mandhata, the son of Yuvanaswa. (37)

SqArdsic TARA: uid: ifadiad Aer ates HgAafor: 139 1 
sre fas: SAA | BISA Wat HAA, HT HAT WAAL 1¥o | 
aq fairer elt sxcisarana: baclaied Wich Sade wWeeled: 1X21 
eet asst acatormadtitads| fH Ugssuntaa aad: AY: 1s 
af: saa: aor Hard qUyksrd| Fas Waa: Used AX: 1431 
ara aferye yaieedisdtar Gea ae A a git Tata eel

The emperor (Mandhata) begotthrough (his queen) Bindumati, the daughter of Sasabindu, 
(three sons, viz.,) Purukutsa, Ambarisa and Mucukunda, (who turned out to be) a mystic. (All) 
the fifty sisters of these (princes) chose (the sage) Saubhari for their husband. (38) 
Submergedin the water of the (holy) Yamuna and practising supreme asceticism (there), the 
Brahmana (Saubhari) conceived a longing for conjugal delight on seeing the happiness of 
a leader of fish pairing with other fish of the opposite sex, and (accordingly approached and) 
asked the king (Mandhata) for a girl (in marriage). The emperor too said (in reply), “Leta girl 
be gladly taken by you in the event of your being chosen by her of her own will, O holy 
Brahmana !" (39-40) The sage (Saubhari) thought within himsel—"! have been (indirectly) 
refused by the emperor, thinking me to be unwelcome to women, knowing (as he does) that 
| am disliked by them, being old, covered with wrinkles and grey-haired with my head shaking 
(all the time). (41) | shall (therefore) make myself so perfect (faultless of limbs) as to be 
coveted even by celestial women, much more by human princesses," Thus resolved, the 
powertul Sage was ushered by the chamberlain into the gynaeceum set apart for the 
princesses, which was full of luxuries (of every description), And (lo !) that one individual 
was desired by (all) the fifty princesses to be their husband. (42-43) (Nay,) there arose a 
great quarrel over him among those girls, so that casting sisterly affection to the winds, they 
Said to one another, “He is fit for me and not for (any of) you," their heart being set on him.(44)

a a@uen aaa: Sarre hseg 
Tey AAA OTST ATR ArTTeHeAAAg IS&| 
AGleqAe a eA YOO RATA eons aaSIA ch: 
AOPTAMT TAY Pree WspNaaesiysarey 1a | 
Tweed gf aalet 9 apelvadiuta: 1 fata: eraser adunBrarbadd Ive | 
a pao fase, fafad: ga: i aaa a Aqelasaedlcnitarten: Isc 
€ said sage Saubhari (who being a student of R 
Agveda, was a master of powerfu 
eal) revelled with them everyday In mansions that were equipped with invaluable 
ice ages by his inexhaustible wealth of saceticism, and which were not only crowded 
Ae Pe a women (servants and maidservants) well-decked with ornaments but were 
lim di e singing birds and bees and panegyrists—as well as on the margin of lakes of 
ka i pa * Steeen with beds of Kalharas and in parks of every description, using valuable 
eals, Costly wearing apparel and precious jewels and taking delight in baths,

atte ete and flowers. (45-46) Observing the (luxurious) household life of 
3 en) Mandhata (the ruler of the entire globe consisting of the seven Dwipas):

* The Sruti says:— :' (He i i 
| SAayS:— @ Sch xT Saat:' (He is the body of which the other gods are (so many) limbs).

various kinds), Saubhari did not feel satiated with manifold delights (of sense) any more than 
a fire would with drops of clarified butter. (48)

a waite 6 arenaganiem: aeet | agate «© ime ferry xe | 
at Ha feet | aafea: «= waftaacer | 
STAI aka wenfad sa fat gat aAitol 
Ry wea gaat qaqa: water a fade afehhsenfer | 
WHIT Wit frat gal geila aphy aay Ad Wag: 14RI 
Caras 9 aatdsi wsiergd usdeaet: |

Tt 8 RMqVERERaR «©—- Areaquldaafafaaasefarra: 1421 
Tt Ae Fe are fae ~rennfe: iat 9 weaeaeres: «afer: 1431 
A Aaa | ACUI! Beata «=| ast OTT Gs

wT: BUakens Pitan af ardigeeraran sft aratranfta: 1441 
Sit SASrTad AI GRAS Gfedal Aaa GAIA TSISeATA: 161

On a certain occasion, while sitting (at ease), that teacher of those professing Rgveda, 
perceived his fall from asceticism, brought about by his association with the fish through the 
agency of his own mind. (49) (He said to himself,) "Ah, look at this fall of mine, a saintly ascetic 
who had observed (sacred) vows (till recently), but whose asceticism, (though) maintained 
for long, has been swept away thanks to (a moment's) close association with aquatic 
Creatures under water ! (50) He who seeks liberation (from the trammels of worldly 
existence) should (therefore) eschew with one's mind, body and senses the company of 
those who have taken to a married life, and should never allow his senses to move out (in 
the midst of sense-objects). Living (all) alone (without any companion) in seclusion. He 
should concentrate his mind on the infinite Lord and betake himself (only) to pious souls 
devoted to Him, if at all company is desired. (51) | was acompanionless ascetic (till recently). 
Thanks to the company of fish under water (however), | later on became fifty (as it were by 
marrying as many wives), and again (by begetting a hundred sons through each) | became 
divided into five thousand parts (in the form of as many sons). Now that my judgment has 
been obscured by infatuation etc., (the adjuncts of Maya or Prakrti) and | have begun to look 
upon the objects of senses as worth seeking, | find no limit to desires relating to the duties 
of both husband and wife. (52) Thus, staying at home for a long time, he (eventually) got 
disgusted (with it) and, having embraced the life of an anchorite, retired to the forest; and his 
wives (too), who (all) looked upon their husband as a deity, followed suit. (53) Having 
Practised there severe asceticism, that emaciated his body, the sage (who had now 
mastered his self) merged his soul alongwith the sacred fires in the supreme Spirit (attained 
final beatitude in the form of oneness with the Absolute). (54) Observing the absorption of 
their husband into the supreme Spirit, O great king, his wives (too) followed him (reached the 
Same goal) by virtue of his spiritual glory even as flames get extinguished with the fire that 
has cooled down (for want of fuel). (55)

Thus ends the sixth discourse, hinging on the story of Saubhari, 
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purdana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 
PIPISESES RIS

d

Ps he

aD y,9,

31g AAAISeaTa:

Discourse VII 
The story of the King Hariscandra 
Sa

28

TMG: Yared atserte: sentfcia: | frees Sqat | ateaTast | ACA: | 
SATA GASH FAIL

THE: wept aswel Re | PAAR ARTA SUTSA fart: 1X | 
qa Weed: Uateagittt fae: | STASTUSTerat BATS TR: Shlferenasrayr | & | 
Set wa: winenta fafa eqaa 1 unfadisarey Rrrieaata wisi aed | &

Sri Suka resumed : The foremost of the (three) sons (Purukutsa and others) of 
Mandhata, who was celebrated by the name of Ambarisa, was adopted (as a son) by his 
grandfather (Yuvanaswa) and Yauvanaswa was the son of Ambarisa. Harita was the son 
of Yauvanaswa. These (three) turned out to be the foremost of Mandhata's line (and the first 
of three branches of this line). (1) Purukutsa (the eldest of the three* sons of Mandhata) was 
taken to Rasatala (the sixth of the subterranean spheres from above) by Narmada, as 
directed by Vasuki (the king of serpents) the same Narmada who had been given to him 
in marriage by his brothers, the serpent-demons. (2) There indeed Purukutsa (who wielded 
the power infused into him by Lord Visnu) killed (a number of) Gandharvas who (being 
enemies of the Nagas and wicked too) deserved to be slain. (In recognition of this service) 
he secured from Vasuki (the chief of the Nagas) the boon of security from the serpent race 
for those who remember this anecdote. (3) Purukutsa's son (named after his grandfathert 
was Trasaddasyu, who was the father of Anaranya. Anaranya's son was Haryaswa and of 
Haryaswa, Aruna was born; while from (the loins of ) the latter sprang up Tribandhana. (4) 
Tribandhana's son, Satyavrata, became celebrated under the name of Triganku.+ Having 
got the rank of a Candala (pariah) under a curse from his father, he bodily ascended to 
heaven by virtue of the extraordinary might of the sage VigSwamitra (a scion of Kusika) and 
can be seen in the heavens (in the form of a star of that name) even to this day, having

been forcibly stopped (in mind air) by the same seer whenh by the 
gods (from heaven). (5-6) n hurled, head downward, by

aga «= eftarst Pearbaateeat: (ata Ge uferoitetgentien 1 © |

* Vide verse 38 of Discourse VI.

T It will be remembered that Mandhata, father of Purukutsa, wa

verse 33 of Discouse VI. s also given the name of Trasaddasyu by Indra—vide

+ TriSanku was guilty of three offences, which tor imii an 
6 5 mented h 4 . . d 
his father and invited his curse by forcibly ca im|like as many darts or spikes. In the first place he displease

rrying away a Brahmana girl who was just bei i he killed a cow 
belonging to his preceptor (the sage Vasi : . } Ing married. Secondly he Kile 
Tijes Hesivaitiéa save 9g stha) and thirdly, he ate meat without having consecrated it by lia Sinn with water.

Pagaraicarenr Webstats | ehfardtrimes fated safe: 1

ae att went Aa wi at sida awe wl wag dea 1 <1 
Sid: Ol Gag Ai waft owe wat wahiéa: wea Bet wafeft 1201 
Feet Aa amet asdeng disndtti coum: uakistaua Bet wafehr 122i 
A Sa Ga A TeeA Pisa Fal UIA sal sit Ae wafefs eet 
Tata ett araene Aisaale | Gal Ua: GAGA TraRISA UA: Aha: 1231 
Gaia asratit @ yener Asad! Grate Bal USANA UY: ha: 12 
st = arin Meafaadtaati ae ase ad adel zaeed eu 
Veter fig: anf faaitftiars sromtegelpenftrea TAIT 126 | 
fat RUT eI Det «aaa afte: «= WeTaeTT 1! 
ya: wet yoe dlelaattavt: 1 dfearalesrasm: Aisevasdalaany |e! 
wa feta qi age usa ae asdemda wiad fast yeasse gaat 129 1 
we Wat wa after tet: gi sinaigntrmet = AAA 
Qa uy fA sea anaedidd: geen afterst eran: 1221 
WMlNSaete_ Far ASU, Mecha: | faahtalsvac aferLetet areata, 122 | 
WAY «ARM «| APABISUTRTaTAT: | ae ABI callers: ala WL 1231

TriSanku's son was HariScandra, because of whom there raged a fight, lasting for many 
years, between the sages ViSwamitra and Vasistha, who (having been mutually cursed) had 
been transformed into two birds*. (7) Devoid of (any) issue and (therefore) sad at heart, 
Hari$candra sought, under the instructions of (the sage) Narada, Varuna (the god of water) 
as his protector with the following prayer:—"Let a son be born to me, O lord ! (8) If he turns 
out to be ahero, Ogreatlord, | shall propitiate you by sacrificing him (to you).” Varuna granted 
his prayer, saying “Be it so ! and through the agency of Varuna a son, Rohita (by name), 
was born to Harigcandra. (9) "Now thatason has been born (to you), propitiate me, dear king, 
by sacrificing him to me," Varuna (appeared and) said (to HariScandra, who replied): “A 
prospective victim is (considered) fit for being sacrificed only when it has passed the age of 
ten days." (10) On the child having crossed (the limit of) ten days, the god appeared (before 
him again) and said, "(Please) sacrifice the child now." Hariscandra (however) replied, “A 
prospective victim is (deemed) fit for being sacrificed only when it has teethed." (11) After the 
dentition of the child, Varuna (approached and) said once more, “The teeth have (already) 
appeared; (please) propitiate me (now).” Thereupon the king replied, “When its (first) teeth 
have fallen, the victim will be fit for being sacrificed (only) then." (12) (On the teeth having 
fallen,) Varuna (appeared once more and) said, “The teeth of the prospective victim have 
(already) fallen, (please) worship me (now).” (To this) Hariscandra replied, “When the teeth 
of the prospective victim sprout again, then (alone) is the prospective victim (regarded as)

rr

*It is well-known that under the pretext of demanding the Daksina due D nine! for the Rajasiya sees conducted 
by him on hehalf of king Hari$candra, the sage Viswamitra not only stripped him ct ne all but persecuted him in many other 
ways too; but Harigcandra remained true to his word and firm under the most trying circumstances. The sage wastsina. the 
king's preceptor, flew into a rage when he heard this and uttered on him inecurse that he would be transformed into an Adi 
(@ species of cranes). Vigwamitra too pronounced a counter-curse on Vasistha to the effect that he would be changed into

a heron.

30 nssenavenunsnnnennsenssns ronsnsnsaeensansnnsesnnnnsnetennintatsssoesentie, 
sacred." (13) (On the child having teethed again) the god of water aa grt ae Once 
more, "The teeth have grown again, (please) sacrifice the child (now). ereupon 
Herigcandra replied, "A prospective victim belonging to the Ksatriya race i (recognized as) 
sacred (fit to be sacrificed) only when he is able to put on his armour, O ae !" (14) In this 
way the god (of water) waited for the time he was asked to wait by Hariscandra, whose mind 
was bound with ties of affection and who was gaining time due to love for his son. (15) Having 
come to know of the aforesaid sacrifice intended to be performed by his father ( Hariscandra), 
Rohita (who had now grown in years as well as in understanding) betook himself to the 
woods) bow in hand, anxious to save his life. (16) Hearing that, visited by (angry) Varuna (the 
god of water), his father had developed the disease of dropsy, Rohita was about to return 
to his home when Indra stopped him (saying that he would certainly be sacrificed to Varuna 
if he returned home). (17) Indra (further) counselled Rohita to undertake a holy tour Over the 
earth by visiting sacred lakes and rivers and other places of pilgrimage (in order to atone 
for the offence of his father against Varuna and thereby rid him of his malady) and Rohita 
too (accordingly) tarried in the forest for a year (going from place to place as advised by 
Indra). (18) Likewise during the second, third, fourth and fifth years as well indra (the slayer 
of the demon Vrtra) came to him, disguised as an aged Brahmana, and repeated the same 
advice. (19) Having roamed about in the woods during the sixth year (as well), Rohita 
purchased from Ajigarta (a descendant of the celebrated sage Bhrgu) his middle (second) 
son, Sunahsepa (by name), while returning to the city (in order to see his father); and, 
handing him over to Hariscandra (his own father) as a (prospective) victim (to be sacrificed 
to Varuna) bowed low to him (his father). Thereupon the highly-renowned HariS$candra, 
whose stories were sung by the great, propitiated Varuna (the god of water) and the other 
gods by means ofa human sacrifice and was (consequently) relieved of his dropsy (stomach 
disease). At that sacrifice the sage Viswamitra officiated as the Hota; the sage Jamadagni, 
who had (duly) controlled his mind, as the Adhwaryu; the sage Vasistha as the Brahma and

the sage Agastya as the Udgata* (the chanter of Samaveda). Pleased with him, Indra give 
him a chariot of gold. (20—23)

VAT | IRE «| ea wea aft EBT aurea a yaa: 121 
femfet yet sidt cqafaeat afi wa: gfreat amakaecraishen AT IAG!

a ard STARTS Wet a Teer | a Aho ear aaa PELE | 
feat at ea mdr Patorgadaa | ahtearaetiot wel faeaqeaara: 1201 
Sit AEP ad AE URASeH Steal aaa Sea AGREIA aT BARSEATE: [N01

| The glory of Sunahsepa (who was not eventually sacrificed but attained liberation during 
his very lifetime) will be recounted later (in connection with the Story of Viswamitra’s son)T 
And highly gratified to perceive (on another occasion) the firmness of the king (Harigcandra) 
as well as of his wife (Saibya)+—firmness which derived its strength from his veracity—thé 
sage Viswamitra vouchsafed to him (as a boon) unobstructed knowledge (of the Self). 
(Mentally) merging his mind (which is said to be a modification of the foods that one takes) 
in earth (the source of all food), he identified the earth with water, water with fire and the latter

* For the respective function of these priests vide foot-note below I.v.19. 
f Vide discoures XIV below.

+ Vide foot-note below verse 7 above. 
* The Sruti says:—' srg fe dre aq.’ |

Dis. 8 ] BOOK NINE 34

with the air; and (again) merging the air in ether, the latter in the Tamasika aspect of the Ego 
and the said Tamasika Ego in the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), and 
laying aside its objective character, he contemplated its knowledge aspect as his very self 
and through such contemplation he finally and thoroughly burnt his ignorance (that veiled the 
nature of the Self). (24-26) (Again,) giving up that contemplation (too) through conscious- 
ness consisting of unmixed bliss, and with (all) his bondage (in the shape of self-identification

with the body and so on) shaken off he stood in his essential character, which is beyond the 
range of description and reasoning. (27)

Thus ends the seventh discourse, entitled the "Story of Hari$candra," 
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

POSS mes

S| ABSA:

Discourse VIII 
The story of King Sagara

Syeh Sava 
@eeat 8 edqasroene = fafaftiar) aeargat geatsat fastal ae areas: 1 2 | 
Tepe Feet agen: | aishiday, wen aural ararfera 2 | 
ag ad usa sq alee aferdti atau sradssam senad fara i 3 1 
Sera) eh «OSMISATET «Wel ae Ada sla: AMIS Aga: | x | 
Sri Suka resumed: Harita was the son of Rohita and from (the loins of) Harita sprang 
up Campa, by whom was built the city of Campa. And of Campa was born Sudeva, whose 
son was Vijaya. (1) Vijaya's son was Bharuka; and from (the loins of) Bharuka sprang up 
Vrka, whose son again was Bahuka. His land having been usurped by the enemies, King 
Bharuka retired to the forest alongwith his wife. (2) Intending to follow (ascend the funeral 
pile of) the aged king, who died (in the forest), the queen was stopped by the sage Aurva, 
who knew her to be enceinte. (3) By her co-wives, who came to know this, poison was 
administered to her with her food (through jealousy); but (no harm came to her. On the other 
hand,) a highly renowned son was born of her alongwith that poison and (thus) came to be 
known by the name of Sagara (one born with poison). (4) 
SHA AER Aad: a: LAMICNGM, ASH SATA! & | 
qradiig yeareea ach fepadfior: | qeraqen wifrdmcrmegitearst | 
stardaraa: iyeatealaasaL| AIsaAeasta Addai | 9 1

QUIET . — firquaarenthtor: | eaaaATOT PATS, AT! et 
Be eee aaa: aHfteniteh | Wa asa sted Alfederead: 1201 
euat eaat wa sf sfsaefer: | saat siftagqerara det ia: 1281 
Tarek AAR SETATE: | ARTE | ARTA, OTT 8

3 meet yfatraiin preg sft AEA | 
ai an wad fred wafer G@ wl Fa: 182! 
wafer are gee ada quae = gay! 
: b ° faufsya: rare Cro rob | qagia: 120 |

Sagara turned out to be a universal monarch, and by his sons was dug out the ocean 
(which was thenceforward named after them as Sagara). (5) In deference to the advice 
of his preceptor (the sage Aurva) he did not kill (even though he conquered) the 
Talajanghas, Yavanas (lonians), Sakas (Scythians), Haihayas and Barbaras (Barbarians), 
but only caused them to be disfigured. Some he had thoroughly shaved, while others he 
left with beards and moustaches (alone); some he left with dishevelled hair (alone, causing 
their moustaches and beards to be removed), while others he left with their heads half- 
shaven. (6) Some he caused to be stripped of their under-garment, while he had others 
shorn of their outer garment. In the manner pointed out by the sage Aurva he (then) 
propitiated by means of (a number of) Aswamedha sacrifices Lord Sri Hari, his (very) Self, 
manifested in the form of all the Vedas and the divinities. Indra (the destroyer of his 
enemies' towns) stole away his consecrated horse released as a prelude to the 
sacrifice.(7-8) Looking for the horse in obedience to their father's command, the proud 
sons of Sumati (one of the two wives of Sagara), numbering sixty thousand, excavated the 
earth down to the sea-level on all sides. (While carrying on their excavation) in a north- 
easterly direction they perceived the horse by the side of the (divine) sage Kapila. “Here 
is the thief, who stole the horse, sitting with his eyes closed. Let this wicked fellow be killed 
and killed (at once)!" Shouting thus, they (all) rushed (towards Him) with uplifted weapons. 
At that moment the sage opened His eyes. (9—11) Deprived of their (good) sense by the 
powertul Indra and already killed by (the sin of) their having offended against an exalted 
soul (like the divine Kapila), they were instantly reduced to ashes by the fire of their own 
body. (12) It is not correct to say that the sons of Sagara (the king of kings) were burnt by 
the wrath of the sage (Kapila). How can Tamoguna (ignorance) in the form of anger be 
conceived in Him who is an embodiment of pure Sattva (Sattva unmixed with Rajas and 
Tamas), and whose (divine) person Is capable of purifying the (whole) universe, any more 
than (prticles of) dust belonging to the earth can be conceived as attaching to the sky 
eae is absolutely unattached)? (13) How could there be a sense of difference (as 
eee : eee and 2 oe in the omniscient Lord Kapila, who is the same as the supreme 
ee ites a ee ee eset in (the ocean of) this world the strong vessel in 
Beaman aeons zk Me with the help of which a seeker after Liberation is able 
cross-of worldly existence, the pathway to death? (14)

ASTAAE FIM BoA OTT: | eT WaISIAM, Aa fuarefedt ta: 1241

TAS | AA GRIT | Sefer: YU ETE aT ferried: 1261 
ara et wre ata cet fae aa Shlsat eee 
ee GRere: Rear Bente s1 ahbador aera aia vat get 12 
are: ae Seen ROTA ger fateh Ue Ue aTEraqaerd 12° | 
oryntattent Tat Teyraat wet | firgererarqast Waa cael Pao! 
wad af die BUTT ATL | SAL ATTA: MSHS: HUTA ETA 128 |

He who is referred to (by the ignorant) under the nam rij j 
e of Asamafijasa (i.e., not good, 
although—really speaking—he was exceedingly good) was another Bb of Beir Eaeares

He

born of Kesini (another wife of the emperor). And Asamafijasa's son, who was devoted to the 
interests of his grandfather (King Sagara), was named Amsuman. (15) Asamafjasa— who 
was given to contemplation in his previous birth, but had strayed from the path of Yoga 
through evil association, although he (still) remembered his previous birth—showed himself 
as a wicked fellow. (16) He did what was reproachful (in the eyes of the world) and (as such) 
unpalatable to his relations (too). (For example) he hurled forth playing children into the 
(river) Sarayd, (thus) frightening the people. (17) Conducting himself in this way, he was 
actually forsaken (exiled) by his father, who set aside his (parental) affection. Showing (to 
his father as alive) the children (that had been drowned in the river and taken for dead) by 
virtue of his Yogic power, Asamanijasa departed from that place (Ayodhya). (18) Seeing their 
(lost) children as having returned (to life), all the residents of Ayodhya felt (much) amazed, 
O Pariksit; and the king (Sagara) too was filled with (great) remorse.(19) Commanded by 
the emperor, AmSuman (Asamafijasa's son) went out in search of the (sacrificial) horse by 
the path dug out by his uncles, and discovered the horse near (a number of) heaps of 
ashes.(20) Beholding Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception) seated in the garb of a 
sage bearing the name of Kapila, the great Ammsuman glorified the Lord with a collected mind 
(in the following words) bowing down (to Him) with joined palms. (21) 
AMATI .

a Udit al UMass! a aeqdsenfa aarferafnte: |

Sarsay qa TAN aeaTST AMAT: 1221

a wuss Wwe fuera a aay!

waa Wierda fae weet a afe:serM: 1231

a wane Waar MUIR Neate: |

Graeme pt fe ye: afte iexi

TRIPAATAR renege Aa

arimara yea TEM

wana oh adage Yeleqiwata amemeinteaurddda: 1261 
Sal A: Way Hesse: | Alea gekeeat WMGETa salad 1291

Arn$uman prayed : (Even) Brahma (who is not born like us) is unable even to this day 
to perceive (directly) through Samadhi (abstract meditation of self-absorption) or (even) to 
comprehend through reasoning of various kinds You, who are higher than his own self. How 
(then) could other living beings—belonging to various species (such as gods, men and sub- 
human creatures), evolved (severally) by his mind, body and intellect (the products of Saitva, 
Tamas and Rajas respectively), much less we (youngsters altogether) devoid of light 
(wisdom), perceive or know You ? (22) They who are identified with a body and are 
(consequently) dominated by the (aforesaid) three Gunas, (nay,) whose intellect is 
bewildered by Your Maya (deluding potency) and whose light (of wisdom) illuminates (only) 
the objects of senses (which are external to the mind), perceive (only such) objects of senses 
(during their waking and dream states) and (sheer) darkness (total lack of knowledge) in the 
other case (during deep sleep). They (however) are unable to realize You (who transcend 
the three Gunas), even though You (ever) dwell in them (as their very Self and Inner 
Controllertoo). (23) Such that You are, how can |, anignorant person, (even) investigate You, 
who are knowledge personified (and hence incapable of being known) and are (only) fit to 
be contemplated upon by sages like Sanandana, who have by their very birth got rid of the

ot saeernneneeereaeteateeReheetEeeeeAReheeeee eee eee eE EEE eR REE EAST SSeS SST O EAT ema 
notion of difference and infatuation, born of the attributes of Maya (modes of Prakrti, viz, 
Rajas and Tamas respectively)? (24) O Lord, let us (therefore, simply) bow to You, the most 
ancient Person, in whom the (aforesaid) attributes of Maya (Prakrti), actions prompted by 
them as well as bodies engendered by such actions are altogether absent, who have no 
(material) name or form, who are entirely free from merit and sin, (yet) who have (by Your 
own independent will) assumed (revealed) a (divine) form in order to teach wisdom (to Your 
devotees)! (25) In this world evolved by Your Maya (creative will) people revolve (are born 
again and again) in the midst of houses and other objects of senses, taking them to be real, 
their intellect being deluded by lust, greed, jealousy and infatuation. (26) Today, O Lord, the 
(very) Self of all created beings, by your sight (alone) the strong cord of our ignorance (in 
the shape of identification with the body and so on)—the root of all craving (for sensuous 
enjoyment), as well as of actions (prompted by such craving) and the Indriyas (the 
instruments of such actions)—has been cut asunder. (27) 
STH Sa

satiated Ware afiel qm: isiqdarenqe ff Fire 
Sri Suka went on : The Divine sage Kapila, whose glory was thus sung (by Prince 
Arnsuman), mentally blessed the said AmSuman and spoke (to him) as follows, O protector 
of men ! (28)

SMPTTAT TATA 
aaisa atadt a | faareayera i sa a fot een ngersisdéha Aad 12e1 
a Ue RR Sa PaAMaI ae GAA mae «WAM 1301 
wey ae wet qa: | aiafafesarior OA afr 13e1 
ga Serad ARM WAS Ueda AAA A RGRSIASEAISEM: 121

The glorious Lord replied : This horse, the animal to be sacrificed by your grandfather 
(Emperor Sagara), may be taken away (by you), dear child. And these uncles of yours, that 
lie burnt (here) Stand in need of the water of the (holy) Ganga (for being redeemed) and 
Late else." (29) Walking round Him (from left to right as a mark of respect) and bowing 
= im a his head (bent low), the prince brought (back) the horse. And with that animal 
7 ies cone concluded the Sacrifice, which had remained uncompleted (all these 
ys). ) aving entrusted the kingdom to Prince Amsuman, Sagara, who was (now) free 
rom (all) craving and had thrown off his fetters (in the shape of identification with the body

etc.), reached the highest goal (viz., final beatitud 
a *9 e b f 
by (his preceptor) the sage Aurva. (31) ) by following the course recommended

Thus ends the eighth discourse, hinging on the Story of Sagara 
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana 
otherwise known as the Paramaharhsa-Sammhita. —

ISSR Hm

BDA ATH Sza:

Discourse IX 
The story of King Bhagiratha: the descent of the holy Ganga

aio: AIP SAT

SAS ART TTT | Shs HeIad ATRIAL A: HOT eT: 1 
Fecstretnegetecann: RIAA! WT UR Ae: 1 2 
alarm od det sear aris Aisa: wuafasrd wetaraadt qa: 12 | 
eeisit eft at are A ugtae | sae ye fired qa ara TOL ¥ I 
fe Ue A Ya ae AT TaN Ae ded Ga weet fare & |

Sri Suka resumed : (Even like Sagara, who renounced his kingdom,) Amsuman too 
(abdicated the throne in favour of his son and) practised asceticism for a long time with a 
desire to bring down (from heaven) the holy Ganga, but did not succeed. Then, in course of 
time he passed away. (1) His son, Dilipa (too) was unsuccessful like him and met his death 
(in the course of his efforts). Dililpa's son was Bhagiratha and he (too) performed very great 
Tapas. (2) The goddess (presiding over the holy river) got pleased (with his devotion) and 
revealed herself (in person) to him, saying; "| am prepared to confer a boon on you." Thus 
spoken to (by the goddess), the king (Bhagiratha), bent low (with humility) and submitted (to 
her) his object (in carrying on his austerities). (3) Somebody must sustain my force (even) 
as | descend on earth. Piercing the (hard) crust of the earth, otherwise, O protector of men. 
| shall penetrate into Rasatala (the sixth subterranean sphere from above). (4) Further, lam 
not inclined to go down to the terrestrial region; (for) people would wash away their sin into 
me. Where shall | wash off that sin (myself), O Bhagiratha? Let some thought be bestowed 
on this point. (5)

TRY Sara 
Sea AA: AAT HRMS THATS: | ow ASMA Ge Walraht: 1 & | 
are 2 at eaeaien athena ahaa stat fad anda aqqi © | 
See AM Aa MTNA! Sleredtaal Waa: AACE 1 ¢ | 
aa wenfafed adetafed: fara: i cerafedt WEI Wego 8:1 1 
aika: a waite yearned aa efaqui ce veiy: BH eA 1g01 
2A argqatt TARAAAMA | SS Get PaaS, VANTASIT 12 
aarerustarot «4 eIeUSeat | Aft) aan fea VY: cach eter: 1221 
TenyMSaet «Sale: | ATT: | tee A: TEM Sat A Para Yate: 1231 
4 aaa worst ween after! artesian = Hae: 12 
Gfasa wal afrspaet Braisme: 1 Ayes gest feat el AraetaTTATA 184 1 
. King Bhagiratha submitted : Pious souls who have given up attachment to actions as 
well as to their fruit, are pure of mind, (nay,) foremost among the knowers of Brahma and 
Capable of purifying the (whole) world, shall wash off your sin through the (very) contact of

“Shee ° i ir heart) dwells Sri Hari, the 
their b hile bathing in your water); for in them (in their hi , th 
apnea anaes (6) Agel lord Rudra, the (very) Self of embodied souls—into whom this

el CD Ui Bs oe eR 
7

universe is woven, warp and woof, as a piece of cloth intoits th reads—will bear your force.(7) 
Having spoken thus, the said king (Bhagiratha) proceeded to propitiate Lord Siva by means 
of his austerities. (And) after a very short time, O Pariksit, the Lord (Siva) became highly 
pleased (with him). (8) Having accepted the king's prayer, saying, So be it!" Lord Siva, the 
Friend of the whole world, cautiously bore (on His head) the Ganga, whose water stands 
hallowed by (the touch of) Sri Hari's foot. (9) The said royal sage, Bhagiratha, led the Ganga 
(which is capable of purifying the whole universe) to the spot where the bodies of his great 
granduncles lay reduced to ashes. (10) (Closely) following Bhagiratha, who rode in advance 
in a chariot swift as the wind, and hallowing the lands on its way, the Ganga bathed the burnt- 
up sons of Sagara. (11) Though destroyed by their own offensive behaviour towards a (holy) 
Brahmana, the sons of Sagara ascended to heaven through the mere touch of its waters with 
their ashes alone! (12) When the (aforesaid) sons of Sagara rose to heaven through the 
(mere) contact of its waters with their body converted into ashes, what need be said about 
them who make use of this heavenly stream with reverence (everyday), having taken a vow 
to this effect? (13) That which has been said here with regard to this heavenly river— 
emanated (as it is) from the lotus-feet of the infinite Lord (Visnu) and (therefore) capable of 
ending transmigration—is not something which should excite great wonder. (14) (For) by 
fully concentrating their mind on those feet with reverence pure-hearted sages have speedily 
attained oneness with the Lord, shaking off their identification with the body (a product of the 
three Gunas or modes of Prakrti)—identification with which is (so) difficult to give up. (15)

own action. (18) 
UMA 
fee fate Wt: ea: Plena Were: | ue Afeahresm: wet AW ae ee

The king (Pariksit) submitted : What was the occasion for the curse pronounced by the

preceptor (the sage Vasistha) on the high-souled Saudasa? We desi i i 
: = esire to know this, which 
may (kindly) be pointed out (to us) unless it is a secret. (19)

Sara 
Beret Tat RS Ta Wa El Aaa wat dist wa: ufiraidanr 1201 
a eG Wa: Geert Tel Ta apenas wea Fra wafer 122 | 
ee wen ve Tal ga ufsere 1221 
Tater Blewranttany | SAMISSHeAISSIA TS WY AAEM: 123 | 
aid Aaa eardi: Ureaisit | fer: waet ad uvagitamd ya: 12¥!

Uae ASAT: Ue aeMTeA Ta: | aT eee adler fest 124 
arent ste fast ACA etpeated | A MAL Waa: MAeaHult AERA: 12E I 
Baa wicett arent | aadadfn 1 fe Ascermrren apart oft fesr 1201 
ceisd TR UE yerenfaerdig: iaenee ae dk wafdlas gant 1221 
we te wet fagiea-steruntad: | enfiretrastan BeOS ESIE Ton 
| Paya YaGAed Wl: 12g 1

Bae Page Wet | UlietOT deeiift afasat sre udtif wea 13)

Sri Suka replied : While roaming in pursuit of game, so the tradition goes, Saudasa (son 
of Sudasa) killed a certain ogre and let go his brother, who immediately left with the intention 
of retaliating. (20) Contemplating harm to the king (Saudasa), he assumed the form of the 
latter's cook at his palace and, having dressed human flesh, took it to his preceptor (the sage 
Vasistha), who had called at he palace with intent to dine. (21) Immediately perceiving 
human flesh (which is ever prohibited as food) about to be served to him, the glorious sage 
flew into a rage and uttered an imprecation on the king saying, “You will surely turn an ogre 
through this (improper) conduct of yours." (22) Learning (in the meantime) that it was the 
work of an ogre, the sage limited (the operation of) the curse to (a period of) twelve years 
(only); (while) Saudasa too (in his turn) took water in the hollow of his joined palms, fully 
prepared to utter a (counter) curse on his preceptor (who had cursed him for no fault of 
his).(23) Stopped by (his wife) Madayanti, and finding the (four) quarters, the sky and the 
earth all instinct with life, the king (Saudasa) dropped that harmful water (burning with the 
fire of his wrath) on his own feet (lest it might injure any other living being, thus justifying his 
appellation, Mitrasaha, which means he who is indulgent towards his friends and well- 
wishers). (24) Blackened in his feet (by the action of the water thrown by him and hence 
named as Kalmasapada) and having acquired an ogre-like disposition, Saudasa saw (one 
night) a Brahmana couple dwelling in a forest at the time of copulation. (25) Pinched by 
hunger, Saudasa seized the Brahmana (with the intention of devouring him), whereupon 
his wife pleaded like one afflicted:— You are no ogre as such; you are (on the other hand) 
@ great car-warrior among the scions of Ikswaku and the husband of Madayanti, O valiant 
monarch! You ought not to do whatis unrighteous. (Pray,) restore (to me—eager as | am to 
have a son—my husband, whois a Brahmana and has not yet attained his object (in the form 
Of a son). (26-27) This human body, O king, is capable of yielding all the objects sought after 
by a Jiva. Therefore, the destruction of this body, O heroic king, is spoken of as the frustration 
of all one's objects. (28) Indeed this Brahmana Is not only learned but endowed with 
asceticism, an amiable disposition and other virtues. (Nay,) he seeks to worship Brahma (the 
Absolute), known by the name of Lord Visnu (the supreme Person)—which, though present 
in (all) created beings is screened by ego etc., (the products of the three Gunas or modes 
of Prakrti)—by looking upon alll living beings as his (very) self. (29) As such how can he, the

foremost of Brahmana sages, deserve death, O lord knowing what is right, at the hands of 
the foremost of royal sages in you, any more than a son at the hands of his father ? (30) How 
can you, esteemed of the righteous, approve of the death (at your own hands) of this pious 
and sintess Brahmana, an expositor of the Vedas even when unborn, any more than you 
would the slaughter of a cow? (31) If (in spite of my protests) this Brahmana—without home 
| shall not survive even for a moment—is to be made a victim by you, then first devour me, 
as good as dead.” (32) In spite of her pleading pitifully in this way and crying like a helpless 
woman, King Saudasa, who was deluded by the curse (of his preceptor, the sage Vasistha) 
devourd the Brahmana even as a tiger would devour a beast. (33) Finding her husband (lit., 
impregnator) eaten up by Saudasa (who behaved like an ogre), and lamenting herself, the 
chaste Brahmana woman, full of anger, cursed the king (in the following words):—(34)"Since 
my husband, O wicked soul, has been devoured by you while | was stricken with love, your 
death too, O foolish one, will be shown by me to follow from sexual intercourse." (35) Having 
cursed King Mitrasaha in the aforesaid words and consigning his husband's bones to a 
flaming fire, the lady—who looked upon the world of her husband (the region to which the 
soul of her husband had gone) as her ultimate destination—followed the course of her 
husband (burnt herself to death). (36)

fart gleaned’ fear age: | fag sreitend afeen a Prarhta: 1301 
ad aa a dam etaa Hao: | afageea AeA = WSN 1 321 
a a aa am adntawa oid! aeseadlet Te: BisedHE Head 13° 
seAaryoat Ba a: aie: akiaa: \anteaa sal A: qeenlswad Xo! 
ad BARI Ww Uslased: iu fast aa Geagamadyd ix! 
a catia curate afr ata:iueimagiaa wut dad aa: Ise! 
TA Ahold WON: Hocaa ais: | a Brat A Ast Usd A enIsihtaeow: 1¥3 | 
1 areas free wea aia! aeaqanaelenead, fas aeaed Ivy 
qa: cat at wel fyatet:1a qual aad ari yaad: xu! 
a fafatisaieet caret mele feist fereha fret wacrart firqaat ive.

i ce a ce

ee OSes 6 famenduida «= ofeeat «Ss aes I'v 
aia mae Gen ART | fear Ad: W Marista: 1c 
Ad iG Wel UN PES Weaker | war argeaha a yore fe aaa: ie

Set AEA AE TeTee Gears AaaY eda aise: 121

Rid of the curse (of his preceptor) at the 
; 2ptor end of twelve years, and fully intent upon 
pep ee uae was Stopped by his wife (Madayanti), who had come to Hee of the 2 io 
ee an meiner ee lady. (37) Thenceforth he gave up the 
y equently) did not have any issue due to his (own) action (of 
neue a Brahmana). Entreated by him, the Sage Vasistha begot - anes through 
adayanti. (38) Shea .\ an

Ctually b ild j 
did not see the light (yet Y Bore ine child in her womb for seven years; the boy (however)

). Vasistha (thereupon) hit her abdo 
> men with a stone; and the boy 
OT Ate oe de neem) was for that reason called Aémaka. (39) From (the loins 
Parasuranene Q up Mulaka, who was effectively protected (against the wrath of 
nailed GEE ee (who actually shielded his body as an armour). (Hence) he was 
y ame of Narikavaca. When not a Single Ksatriya was left (after the

, PERE R SS RR RB Re Br Se Orie Se te irri tr tr rte ty tet te ict tr tet te tr tect te trt te tert trie tritici tr fete ict tr trict trie fetter tcte trite 
extermination of the Ksatriya race by Paragurama), it was he who servedas the stock of the 
regenerated Ksatriya race. (Hence he became known as Mulaka). (40) Of Milaka, Dasaratha 
was born and from (the loins’of) the latter sprang up a son, Aidavida (by name). Of Aidavida 
(again) was born ViSwasaha, whose son, Khatwanga, turned out to be a universal 
monarch.(41) Hard to conquer (himself), he slew demons in battle at the entreaty of the gods. 
On coming to know (at the conclusion of the battle) that (only) an hour's life was left (to him), 
he forthwith returned to his capital (by an aerial carlentto him by the gods) and concentrated 
his mind (on God). (42) (He said to himself,) "Neither life nor sons nor riches nor earth nor 
kingship nor wife Is dearer to me than the Brahmana race, the adored of my family. Even 
during my childhood my mind never took delight under any circumstance in 
unrighteousness.Nor did | (ever) find any other reality than the Lord of excellent 
renown. (43-44) Although a boon of my choice was offered to me by the gods, the rulers of 
(all) the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region), | didnot hanker after such 
enjoyment, engrossed as | was inthe thought of Lord Visnu (the Maker and Protector of 
all beings). (45) (Even) the aforesaid gods, whose senses and mind (too) are bewildered (by 
the objects of senses) fail to discover their beloved Lord, ever present in their own heart as 
their very self; how, then, could others know Him? (46) Therefore, shaking off, by means of 
Devotion to the Maker of the universe, the attachment, rooted by the very nature of things 
in the mind, for the objects of senses (which are products of the three Gunas or modes of 
Prakrti), produced by the Maya (creative energy) of the Lord and no more real than a fanciful 
project, | (hereby) betake myself to Him." (47) Having thus resolved by force of his reason, 
which was drawn towards Himself by Lord Visnu (who has His abode in water), and shedding 
his ignorance in the form of identification with the body and so on (which are other than the 
self), Khatwanga forthwith regained his essential character (divine state), which is the same 
as that transcendent Absolute, which, though not unsubstantial, is conceived as intangible 
(because lying beyoud the range of speech and other organs) and is (very) subtle (too), (nay,) 
which devotees of God undoubtedly refer to as the almighty Lord Vasudeva. (48-49)

Thus ends the ninth discourse, forming part of an account of the solar dynasty, 
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BIA SavaSeATa:

Discourse X 
An account of Sri Rama's pastimes 
sity Sara 
aeareta atefaresr TARA, FARA: | STsTeTetY FETA, SATANSATA | Ft 
aaa waa mete serra aft: 1 staat aged Yat sifsia: at: | 
THAT Sit AAA | I | 
Taal aarafafireaaahite: | qt fe afte ye cer etaradde 1 2 1 
Wt wat aN uaaesat = BTA: 
ufreigaat | yeestt at ST

exterminated the host of wicked demons (including Ravana) even as a wild fire consumes 
a (whole) forest—protect us! (4)

feat a4 unten ferent: uel wana wat Aqua: 1 & | 
a media aa dimedace fede 
es Aerie saws Usiad qa fret ava aed & | 
ReayetRicddissea dine frequent | 
art ae Wdehad wes at dma afar © 1 
a: Femme ret Sore aia freer aye aad: | 
wet fret sofas: Yeat Part wera wat arate mae: 1c

Pay: STRierme: Haren | 
Ae aeAAa Ue evSUTURATA

CAISAPCRPUME He Te frera caffe frais a: 1 
FRET ater eet BatrR Seeley sm ere fee: 1221

Br Br er Br Be Kee Ge He Be Ke He Kr He He Hy 4 
gy br Br Br Br Bt Be br He He He He He Hy 
eS ng et ee NM ee en el 
s 7

Wl semitartacd wafam afer HAHA 121 
at ACA AMA ATA Bahasa | 
alam erUTr ER reetonge ateeate here haa SAT, 1881 
dsteat worm ad g¢ amafisafaorsd: | 
Aaa FORATIAT | Ro |

(Earlier) in the course of a sacrificial performance of the sage ViSwamitra, Marica and 
other demon chiefs, who roamed about (and carried on their nefarious activities) at night, 
were beaten by Him (all alone), Laksmana standing (aloof) as a mere spectator. (5) Picking 
up in the midst of an assembly of world-renowned heroes the formidable bow of Lord Siva, 
lying in a hall (specially) built for the choice-marriage of Princess Sita and brought (conjointly) 
by three hundred men, He strung it and, (then) drawing it, broke it in the middle, O protector 
of men, as sportfully as an immature elephant would snap a stick of sugar-cane! (6) Having 
won (as the prize for his feat of valour). Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity)— whose 
Virtues, disposition, age, limbs and appearance (eminently) matched His, (nay,) who (in the 
form of a golden streak) had (already) secured an honourable place on His bosom and who 
(now) bore the name of Sita—He tamed, while on His way (back ot Ayodhya) the overgrown 
Pride of Paragurama (the chief of the Bhrgus), who had thrice seven times swept the earth 
clean (even) of the seed of the Ksatriya race. (7) The Lord accepted with His head bent low 
the command of even His uxorious father (King DaSaratha), who was bound by the cords 
of truthfulness, and, relinquishing (His claim to) the throne, (of Ayodhya), the (imperial) 
fortune, His loving relations (mother and so on), friends and ES aah as an 
ascetic (who has shaken offall attachment) would give up the ghost, left for the woods along- 
with His (divine) Spouse (Sita). (8) (While in the forest) ws EL nike features of 
Sir : + the demon king) a woman of unclean mind, slew her kinsmen,

poookha (the siete sand, Khara, Dusana and Trisira being the foremost 
"Umbering (not less than) fourteen thou ;

. ‘rresistible bow in His hand, led a hard life (in order to 
(0 them), and roaming about with pte the demon Marica deputed in the form of a weird

ner a lesson to humanity). tae by Ravana (the ten-headed monster}—whose passion 
a pat) deer, O protector Ze description of Sita (from the lips of Surpanakha)—and drawn 
way ae kindled on ny the aforesaid deer), He forthwith killed Marica with an arrow

rom His hermitag Ze

SAAR AAA AAA ST SSH Bt Bt Bk Sr ty 
EEEREREEEREELERAREERELREREE RE eae 
9 other than Lord Siva) slew Daksa” (a lord of create 
Se on sia the pe aiior of Janaka, the ruler of the Videha country, now known 
as Tirhut in north Bihar) having been (forcibly) carried away in the forest during a absence 
by Ravana (the vilest of the demons), even as (a sheep Is snatched Rea bya i ), the Lord, 
who was (thus) disunited from His beloved Consort, wandered in that stag! io ongwith His 
(younger) brother (Laksmana) like a forlorn creature, exemplifying in that way the (Sad) plight 
of those attached to women. (11) Having cremated (like a devoted son) Jatayu (the king of 
vultures)—who had (all) his (stock of) Karma wiped out through his (heroic) action (in the 
shape of a duel with the mighty Ravana) for His own sake (for the deliverance of His beloved 
Spouse from the clutches of that tyrant)—the Lord slew the demon Kabandha (who had 
stretched his arms to seize Him). (Then,) cultivating friendship with the monkeys (Sugriva, 
Hanuman and others) and ascertaining through them, when Vali had been killed, the where- 
abouts of His Darling, the Lord—who behaved as a human being even though His feet are 
worshipped (even) by Brahma (the birthless creator) and Lord Siva (the Source of 
creation)—marched with the forces of Sugriva (the ruler of the monkeys) to the seashore.(12) 
The deity presiding over the ocean found the crocodiles and alligators initagitated by a fierce 
glance cast by Him in seeming anger (provoked by his failure to appear before the Lord in 
spite of His waiting for him for three days without food and water), nay, its very roar silenced 
through fear. (Therefore,) assuming a living form and taking articles of worship on his head, 
he approached the Lord's lotus-feet and spoke as follows:—(13) "Dull-witted as we are, O 
infinite Lord, we ate unable to know You, the most ancient Person, the immutable supreme 
Ruler of (all) the worlds. (Surely) You are (no other than) that Lord of Prakrti (consisting of 
the three Gunas) from whose Sattvika aspect sprang up hosts of divinities, from whose 
Rajasika aspect, the (various) lords of created beings and from whose Tamasika aspect 
appeared the lords of ghosts. (14) (Be pleased now to) march (across the ocean) at Your will; 
Slay Ravana (the refuse of his father, the sage Visrava), who (by his atrocities) makes the 
three worlds weep; recover Your Spouse, O valiant One; (and) for the expansion of Your 
fame construct here a bridge, reaching which monarchs intent on the conquest of the (four) 
quarters may sing Your glory." (15) Having (accordingly) constructed across the sea a bridge 
with mountain-peaks of every description—full of trees the boughs of which were shaken by 
the hands of monkey chiefs (who handled them)—the Lord, accompanied by armies (of 
monkeys) led by Sugriva, Nila and Hanuman, entered under the guidance of Vibhisana (the 
fortress of) Lanka, already burnt (by Hanuman in course of his quest for Sita). (16) With its 
sports grounds, granaries, treasuries, doorways, city-gates, council-chambers, porticos and 
pigeon-cots occupied by the army of monkey chiefs and its platforms, flags, jars of gold 
(placed on both sides of its entrances) and crossroads being destroyed, the city shook like 
a river churned by herds of elephants. (17) Perceiving this (calamity), Ravana (the lord of the 
demons) deputed Nikumbha, Kumbha, Dhimraksa, Durmukha, Surantaka, Narantaka and 
others, his son (Meghanada), Prahasta, all his followers headed by Atikaya and Vikampana 
pees dene we younger brother) Kumbhakarna (to meet the invading army).(18) 
4 panied by Sugriva (the lord of the monkeys), Laksmana (His own younger brother): 
anuman (son of the wind-god), Gandhamadana, Nila, Prince Angada (Sugriva's nephew 
and heir-apparent), Jambavan (the king of the bears), Panasa and others, Sri Rama (too) 
marched against that army of the demons, which was difficult to penetrate, armed as it was 
Me cutlasses, Silas (sharp-pointed steel weapons), bows, Prasas (darts), Rstis (double- 
edged swords), javelins, Tomaras (iron clubs) and swords. (19) Meeting ina single combat

* Vide IV.V. 24.

Dis. 10 ]

Br Br Be Be Be Be Ge Me Be Be Ke He Br He Hr LRepeesiergtiprer ses

BOOK NINE 43

Be Br Be He Ke Ke Ke He Le Be x Ke Be Kr Ke Be He Kr We Be He Br Bee Bee HC Be Be Me Be BORE BE BEL Be Be BEE eB BE

the ee ee (consisting of elephants, foot-soldiers, chariots and cavalry, all the aforesaid 
ee S of Sri Rama (the Lord of the Raghus)—Angada and others—struck with trees, 
rocks, maces and arrows the demons whose Lord, Ravana, had (all) his good luck wiped off 
by the abduction of Sita. (20) 35% 
Wath: Wacnieader ose ane uaa TAH | 
erat gate wrefedeia fawrmaneaehre: are: 1221 
Tate Yeregie aa: arenas wad a 
CAT HOM Wyte se ares ga cdtegaete: 1221 
Wa faa age dager at a anfta aayed fave t 
WISH Gel aeade frase aeakt aa Garda fiw: 123 | 
Enraged to see the destruction of his army and mounting the aerial car (viz., Puspaka that 
had been snatched away by him from Kubera, the god of riches), Ravana (the lord of the 
demons) forthwith marched against Sri Rama—shining brightly in a splendid heavenly car 
brought by Matali (the charioteer of Indra)—and struck Him with sharpened arrows having 
crescent-shaped heads. (21) Sri Rama said to him, "O refuse of ogres, |, whose prowess 
cannot be prevailed against, shall award this very day to you, who have cast (all) shame to 
the winds—(even) as Kala does to a perpetrator of sin—the fruit of your detested action 
consisting in the fact that our beloved spouse was stolen away during our absence by your 
wicked self, who behaved like a dog." (22) Scolding him thus, the Lord discharged (at him) 
an arrow fitted (by Him) to His bow andit split his heart, hard as adamant. Like a virtuous soul 
whose stock of merit is exhausted, he fell from his aerial car, vomiting blood through his ten 
mouths, in the midst of his people crying "Dear me! Dear me!!" (23) 
ad Fema os Aquat: Wee: | wales WA ae Seq TOKAI! 
IM GP Seb ugar wanigiicdr| Seg: Tat qT Hel STAAATT 124! 
al dl: WI ad AM lata Wai Asm ost alec salad 1241 
aq ae usm wa waa Ad: | aeisqure Gera aa Atal canary 1201 
pan fara ost at A Herratiae: FelsA YMA Aheda 121 
Issuing forth from Lanka in (their) thousands, with Mandodari (the principal consort of 
Ravana), Raksasa women now rushed, weeping bitterly, to the spot (where Ravana lay 
dead). (24) Hugging each her own relations struck down by the shafts of Laksmana (Sri 
Rama's younger brother), they helplessly wailed in loud tones (as follows), beating their 
person with their own hands:—(25) "Alas, undone we are, O lord! O Ravana, who made the 
(whole) world weep (by your tyranny) !! Bereft of you and overrun by the enemy, whom should 
Lanka seek as its protector? (26) Swayed by passion, you did not realize, O highly blessed 
One, such (extraordinary) power of Sita's glory, by which you have been reduced to this

(miserable) plight! (27) Widowed is this Lanka as well as we, O delight of your race! (Nay,) 
your body AS bie Da the food of vultures and your soul rendered fit for hell. (28)

Aye SAA 
mami faxqosd ataeaanted: fgets age aTentfaten 12¢ 1 
aa aaal STS HARTA | Aa areata ReIMeAea4y_ 130 1 
aa: fraaai wat gat dtearaaad | stterdeniteeltnart args 1321 
jars? oat wat ware: | favteora TTA, SAT TATU RTA, 132 1

_ 
i 
it

SRI AGAVATA Dis. 
44. sscansnensnansnsesansennten MatnesssanstatnntsSusnashtseneennanensient se 
VES Be sat vlad: qi saatdarn: Hatetacrentidt: aA 133 1 
SH ATAT TALL: Saad | aS AAT TAL ACHAT 13% 
Wernrefrnisdasties — WsergraA! ANA: sarod = Uhr afed: 13% 1 
age frfe wea wa TAEAISTSTY | AReaTAM, BfatferTe, ATCA A: 13K | 
saat aA: «| Uotasialariaf: | quianarcatent en erareast Wi: 13191 
wet vanaaes®: greanif: | duifrategenfeista = Gara: R01 
UI | Wasa |= a Ureetatode, To | iaAETAATT: 131 
Wen AA Ue: wWelfeatete: lamer fat deat eraa Aas: Iso | 
TA cenurdtanat feat asda: aa: aa Aah ses AAeHA: set 
Gad sas Ut ated fad! sa: aiden aed: fer aAqader 1x2 
lech TASER | fasten: BPta: Adsl ASIA: 13st 
qqtuereqa: din dieu! afrage: Get ot adatuol 77 xxi 
qaaeishad: aie: Kaas arate: | fats wa We AeaR Falla: 1s4 1 
Sri Suka continued : Encouraged (commanded) by Sri Rama (the uncrowned King of 
Kosala), Vibhisana (the youngest brother of Ravana) performed for the benefit of his 
Kinsmen (Ravana and others) whatever is ordained (in the scriptures) by way of obsequies 
according to the procedure laid down for a sacrifice intended to propitiate the manes. (29) 
The Lord then saw in a retreat in the ASoka garden His most beloved Spouse (Sita) 
| emaciated due to the disease of separation from Him and seated at the foot of a Simsapa 
(Asoka) tree. Observing Her in that wretched plight Sri Rama was filled with compassion. 
Bestowing on Vibhisana the rulership of the Raksasa hordes, (the city of) Lanka and 
longevity extending to the end of the Kalpa, and (first) helping Sita—the lotus of whose 
countenance was now blooming with joy caused by His full vision—to mount the aerial car 
(Puspaka), the Lord, who had (now) completed His vow of residing in a forest (for fourteen 
years), Stepped into the car (Himself) alongwith His two brothers (His half-brother Laksmana 
} and His adopted brother Sugriva) and, (further) accompanied by Hanuman, flew (back) to 
a capital (Ayodhya), showered over on the way with flowers offered by the guardians of 
the (various) worlds, His (heroic) deeds being joyfully celebrated (all along) by Brahma (the 
creator) and others. The highly merciful Lord (however) felt (much) pained to learn about His 
een) brother (Bharata), who, covering himself with the bark of trees, was living on barley 
eae ss the re of Cows, wore matted locks (on his head) and slept on the ground strewn 
! F es of (the sacred) KuSa grass. Hearing of Sri Rama having arrived, Prince Bharata 
placed on his head the latter's wooden sandals (lent to him by the Lord as a token of love) 
ae eal ala ee citizens (of Ayodhya), his ministers and family priests, proceeded 
Fatt eeSeeHIG las ipa he eee (with a vow not to enter Ayodhya till Sri Rama's 
aad te er Brother in the midst of songs and sounds of musical instruments 
er) accompanied by (great) exponents of the Vedas, repeatedly chanting in lou 
ones (sacred texts from) the Vedas, by flags with gilded edges, chariots of gold decked with 
flags of various colours, noble horses with trann; : 
ho rappings of gold, warriors protected by go! 
armours, traders (of P ( 
faking wit BKIe ee descr iption), courtezans and servants following on foot, and (also) 
yal insignia (in the shape of an umbrella, chowries andsoon) and (valuable)

commodities (jewels etc.), of every descripti j 
aaa ption (great and small by way of presents). Placing 
the sandals before SriRama, he dropped down at His feet, his heart ts ae See with

] 
Sr br Br Br Be Br Hr Br Br Sr Sri trertrtr triers BOOK NI 
SASS AR NATRRSE SR EASON ESS Newewaa nen snaneetees¥scneassToctereet ieee emo

es ane cd peice palms and eyes full of tears. Keeping him folded in His arms for 
Weis iana and Sis ote Ae tears flowing from His eyes, Sri Rama Himself alongwith 
Be iter! deat eG Tis greetings to the Brahmanas as well as to those (others) who 
Beconin ‘hare Ae of honour and was (in His turn) saluted by the people. (30—41) 
g Meir lord returned (home) after a longtime, the inhabitants of north Kosala joyfully 
danceq, waving their upper cloths and showering flowers on Him. (42) Bharata took His pair 
of wooden sandals; Vibhisana alongwith Sugriva (who stood severally on His right and left), 
a chowrie and an excellent fan (respectively); and Hanuman (son of the wind-god, who stood 
behind the Lord) held the white umbrella (over Him). (43) Satrughna (the youngest brother 
of Sri Rama) bore His bow and the pair of quivers; Sita held the Kamandalu (water-pot of 
cocoanut-shell) containing the water of sacred lakes and rivers; Angada carried His sword 
and Jambavan (the king of the bears), His shield of gold, O protector of men! (44) Seated 
in (the aerial car named) Puspaka, attended by (the aforesaid dancing) women and 
panegyrized by bards, the Lord shone brightly, O king, like the rising moon in the midst of 
minor planets. (45)

sighted: ast aera nea a sara Ua «Wea: ae xe I 
Te AIMTaG «Ufa: sea adel «mana amad aAqdead: Ive! 
WAM, BAe Wtera gather: | smtearsshafierent areatefeere: Ya: 1c 
wet friar fafiad woae: aa me: 1 safes ated ag:faepronefa: ive 
Ud HAGA: Fae: Weaogd: | aoge: Tarihraighratiar gt 1401 
sidleraad «6 MESS etfea: ie: «ede «| aurismrqonaci: | 
aia faqae wat APR at a TIGR I 
Jaat ada aie: paasvadiwa wit wa adware 1421 
aq at firat aaif gufaea: iad ame set STAT AAs 1431 
Tftenficrrente canara: | yates are TA Tsrarett east 14 | 
Ueudiaen wUsitafia: Wala yet Rrgad Gaara 144! 
Toe ater seed «adit feen feat a Mea Ad: AlateTa: 146 | 
of ster Tad AST UH Slee TIAA WHat SAIS: IQ]

Welcomed by His (younger) brothers, the Lord too entered the festive city and, on 
entering the royal palace, duly honoured His stepmothers (Kaikeyi and SO on), His own 
mother (the blessed Kausalya), preceptors (Vasistha and others), His equals in age as well 
as those younger than He, and was honoured (in return) by them. (Likewise) Sita and 
Laksmana too met them in a befitting manner. (46-47) Rising (from their seats), like dead 
bodies returning to life, the aforesaid mothers of these princes placed their sons on their lap 
and, bathing them all over witha flood of tears, shed their grief (of separation from them).(48) 
Causing the matted locks (of Sri Rama) to be unravelled, the sage Vasistha (His preceptor) 
alongwith the elders of His race (the Raghus) bathed Him with the water of (all) the four 
Oceans (in the four quarters) and other (sacred) waters (even) as the sage Brhaspati (the 
Preceptor of the gods) bathed Indra (the ruler of the gods). (49) Having thus washed His 
Whole body including His head, nay, clad in beautiful attire and adorned with wreaths of 
flowers and ornaments, the Lord shone with His (younger) brothers (Bharata, Laksmana and

atrugh d (divine) Consort (Sita), who were (all) well-adorned (with jewels) and 
lagenteneeee (50) Wen over by His brother (Bharata) through prostrations, Sri Rama

] A TA i 
46 Fee ee ee passeareeennabeheeeewetememsan Sell

Skt

ne (of Ayodhya) and like a father protected the people (of His kingdom), 
whe: ies Fan evotcd to their erase duties and endued with the characteristics of thet 
(own) Varna (grade in society) and Asrama (stage In life); while they (in their turn) recognizeg 
Him as theirfather. (51) Solongas Sri Rama—who knew whatis right and brought happiness 
to all created beings—reigned as king, time was like Krtayuga (Satyayuga, the first Yuga) 
though (actually) Treta (the second Yuga) prevailed. (52) Forests, rivers, mountains, Varsas 
(subdivisions of a Dwipa), Dwipas (principal divisions of the globe) and oceans, all yielded 
the desired objects of the people, O chief of the Bharatas! (53) While Sri Rama—who is the 
same as Lord Visnu—ruled as king, mental and bodily ailments, old age, self-disparage- 
ment, sorrow, grief, fear and fatigue were non-existent. (Nay,) death too did not overtake the 
unwilling. (54) (Strictly) observing the vow of having (only) one wife (throughout His life) and 
conducting Himself like a sage even though a king, the pious Lord Himself (scrupulously) 
performed His household duties (just) in order to give a lesson (to the world).-(55) By Her 
affection, obedience, amiables disposition, intelligence and bashfulness, Sita, who was not 
only virtuous but meek through humility and knew His intention, captivated the mind of Her 
(divine) Spouse. (56)

Thus ends the tenth discourse, forming part of the Narrative of Sri Rama, 
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CDI EE SI OD

BACHISaNSeATA:

Discourse XI

The other pastimes of Sri Rama 
Hy Jaa

WSIS WH sided: | adeand tari staan wea: 1 @ |

erase feet ret set afar wy: 1 steada oil a sete area a: 1 2 |

arena cat ei arat YMG | AAA ge Hea Aeloisdla we: 1 2 |

saa Merge: 1AM Ua asst aasearaalfaar |X |

TY meatier arene ches eeqan site: fgafrreret serie aerfati & |

aor Arata fe Ye qatet i aaisaded fasa wat df wafer! «|

Pes : meTaaa TareTgrstes | sumeclengata = =reteuertlaregra | 9 | 
iscsi aie 4 esumed: Guided by His preceptor (the sage Vasistha), the divine Sri Rama 
; Hea a tlated—by means of sacrificial performances conducted with excellent 
q Ait AE tet oa in the form of Lord Visnu, representing all the gods on His person.(1 
a a te the sacrifices) the Lord gave away (by way of sacrificial fees) the easte™ 
and tiene dais a, the southern quarter to the Brahma, the western quarter to the Adhwary¥ 
caveraiee Aen lo the Udgata (the chanter of Samaveda). (2) To His preceptor He 
y the entire land that remained at the centre, recognizing (as He did) that the

Brahmana (alone) was entitled to the wh 
ing.(3) In thi 7 Ra ole of this earth, Himself being free from (al! 
craving.(3) In this way Sri Rama (who had given away His valuables and ach too) was le

with the ornaments and the two 
(Daughter of Janaka, the ruler 0 
Sutra* (every other ornament 
Brahmana ladies). (4) Delighte 
Lord, who is (so) fond of the Br

pieces of cloth He had (on His person); and Empress Sita 
f the Videha country) too was left (only) with Her Mangala- 
even on Her person having been given away by Her to 
oe dle bes see praiseworthy parental affection of the 
US anas, they however returned (all) that to Him and spoke 
as eae: ne mind moistened with atioctonte) "AS a aes fa what has not Been 
given [0 oe y You, O Lord, O Ruler of the universe, when (we know that), entering our 
innermost eart, You Wipe out our ignorance by Your (divine) splendour? (6) Hail to Lord Sri 
Rama, a votary of the Brahmanas, the foremost of those enjoying excellent renown, whose

wisdom knows no obstruction and whose (holy) fe 
eta 
up (all forms of) violence. (7) (holy) re cherished by those who have given

Te fant ai gamed aderm alee fryer dat wet ae AAT: 1 eI

git Oleg SEqUTe qTeMedfae: Ua Mita Ol eal STAT MrektastwarL 120 |

oraetcarTd BT AA AT ATS Oat | Gait wat gle wareht aaah fev AP: 18k

sqaisahds 8a «= By Laat: eRe See UST Ata 1221

Gag: «AMAA «WANA «AYA: | Wea atfean aa set fasta fear 1231

dda wart at WA Adeai WaaA AM: WA Baul aM waa

Sal AYad Ash ABM A a GAT 1 AX 
aat fafarer aqat diet wal faenfaari eat weet faat sfader z1eu 
A TAT TAY Sea MT Ya: | TT TOTTI aTT he UST: 12 E | 
ITS aATanae: | start «fad wreeT Weelcta: 12091 
On a certain night, while moving about incognito and unperceived (in the capital) with the

intention of knowing the mind of the people, Sri Rama overheard the (following) remarks of 
someone concerning His own Spouse (Sita):—(8) “I would have you no more, a wicked and 
unchaste woman that you are, since you have lived in the house of another. King Rama, 
who is excessively fond of his wife, may retain Sita (in his house); (but) | am not going to 
accept you again (in any case)." (9) Forsaken by Her (divine) Consort (Sri Rama), who was 
afraid of the ignorant and myriad-mouthed world, which could not be easily placated, Sita 
reached the hermitage of the sage Valmiki (son of Praceta, the god of water). (10) Being 
enceinte, She gave birth, when the time came, to twins who became (severally) known as 
Kuga and Lava. The sage (Valmiki) performed the (purificatory) rites concerning them.(11) 
The two sons of Laksmana were called Angada and Citraketu; while Taksa and Puskala 
were the two sons of Bharata, O lord of the earth! (12) (Further) Subahu and Srutasena were 
the two sons of Satrughna. In the course of his conquest of the (four) quarters Bharata slew 
Gandharvas (celestial musicians) in tens of millions and, bringing their wealth (to Ayodhya), 
Presenteditall to the King (Sri Rama). Again, getting rid of the demon, Lavana by name, son 
of Madhu, Satrughna forhis part founded on the site of (the forest of) Madhuvanaa city known 
as Mathura (13-14) Having committed Her sons (Kusa and Lava) to the care of the sage 
(Valmiki) and contemplating on Sri Rama's feet—so the tradition goes—Sita, who had been 
€xiled by Her (divine) Spouse (and could no longer bear separation from Him) found Her way 
into the bowels of the earth (that parted asunder to take Her). (15) Hearing of this and

* The auspicious thread with a piece of gold at the centre worn by married women round their neck as long as their

husband lives.

D 
48. sausanennensusansananstisssrismanssstasnsanssnesttntnenseseneneenentnheae st

i i sri Ra Imighty Lord, could not restrain His grief, eve 
recalling Her manifold virtues, Sri Rama, thea ) : 
though ie tried to suppress it by force of reason. (16) Excessive fondness of men and women 
for each other is always such as brings fear (and grief in its train) even to powertul souls, and 
much more to a voluptuary whose thoughts are riveted on his household ! (17)

=, aed weed | araREn WY: | AleRSTATSA A aA STA 12d) 
eat ee fae fr aUsaenved: | aque UH ateatfareeT Ta: 18 
ss gat woe: qaeaisssterminsearatagHean: | 
Waa wot: fe aa wet ars: AeA: lot 
Toes FE satse Maer feiss | 
q wWemeageftegemerg waft MOT TERRI 
@ a: SBISHHEST aT PABST TASH at HAA Aq: LI GA Tash SAA: 122 1 
Wrath STSURMEREL| SSI UR, HM aefelqpeTA 1231

Since then for (a period of) thirteen thousand years without interruption the Lord poured 
oblations into the sacred fire, observing (a strict vow of) celibacy (throughout). (18) Leaving, 
in the heart of those who remember Him, an impression of His feet—tender as a pair of young 
leaves—pierced (earlier) by the thorns of the Dandaka forest, Sri Rama then left for His own 
effulgent (divine) realm. (19) Extirpation of demons through the instrumentality of multitudes 
of missiles and the bridging of the ocean—this is no praise to Sri Rama (the Lord of the 
Raghus), who assumed a form for the sake of sport at the entreaty of the gods and whose 
glory is absolutely matchless and unsurpassed. Did monkeys (actually) serve as His 
helpmates in disposing of the enemy? (No, not at all, Destruction of demons was as good 
a sport on His part as enlisting the help of monkeys for that purpose.) (20) | seek as my 
protector the aforesaid Lord of Raghus, whose unsullied glory—which is capable of 
destroying (all) sins and serves as an adornment for the elephants guarding the (four) 
quarters (pervades all the quarters)—sages sing in royal courts even to this day, and whose 
lotus-feet are touched by the crowns of (even) rulers of heaven (like Indra) and custodians 
of wealth (like Kubera, the god of riches). (21) (All) those people of the Kosala country by

whom He was lovingly touched or fully observed or seated by their side or even followed

' (while moving about) reached the goal which Yogis (those adeptin Yoga or deep meditation) 
attain to. (22) A man treasuring up (in his mind) the narrative of Sri Rama through the

repeated process of hearing, and pledged to (a vow of) tenderness (cessation from violence);

O Pariksit, is freed from the shackles of Karma (in the shape of virtue and sin, which maké 
for transmigration). (23) 
UAT

wa a ATA TAY AGA AT THT: | aA, aT aSsaaded Tet: Gis Sart 12! 
h ine ae (Pariksit) submitted : How did the said Lord Sri Rama conduct Himself and 
who y: eee towards His (younger) brothers (Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna); 
ere rils Own selves (part manifestations)? How, again, did they (Bharata and others)

as well as His subjects and residents of Avodhva (j ds 
Him, their (almighty) lord ? (24) yodhya (in particular) behave in their turn towar

wartena fefesra rqferqeran: | omert astaa warat filet Brat: 
arfarnamt SAT: 124! 
Tele: afar Teaient: ent srmlea wt ar aura 126

AUB Senate 
SE, RE SRESER ERS SSE RENSERERE RE NORGE EE REESE EOE 
: | . Tete TRY ferent: Udteniia afteard 1201 
ae | > PUA sesh: Elta: qracldendUIL 122 
wm outT ardour : | STS Gauida Uretat Sey AMaIATA 123 1 
ad: Se cet uit fant fegeteqeye: fat au: | 
Baton eran yaa: HAALATATL 130 |

or Suka replied : Sri Rama (the Ruler of the three worlds) now charged His (younger) 
brothers with the conquest of the (four) quarters, and Himself looked round the city with His 
followers (attendants), allowing Himself to be seen by His people. (25) With its roads 
sprinkled all over with perfumed water and (fragrant) drops of temporal fluid (emitted by 
elephants in rut), the city looked highly inebriated (exhilarated) as it were to see her lord 
arrived. (26) It was adorned with domes of gold set on the top of palaces, city gates, council- 
chambers, sanctums and temples, as well as with flags. (27) It had festal arches erected by 
means of (fresh) areca-nuts joined with their foot-stalks and banana trees (fixed in the 
ground), strips of beautiful cloths, mirrors, tapestries and wreaths of flowers. (28) With 
articles of worship in their hands citizens met Him at various points and pronounced their 
benedictions (on Him) with the prayer, "Protect, O Lord, this (earth), lifted up of yore by 
Yourself (in the form of the divine Boar)!" (29) On learning that their lord had arrived (there) 
after a long interval, the people—both men and women—forthwith climbed up to the top of 
their mansions with intent to see Him, leaving their household (duties), and showered 
flowers on the lotus-eyed Lord, their eyes (still) unsated. (30)

aq wfas: aye aS e: duet: | samfaeatnemaeicahtesey «=: 1:32 I 
fagrigratanage erste hrnte: | Woeaktand: Wastidenfeanfafaf: 1321 
faorafia: ufgenfiataraforriiggen: | qameisigeeea: cardenreraatas: 133 
gud: yiiafinifted gems: | igi: Gaas YAU: 13x 
Ter Baar wa: fara fraser A ameter: aia fea 1341

qyN a ames ar wadisa! edge sed PaeaaatIema: 136 | 
aft SRI Ta AST TSR Share Aare STATIC Tepe: 12 8 |

The Lord then returned to His palace occupied (in the past) by His own predecessors, 
rich in unlimited treasures of every kind and equipped with an invaluable variety of articles 
of household use. (31) It was graced with entrances having thresholds of coral, rows of 
pillars of cat's-eye, transparent floors of emerald and walls of shining crystals, wreaths of 
Various colours, flags, cloths, gems and canopies, pearls effulgent as consciousness and 
(all) luxuries coveted by men, fragrant incenses and lights and decorations of flowers, and 
attended by men and women akin to gods and lending charm to ornaments them- 
Selves(32—34) In that palace the said Lord Sri Rama, the foremost of wise men revelling 
in the Self, enjoyed life, so the tradition goes, with His beloved and affectionate Spouse, 
Sita. (35) Nay the Lord, whose feet—_tender as young leaves—are contemplated upon by 
men, enjoyed pleasures of sense each atits proper time for very many years, taking care

not to twist (the principles of) righteousness. (36) : 
Thus ends the eleventh discourse, forming part of the Narrative of Sri Rama,

] j ious Bhagavata-Purana 
Book Nine of the great and glorious BI a-Purana, 
- otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PRP RS SSS ae

BIA Bean seaa:

Discourse XIl

The genealogy of (the remaining kings Of) Ikswaku's line

Sad 
SU Allafererefarseredcaet AW: | ustatsa AGA: = AAaATHaAA: 1 kt 
SaMieedistte: Uarase ART: | AA TORI, ASAT: | 2 
nore faecal, Ga: | wat feoansiisyg arrreeted SA: 1 3 
fire: raed steal aaraaserMe at: || AT aaleayrecearutgenr |X | 
Gest wate «9 qaaherenisvad! qexciserzent: BT AG: YA 1 4 | 
AS aria: momma: iawerd Piast aw waft WAI & | 
THI SeatEt «= ireremedor: | Hecate faveretsasead | 9 | 
dd: WAAR AA Aa Alaa UA: i ddl Feat seq at A AA wd ict

Sri Suka resumed : Now, Ku§a's son was Atithi, of whom was born Nisadha and the 
latter's son was Nabha. Then came Pundarika, whose son was Ksemadhanva; and from (the 
loins of) the latter sprang up Devanika. Of Devanika was born Aniha and his son was 
Pariyatra. From (the loins of) the latter sprang up Balasthala and of the latter was born 
Vajranabha, who emanated from (a ray of ) the sun-god. (1-2) His son was Khagana and of 
the latter was born a son, Vidhrti (by name). From (the loins of) Vidhrti sprang up 
Hiranyanabha, a teacher of Yoga and a pupil of the sage Jaimini. From him the sage 
Yajnavalkya of Kosala received instruction in Yoga relating to the Spirit, (which is) 
conducive to great elevation and capable of snapping the knot of ignorance existing in the 
heart. (3-4) Hiranyanabha's son was Pusya, of whom Dhruvasandhi was born. Thencame 
Sudarsana; from Sudarsana, Agnivarna and from the latter sprang up Sighra, whose son 
was Maru. He is the same (Maru) who, having attained perfection through Yoga, stays 
(even to this day) as an inhabitant of Kalapagrama (a famous colony of Yogis in an obscure 
part of the Himalayas), and will revive the solar dynasty, when extinct, at the end of the Kali 
age. (5-6) From (the loins of) Maru sprang up Prasusruta, whose son was Sanghi and the 
son of Sandhi, again, was Amarsana. The latter's son was Mahaswan, of whom Vigwasahva 
was born. (7) Of him was born Prasenajit and from (the loins of) the latter sprang uP 
Taksaka; and of the latter was born Brhadbala, who was slain in battle (O Pariksit!) by your

father (Abhimanyu). (8)

Wt gaye adit: yw gee af oa aM FEAT: 1 et 
sie aS! fea siete aTaat atfetiafa: 1201 
aeeaetdi afta Feestsa MARL sete aque: Wacttsa Aad: 128! 
‘eat Heeatsa qrapise Yer: | werafterenaa: «© -_qaureefterfar 122! 
Team dai alee Has: | wey Gt: Baal ufaar aa: 123! 
Se RR ROT: GR |: Me aRAN eT we: 1

Wem We MEMaR: yh a Ferd we angeraar: 1241

STRAT aT: Aft safest | aaet Wer US Heat wear A et 1261 
Sie APE Ta AEN ORE Gere TaD Sear AT GISSHSEAE: 1221

These are all the past kings of Ikswaku's line: (now) hear (the names) of the coming ones. 
Brhadbala's son will be named Brhadrana, of whom will be born urukriya and from (the loins 
of) the latter will spring up Vatsavrddha. Of the latter will be born Prativyoma; from 
Prativyoma Bhanu and from him will follow Divaka, a (great) general. (9-10) Of him will be 
born the valiant Sahadeva. Brhadaswa will be the son of Sahadeva and Bhanuman, of 
Brhadaswa. Bhanuman's son will be Pratikagwa and the latter's son will be Supratika. (11) 
Then will follow Marudeva; from Marudeva, Sunaksatra and Sunaksatra's son will be 
Puskara, Puskara's son will be Antariksa; Antariksa's son will be Sutapa and the latter's 
Amitraj It. (12) Again, Brhadraja will be the son of Amitrajit; Barhi of Brhadraja and from the 
latter will follow Krtafijaya. His son will be Rananjaya and from (the loins of) Ranafjaya will 
spring up Safijaya. (13) From the latter will follow Sakya; from Sakya, Suddhoda and his 
son will be called Langala. Of him will be born Prasenajit and from Prasenajit will follow 
Ksudraka. (14) From (the loins of ) Ksudraka will spring up Ranaka and of the latter will 
be born a son, Suratha (by name). From Suratha will follow a son, Sumitra by name, who 
will be the last of his line. These are (all) the scions of Brhadbala. (15) This race of the 
Ikswakus will have its end in Sumitra; for, having reached this king, the line will actually 
terminate in the Kali Yuga. (16)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse, "A genealogy of (the remaining kings of) Ikswaku's line“ 
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SIRES ee

lo] 
ZIM WAN SATA: 
Discourse XIll 
The posterity of Nimi described

Hh Jaa 
fafaRearendaat afagradieast | SIT A MISES Bowl Hash At: 1 kt 
+ frdatnitrenta areat sears | quite yedtd: dist | 2 I 
Aigo fier FaAAAeaH | whafetenaarMe Ae YS: 1 3 | 
freeatiend die fadel Wee: | sted eee eet FA: atest: 1 x 1 
fat: owftedt ari mRaserfatts cari aaere eet ote edad: 1 4 
sarrest Se Fifteen: | Proraeuresig saga. wftrar]: 1 & 1 
THAT dace faa afar: | AAT GAAISA cary: PARTAFL 1 9 | 
Wat staq ist vee: swat ate adaw MP: sre AT A cere < | 
wer ati a awofa fatima: | ast OMsist grat efter: 1 < 1 
Ce 0 Aaa eae varae | Aaa ad AQURMYE AA 1201

te

52 aeusnannennsnnsnsssensantsriivensssnsnaranasnesnssansnennesansrttenesen sie

sri S n again : After commencing a sacrificial session King Nimi, son of 
feawaktt ited the see Vasistha to be the (chief) priest. He too on ‘I Nave 
already been invited by Indra (to conduct his sacrifice), O king ! (1) | shall (therefore) 
return after concluding that; (please) what for me till then’. The householder (sacrificer, 
King Nimi) kept silent and the sage too (left for heaven and) conducted the Sacrificial 
performance of Indra.(2) Knowing all this (his life and everything connected with it) to 
be evanescent, the thoughtful Nimi proceeded with the sacrificial session with the help 
of other priests and continued it till his preceptor (the sage Vasistha) did not return. (3) 
Coming back after concluding the sacrifice and perceiving the indecorum on the part 
of his disciple (King Nimi), the sage Vasistha cursed the latter (in the following words):— 
"Let the body of Nimi, who regards himself (very) learned, fall I" (4) Nimi (as well) 
pronounced a counter-curse on his preceptor, who had acted unrighteously (in the eyes 
of Nimi), saying:—"Let your body too fall because of your not knowing what is right on 
account of greed." (5) With these words, Nimi, (who was) well-versed in spiritual lore, 
gave up his ghost; while the sage (my ancestor) was reborn of the gods Mitra and 
Varuna through Urvasi (a celestial nymph). (6) Placing the body of Nimi in balms (with 
a view to preserving it), the foremost of the sages (who were conducting the sacrificial 
session on behalf of Nimi) said to the gods assembled there, after the conclusion of the

sacrificial session (as follows):—(7) "Let this (dead) body of King Nimi come back to life,

if you are pleased, O gods !" When the gods said ‘Amen’, (the spirit of) Nimi spoke aloud, 
“Let me not be imprisoned in a body (again). (8) Stricken with the fear of separation, 
Sages do not long for union with a body and worship the lotus-feet of Sri Hari (devotion 
to whom dispels the fear of transmigration). (9) | (too therefore) am not eager to get 
(back) a body, which brings in its train suffering, grief and fear and because of which 
death threatens the Jiva everywhere, as it follows the fish in water." (10)

Ga Hy: 
face Set aa rey atom saeurhMenai wfeadiseararaheera: 1221 
Seya FU AAT «= Aeta: 1ee AY: wt AA: HAR: asad 1221 
Sr Sah: Bisya degeq faces: 1 fafret aerarendt freer aa firfifer ies!

The gods replied : ‘Bereft of a body, may you reside at will in the eyes of embodied 
souls. (In this way) Nimi took up his abode in the body (of all the Jivas), being indicated by 
the opening and closing of eyes. (11) Perceiving the risk of anarchy for the people; the great 
sages (who officiated as priests at the sacrificial performance of Nimi) churned the body of 
the king, whence a son was born (to him). (12) By virtue of his extraordinary birth (or by 
reason ot his being the progenitor of a new line of Ksatriya kings) the prince was called 
Janaka; born inthe line of king Nimi (who remained withouta body), again, he became known

as Vaideha (son of Videha). Sprung from the process of churni 
: 1a (s 3 . rning and further because (the 
city of) Mithila was built by him, he came to be known as Mithila. (13)

PUA HIE: Tihteang freaaT | AAT Tetarafaentaanke: 120 | 
: Wit: HATE: | MTATETL | UPNSHSATAR | ARG: 128 
URE | Ag enSta| Hedda: | Gaiesiiseal | Wea: 1221 
ASS ahs Angee: ada swe safehiferenfera: 1231 
ee Ut ARIA: | SIGUA eETenTga TA Shara va: 12v I 
aardisa aT aye Ad, GANTT: | Acedt Seretete fasralsetied: Ad: 1241 
WSR Te Ataeett Gitta: ager yaar afar aeasit 126) 
wt a After Uetarettaentaamer: | arrarsraest Sater TRE 1201 
ala ASTad AE Use Sfeaal Tare Ptah arr aalestsea: 1231

Of Janaka was born Udavasu, whose son was Nandivardhana. From Nandivardhana 
followed Suketu and his son, again, was Devarata, O protector of the earth! (14) From (the 
loins of) Devarata sprang up Brhadratha, whose son Mahavirya was the father of Sudhrt 
(Sudhrti). Sudhrti's son indeed was Dhrstaketu. Then came Haryaswa, of whom was born 
Maru. (15) Maru's son was Pratipaka, of whom was born Krtiratha. From (the loins of) 
Krtiratha sprang up Devamidha, whose son was Visruta, and then came Mahadhrti. (16) Of 
him was born Krtirata, from whom followed Maharoma. Again, his son was Swarnaroma, and 
Hrasvaroma was born as his son. (17) Of Hraswaroma was born Siradhwaja. (The divine) 
sita (the Spouse of Sri Rama) appeared from his ploughshare while he was ploughing the 
earth for the purpose of a sacrifice; hence he is remembered as Siradhwaja (who owed his 
celebrity to a plough). (18) His son was Kusadhwaja, of whom was born King Dharmadhwaja; 
and DharmadhWaja had two sons, Krtadhwaja and Mitadhwaja (by name). (19) From (the 
loins of) Krtadhwaja sprang up Kesidhwaja and from Mitadhwaja (Krtadhwaja's younger 
brother) followed Khandikya. (Of these) Kesidhwaja (the son of Krtadhwaja), O king, was 
well-versed in the science of the Spirit. (20) Knandikya (on the other hand) was proficient in 
the science or rituals and fled (left his kingdom) for fear of Kesidhwaja. Kesidhwaja’s son was 
Bhanuman, whose son was Satadyumna. Satadyumna's son was Suci, of whom was born 
Sanadwaja; and from the said Sanadwaja followed Urdhvaketu. From Urdhvaketu followed 
Aja and his son was Purujit. (21-22) His son, again, was Aristanemi. From the latter followed 
Srutayu and his son was Suparswaka. Of the latter was born Citraratha, whose son was 
Ksemadhi, the (famous) king of Mithila. (23) From (the loins of) Ksemadhi sprang up 
Samaratha, whose son was Satyaratha. Of Satyaratha was born Upaguru and from him 
followed Upagupta, who emanated from (a ray of) the god of fire (Agni). (24) Then came 
Vasvananta and his son was Yuyudha, from whom followed Subhasana. Then came Sruta, 
from whom followed Jaya and from (the loins of) the latter sprang up Vijaya, of whom was 
born a son, Rta (by name). (25) Then came Sunaka, of whom was born a son Vitahavya by 
name and from him followed Dhrti. Dhrti's son was Bahulaswa, of whom Krti was born and 
from (the loins of) Krtisprang up Mahavasi. (26) (All) these kings of Mithila, O king, were really 
Proficient in the knowledge of the Spirit. By the grace of masters of Yoga (like the sage 
Yajfiavalkya) they were rid of pairs of opposites (such as joy and sorrow) even in their

household life. (27) 
Thus ends the thirteenth discourse entitled "The posterity of Nimi described“,

in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhaga vata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

54

ee Tete Rk

AM ATaMSeATa:

Discourse XIV

A brief survey of the Lunar Dynasty 
Heh SAAT

sera: seat Wa aa: ST Waa: | aera YT: lett Yoerenita: 1k 
aaa: Wal aairgaerreer Scere Get errata: FegeTAT TT: 1 2 
ae erased Wa: arasqara: flee i fastseggrona sero aieda: ait: 1 3 
asate wig fate YaST | UA FEMI, AR ATTN, TTT ¥ 
Tal A RATS Afaiseanrant Hak Aes aed WA Prattafase: 1 & 1 
Tl | geRAIEI, «ATSIC Tea Stele ATTA: |G I 
aad «=e STI auateansyd, «= AIT: 1 © |

Sri Suka began again : Now hereafter hear, O king, of the hallowed race of Soma (the 
moon-god), in which are mentioned kings of sacred renown such as Aila (King Pururava, the 
son of lla). (1) Of Brahma (the creator), sprung of the lotus (in the form of the cosmos) evolved , 
out of the pool-like navel of the (supreme) Cosmic person possessed of countless heads, 
there was a son, Atri (by name), who was a replica of his father in point of excellences. (2) 
Out of his tears of joy, so the tradition goes, sprang up a son, Soma (by name), who is an . 
embodiment of nectar. He was appointed by Brahma as the lord of the Brahmanas, herbs 
and annual plants, as well as of the hosts of stars. (3) Having completely subdued all the . 
three worlds, he worshipped the Lord by means ofa Rajastya sacrifice and out of arrogance 
he forcibly carried away the wife of the sage Brhaspati, Tara (by name). (4) Though solicited - 
time and again by the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of the gods), he did not leave her through 
vanity. On that account there ensued a war between the gods and the demons. (5) Due to 
Jealousy towards Brhaspati, Sukracarya (the preceptor of the demons) together with the 
Asuras took the side of the moon-god (the ruler of the stars); while Lord Siva (the Destroyer 
of the Universe), Surrounded (accompanied) by all the hosts of ghosts espoused the cause 
of Brhaspati (son of the sage Angira, the teacher of Lord Siva) due to his affection (for 
Brhaspati). (6) Accompanied by all the hosts of heaven, the mighty Indra followed Brhaspati.

(In this way) there raged a battle for the sake of Tara, which caused the annihilation of (both) 
the gods and the Asuras.(7)

Refers art Priel fag ant au Wearserddeiaad ula: 1 | 
ws TM gaa Aaaarfed Ud: | Hie at eral Rat araras: BAA |e 
var Sse at Gat sa BET GA wT wa a izol 
one ( faacarrat: | onglawet Zar Fatt sitfear q aT 1eet 
al ae Sinister | fa a drereraage enanaet qarg B12?! 
Fen a Ww sgt WaMaite aa amaene amd: dire areca 122!

pt Ga geatsren Tl Gea Tika aq yauraleavqen 12% 
aa: Gert Se Fe A Sawa maT etaafteferorfeere, | th!

wr

Dis. 14 ]

Pore: arena Rote Fara yeasty arcdfa wfcor | 
3 afc fase wert Sama Aakash 191 
a mt teeter quieivingeectes: |gara yeeurar arat Sei eBaqeE: 1221

___ Now, apprised of the (whol) situation by the sage Angira, Brahma (the creator of the 
universe) harshly rebuked Soma and had Tara restored to her husband, who perceived her 
to be enceinte. (8) (He saidto her), "Cast away, cast away atonce from my soil, O evil-minded 
one! the seed sown by others. | am not going to burn you a woman, O good lady, anxious 
as | am to have children (through you)." (9) Full of shame, Tara brought forth a son effulgent 
as gold. The Sage Brhaspati (son of Angira) as well as Soma conceived a longing for the 
boy.(10) While the two were hotly disputing with regard to the child, each saying, “It is mine, 
not you rs!" sages and gods questioned her (as to whose progeny it was). She, however, said 
nothing, overcome as she was by shame. (11) Full of wrath the child said to the mother, “Why 
do you out of false modesty not speak (the truth), O immoral woman! (Therefore) tell me of 
your sin at once.” (12) Calling her aside and reassuring her, Brahma gently interrogated her. 
She (then) gradually intimated that the child belonged to Soma, on which Soma took 
possession of the child. (13) Brahma (the self-born) gave him the name of Budha (the wise 
one), in virtue of his profound wisdom, O protector of men! From this son, the moon-god (the 
king of the stars) derived (great) joy. (14) Of Budha was born, through Ila, Purdrava, who 
has already been referred to.* Smitten with shafts of jove to hear of his personal charm, 
excellences, liberality, amiable disposition, affluence and valour, which were being extolled 
by the celestial sage (Narada), in the court of Indra (the lord of paradise), the celestial nymph 
Urvasi sought his presence. (15-16) Having developed a human disposition, thanks to the 
curse of the gods Mitra and Varuna, that charming damsel saw Pururava (the foremost of 
men), who was as handsome as Love, and, controlling herself, arrived in his presence. (17) 
Seeing that celestial nymph, Purdrava spoke to herin a polite language (as follows), his eyes 
blooming with delight and the hair of his body standing on end. (18)

mrmd FX ame sve wean fei dae aa aeh caf ara: Aar: 12e1 
The king said : | welcome you, O charming one, let yourself be (comfortably) seated. 
What shall we do for you? Revel with me here. Let our enjoyment extend over numberless

years. (19) 
Saga 
Heda A Wad AN ges Pat | AqqrdMaAe wad & faa izol 
UNquat Us et we AME | ALA Had eh FTA: SHUT AT: Ba: 12k I 
aa 2 dk vat waa ares Aga feared aa Aare ARMA: 1221 
aa UR Met aRetenfettete! ait A Aaa Aa Self aT ASAT 123 | 
Ta om yeast wee seed Aang | A SAAT 12% | 
TUT RMT erage | Aaa TRG | 
augaadaitrst | wala qaaeal | saaitted = AIT © ATferattsat 1261 
a sta weet aafa seu sdear sot wget usht sree 1201

frerarePad Ret Wafer emrese Se aetna ee 
Ahh.) nn 
* Vide IX. 1. 35.

saemeannennnaenenatvennneans: 14

ae Br Rr We He He Br Be Br

eRe AAA EEE AAA A LAA ATE A AE SS TT 
afesrstee AST wae a aegis: | a: Ret Fifer eareA AMT ANT Feat TAT 128 | 
sft araaraaide: sateiita war: | fate Fiera facetssasag aT 130 | 
5 frgettul ax meter wT ferga: | ameter Revered Aaa AT AT RR

Urvasi replied : Whose mind and eyes will not be riveted on you, O handsome prince?

Lo! on (mentally) reaching your bosom, my presence of mind leaves me, seized as | am with 
a longing to enjoy life with you. (20) Please take care, O king showing honour to others, of 
these two rams as my pledges. (Till then) | shall revel with you; (for) he who is praiseworthy 
(from the point of view of comeliness and other virtues) has been declared as acceptable to 
women. (21) Ghee (alone) will be my food, O valiant one, and | should not see you unclothed 
except during coition. Full of great joy, the king accepted (all) these conditions, Saying, 
"Amen"! (22) “What wonderful beauty, what lovely gesture, that ravish humanity! What 
human being would not accept you, a celestial lady, come of her own accord?" (23) Along- 
with her, who delighted him (in everyway) in a befitting manner that jewel among men 
revelled at will in the pleasure-gardens of the gods such as the Caitraratha (the garden of 
Kubera). (24) Revelling with that celestial nymph emitting the fragrance of lotus filaments 
and captivated by the (sweet) odour of her mouth, Pururava rejoiced for many years. (25) Not 
finding Urvaési (in his court) Indra earnestly urged the Gandharvas to look for her, saying:— 
"Bereft of Urvasi, my court does not look very charming." (26) Approaching at dead of night, 
when darkness fully prevailed, they stole away the two rams pledged with the king by his wife 
Urvasi. (27) Hearing the scream of the two rams (who were dear as sons), while they were 
being carried away, Urvasi (the celestial lady) exclaimed:—"I am robbed of my life (as it were) 
by my unworthy husband, lackingin manliness though accounting himself a (great) hero. (28) 
By putting faith in him, |am ruined and have been despoiled by robbers of my rams (who were 
dear as my own progeny). At night he sleeps in fright like a woman and behaves as a man 
during the day time." (29) Thus pierced with arrows in the form of pungent words as an 
elephant with goads, and seizing a sword, Purtrava angrily rushed forth in (that dark) night 
with no clothes on. (30) Leaving the rams on that (very) spot, the Gandharvas shone brightly 
like flashes of lightning, so that (in the light shed by them) Urvasi saw her husband coming 
back in state of nature taking the rams (with him) and left for heaven. (31)

tetste Tet tamu fea gal diet fage: are auras 1321 
UM ale Heart aaa a aaa: | Us Wepacat: owe Gr Gata: 1331

ae wrt ig fg a a agent amemafida auf qo’ 12¥! 
West wen ta a CRAM | Me Fh PNAS ART 134 |

. Not finding his wife in the bed, Purdrava (the son of Ila) appeared like one out of wits, his 
mind being fixed on her. Restless and grieving for a Panged over the globe like 4 
madman. (32) Seeing her as well as her five female companions with their faces lit with keen 
rahe (on one occasion) at Kuruksetra on the bank of the Saraswati, Purdrava uttered the 
(following) adaptation of a famous Vedic text:—(33) Oh! my darling, Stop! Stop!! Having 
remained ungratified (yourself) till now, you ought not to consign me (as well) to misery. Le! 
us have a (heart-to-heart) talk. (34) Drawn away too far, this charming body, of mine will fall

here, O celestial lady ! (Nay,) wolves and v ' 
= s f 3 ul s . . he 
recipient of your favour. (35) tures will devour it since it is no longer t

a aM: Tea SAT wr carepefear FA 1 aft wet a a witnt qari wai ae 136! 
faa geen: pu ada: Berge: | praeandistt fasrer uli WMATA 1319

Dis. 14 ]

Hae fe Mae Tea | ae a A faerie At: 1321

rvasi replied :

fe santac\aneene ae »aman that you are; nor let these wolves (in the form of the 
Beer cincrainitc enn ie ndeed there is no friendly feeling for anyone in women, their 
Areband orevenialbrothar olves. (36) Women kill for the sake of even a trifle their trusting

ESS ner; for they are merciless, cruel, not easily forgiving, (and) ready to 
take great risks tor their beloved objects. (37) Having cast away (all) friendly feeling after 
nse confidence in ignorant people through deceit and ever longing newer and newer 
lovers, immoral women lead a wanton life. (8) Atthe end ofa year you will cohabit with me

for a single night, O powerful lord; and you will have other i iti 
: ; ther issues too (in addition to the one 
already conceived by me through union with you). (39) (

srddciqneet edt a saat gmigen udiscerd sda dtemaatixol 
suena Yel Gh: Aqaa aa fFamiswdagdat se past faracixet 
Trager dard mitfticsr qa afwencl aia

Vet WA at Teal Jered fr isaat asanat wafa weaadd 1x3! 
WIR Mdisxa adh fase a: 1 aq & anu Heal sdaitetnraar ivxt 
saaii a (Ge TTT stg Aq aes SAT TY: 1541 
aa fide sadder fang: | cen a fae Ua Gad aieadhagd Iss | 
dala Gq | _- WMaMAM As SdallelHabaewsl Aacasd Beis 
Uh Wa WW aa: Wa: Adanga: | eat Aa ara unlsfuevl wa a ixc! 
GE ward wat Aaa Fal Ae ssn wT oles ardtisar ive

ofa sieerTad AEM URASa Sedat ATS USM Aeatsea: 12¥1

Perceiving Urvasi (the celestial lady) to be gravid, Purtrava returned to his capital. Going 
there (to Kuruksetra) once more at the end of a year, he found Urvasi the mother of a hero 
and, full of joy, cohabited with her for the night. Finding him impatient at his separation from 
her and (therefore) afflicted, (the next day), Urvasi lovingly said to him as follows:— 
"Propitiate these Gandharvas (by means of prayer and so on) and they will hand me over to 
you."(40-41) Pleased with him (even) while he was glorifying them, they bestowed on him, 
O protector of men, a vessel holding fire (for the purpose of propitiating it and thereby 
attaining to the realm of Urvasi). Thinking the vessel to be Urvasi (blinded as he was with 
Passion), and roaming aboutin the forest with that vessel, he discovered the reality of the 
vessel (when he was just going to embrace it sexually, taking it to be Urvasi). (42) Leaving 
the vessel in the forest, he returned home and began contemplating on Urvasi at night. (In 
the meantime) when the Treta age commenced (at the end of Satyayuga), the knowledge 
of the science of rituals (as represented by the three Vedas—Rk, Yajus and Sama), dawned 
on his mind. (43) Going to the spot where he had left the vessel, and perceiving (there) a 
Peepul tree sprouting from inside a Sami tree, he hewed out of it a pair of Aranis (churning 
Sticks) for kindling fire by attrition. (44) (Then) visualizing the lower Arani to be Urvasi, and 
the upper one as his own self and the piece that intervened the two as their son, the king 
churned them with a longing to reach the realm of Urvasi, uttering sacred texts (detailing the 
Procedure of producing fire through such churning). (45) As a result of his churning was 
Produced a flame of fire. which is known by the name of Jataveda (that which has everything

[565] B.M. Part II—31

- createdin this universe by way ofits property or food). Through the ceremony of consecration 
(as enjoined by the three Vedas) it was adopted by the king (Purdrava) In three forms (viz.

the Ahavaniya, the Garhapatya andthe Daksinagni) as his son (because leading tosacred region, — 
above). (46) Seeking after the realm of Urvasi, Pururava worshipped by means of that fire. 
Lord Sri Hari, the Ruler of sacrifices (the Bestower of their fruit), who is above sense. 
perception and represents all the gods in His person. (47) Of yore (before the time of 
Pururava) there was but one Vedain the form of Pranava (the mystical syllable OM), the Seed 
of all speech; there was one deity, Narayana, and no other; there was but one fire (and not 
three) and only one caste known as the Hamsas. (48) The three Vedas (the cult of rituals 
expounded by them) came into being from Pururava alone at the dawn of the Treta age, 09 
protector of men, and the king attained (after death) to the realm of the Gandharvas by means 
of the sacred fire, adopted by him as his son. (49)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse bearing (inter alia) on the story of Pururava 
(the son of Ila), in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

GSI

BA UBeaseara:

Discourse XV

The stories of Rcika, Jamadagni and ParaSurama 
Mylh Faq

Use aided Asta Fa Bg: Aaa: Weg wise fasral a: 1g |

AAA UA: AANA Ata: 1 AA Was wae aaaisfra: 1 2 |

arg faea areel eae: | ae We: Gat Met Wadi Aisa |

Wald FORA AcieHscisisths: | 3 | 
Pea: ne SUM FAPGKAN AG: | PATA ead MATa, HAT: 1 ¥ |

ane rl F a ale - Pururava (the son of lla), again, O protector of men, had by Urvasi 
aes aes \YU; OF a Satyayu, Raya, Vijaya and Jaya. (1) Vasuman was the son of Srutayu 
ae alijaya, 0 Satyayu. Raya Sson was Eka and Jaya's son was Amita. (2) Again, Bhima 
: Aedes e iad Vijaya; from Vijaya followed Kaficana and of Kaficana was born Hotra. Hotra’s .

as vannu, who took the (holy) Ganga in the hollow of his palms and quaffed it. Again:

te . Eo oe Puru, whose son was Balaka, and the latter's son was Aja. (3) Then came 
; Irom (the loins of) KuSa, again, sprang up four sons—Kugambu, Tanaya, Vasu an

Kusanabha. Gadhi was the son of Kugambu. (4) 
wa Wea eapeicsarad fst iat faaest meat mftrablarsdt & | 
Wea: Ranrenuiitt CaM asta Mee dtaat Yess aaa: afer AML! & | 
SIOeaT Weal Wd: A Sea a aA AAMT GRAAL! 9 | 
a ele: Safed: Ge weet aera | safaris aq mat aft 1 ol 
ed, aad AT eee af at hy we AISA aE AIL! S|

aq, fear SM: Ste veil apm: at queer: Gt wnat a warAMA: 1901

Walled: ata ae Weta Uta: | sta ae waa Ut WAahaeddsta 122 |

“ 4 RAeTara safest Glermrentt Wit: Eat Wyst A omafireare aM 192 
aS aiteraae Ut agralea: adinast «ouet wa sefafasa: 1221 
TEAST ear Porday | F:aHal a sat ash F:arat ws 1 ex 
Be Yat wre wea |e | aasefa 1241 
| A Brahmana, the sage Rcika, asked in marriage Gadhi's daughter, Satyavati. Considering 
him to ae an unworthy match, Gadhi spoke to Rcika (a scion of the sage Bhrgu, as 
follows):— (5) Let a thousand horses, white as the moon, (each) having one black ear, be 
given as the price of the girl; (for) we belong to the race of Kusika (renowned for our noble 
pedigree)." (6) Thus spoken to and having come to know his mind, the sage sought the 
presence of Varuna (the god of water) and, having brought and delivered the horses of the 
aforesaid description, married that lovely princess. (7) Entreated by his wife (Satyavati) as 
well as by his mother-in-law, each of whom was desirous of (having) a son, he prepared a 
Caru (an oblation of rice, barley and pulse boiled with butter and milk for presentation to the 
gods), uttering both kinds of Mantras (those invoking the birth of a Brahmana for his wife 
and ‘that of a Ksatriya for his mother-in-law), and went out to bathe. (8) Meanwhile, being 
solicited by her aforesaid mother, who (naturally) thought the Caru prepared for her daughter 
as superior (because of the sage's affection for her), Satyavati (the sage's wife) gave the 
Caru meant for herself to her mother and herself ate that intended for her mother. (9) The 
sage having understood this (exchange of Caru between his wife and mother-in-law) politely 
said to his wife, "You have committed a grave blunder. Your son will be a cruel chastiser (of 
foes); (while) your brother will be one foremost among the knowers of Brahma." (10) Implored 
by Satyavati in the words "Let this not be", the sage Rcika (a scion of the sage Bhrgu) said, 
"If so, then your grandson will be such. Accordingly Jamadagni was born (of Satyavati). (11) 
And Satyavati became transformed into the most sacred river KauSiki (Kosi), capable of 
sanctifying the (whole) world. Indeed, of the sage Jamadagni were born through Renuka, the 
daughter of Renu—whom the aforesaid sage had duly married—{a number of) sons, 
Vasuman and others. The youngest of these became widely celebrated under the name of 
Rama (Paragurama), whom the learned speak of as a part manifestation of Lord Vasudeva 
(Visnu) and the destroyer of the race of the Haihayas, (nay) who divested this earth of the 
Ksatriya race thrice seven (twenty-one) times and struck and exterminated the wicked 
Ksatriyas, that had turned hostile to the Brahmanas and constituted a (veritable) burden on 
the earth—enveloped (overcome) as they were by the (element of) Rajas (passion) and 
Tamas (ignorance)—even though they committed the slightest offence. (12—15)

fe aad wnad asec: | gd at He Aw araroneawtevtar: 126 | 
The king (Pariksit) submitted : What was that offence which was committed against 
the glorious sage (Paragurama) by Ksatriyas of uncontrolled mind, for which (the entire) race

of the Ksatriyas was wiped out (by him) time and again ? (16) 
Hye SATA

Saerarafiratiata: aaaie: lad ARTO, OftendfH: 1201 
Te met | (Oa gefhearreriag | stomata: attest terete 12o1 
aaaiet wT Qaornad: | AATEC ieteey =a =a R81

CO CARER eRta een eRe eee eae ee tees eee eee soot eee eee esse ses eeeSSSESSSSRERSSSSR ARSE TERS 
@aga: mist tanta yar: await ast fae eter GRA GS: 1201 
fagiad wiarfar SRT SRST: | AGE, TAT Te aa ATT SRA: 122 1 
Waal Sioa wot Wa arifnfeas: | rife deel Bet A Hitter 1221

Sri Suka replied : Having propitiated Lord Datta (better known as Dattatreya), a part 
manifestation of Lord Narayana, through acts of worship, Arjuna, the jewel among the

Ksatriyas and the then ruler of the Haihayas, had secured a thousand arms, formidableness

in the eyes of foes, uninterrupted soundness of the senses and organs of action, affluence,

glory, prowess, fame and bodily strength, mastery of Yoga and superhuman power which 
was characterized by virtues such as the capacity to assume an atomic form..His movement 
being unimpeded (everywhere), he went about the worlds like the wind. (17—19) Sporting 
in the water of the Reva (Narmada), surrounded by jewels among women and intoxicated 
with excessive pride, King Arjuna, who wore a necklace made of precious stones of the (well-

known) nine varieties, obstructed (the stream of) the river with his (thousand) arms. (20)

Finding his (military) encampment inundated by the water of the river flowing upwards,

Ravana (the ten-headed monster), who thought himself to be a (great) hero, did not brook

this (show of) valour (on the part) of Arjuna. (21) Having offended against Arjuna, Ravana

was seized by way of sport in the presence of those women (by Arjuna) and was imprisoned

in Mahismati (his capital) like a monkey and (eventually) set free. (22)

@ Und qq gaat faa fata ati agaasssmue WACASAT ATA 123 | 
TH A Aaa AME adams wasn ated: 12x! 
a ahead de ep snetealfaeaa datsaataert afsera: a tea: 1241 
Gaayacatar Saraead | a a Asad Hq: Gaal Hac Teng 126 | 
aa wus fait Wa sus sta: | eat aa aS aed Glenfattared: 1291 
ana TRL A ad ara sramad get ate ga Be RCI

Ranging in a dense forest in pursuit of game, on one occasion, Arjuna for his part found 
his way perchance into the precincts of the hermitage of the sage Jamadagni. (23) By the 
good offices of Kamadhenu (the cow of plenty) the sage, rich in asceticism, extended his 
hospitality to that ruler of men including his army, ministers and animals carrying them. (24) 
Seeing that affluence (of the sage), which surpassed his own, in that hermitage, and full of 
longing for the cow of plenty (which was so useful for Agnihotra or pouring oblations into the 
sacred fire, and which was responsible for all the affluence displayed by the sage), the hero 
(Arjuna) including the (other) Haihayas (his kinsmen that had accompanied him in his 
hunting expedition) did not make much of that hospitality. (25) In his arrogance the king (did 
not think it necessary to seek the permission of the sage and) commanded his men to take 
ay the cow of plenty (lit., a storehouse of milk, ghee and so on, fit for being poured 4s 
ae into the sacred fire). And they (in their turn) forcibly took away to Mahismati the 
oe aie vee alongwith its calf. (26) Now, on the king having gone away Rama (who had 
a rage lik ppectothe hermitage and, having heard of his aforesaid. wickedness, flew into 
ge like a serpent that had been hit. (27) Taking his terrible axe, shield and bow with 4

quiver, the formidable hero pursued the king like a |i 
of a herd of elephants. (28) e king like a lion (the king of beasts) chasing the leade!

is. 15 
eS L, cwnndaacexece eee ace BOOK NINE 61

— a LRP CP Pace sete ee teeeeee teers ete t sth tt ott 8 he eee

wr Waseyat | quaofhentenercyferr pacer 133 |

Ot: BeKttaem qasefirrgfera amefirenadt afer

WH Mornu acai fase wa: wad wea avi 
quad: free fm: sgireiea fiat age sat eqeariaul

(Even) while entering his capital, Arjuna saw rushing with (great) vehemence Parasurama 
(the foremost of the Bhrgus), wielding a bow and armed with an arrow and an axe, clad in 
the skin of a black antelope and marked with matted locks brilliants as (the rays of) the 
sun.(29) Arjuna sent forth (against the intruder) seventeen most formidable Aksauhinis* 
characterized by elephants, chariots, horses and foot-soldiers and armed with maces, 
swords, arrows, javelins, Sataghnis (a stone or cylindrical piece of wood studded with iron 
spikes) and darts. The glorious Rama destroyed them (all) single-handed. (30) In whatever 
direction appeared Rama (the destroyer of hostile armies), quick as mind and the wind, 
whose axe was (ever) prone to strike, there fell down to the ground warriors with their arms, 
thighs and necks severed and their charioteers and animals slain. (31) Seeing his army laid 
low in the battle-field—rendered miry with streams of blood—with their shields, ensigns, 
bows and bodies cut to pieces by the axe and shafts of Rama, Arjuna (the chief of the 
Haihayas) rushed forward in rage. (32) Now, with his (one thousand) arms the celebrated 
Arjuna synchronously fitted arrows to his five hundred bows in order to pierce Rama. Rama 
(however), who was by far the foremost of those that (ever) wielded missiles and who had 
(only) one bow, simultaneously cut them down with his arrows. (33) Again, with his hard- 
edged axe Rama, for his part, violently lopped off, like the hoods of a serpent, (all the 
thousand) arms of Arjuna, who came rushing forwardin battle with (terrible) speed uprooting 
with his (numerous) hands rocks and trees on the battle-field. (84) Rama severed, like the 
peak of a mountain, the head of Arjuna, whose arms had (thus) been lopped off. On the father 
having been killed, his ten thousand sons ran away out of fear. (35)

afta wae | eer ae fet ait Aa 1361

wad wad wa: fa wet wa Biatiae =e Hea 1301

Ta UWA UA War WMH sated ad dear | qe 3c

aa fe mreonea aatdorat Wet: aeat Slenlead: UGA Fe 1 38

arr {aa wetiataht Gt aM NAT | aOR, WAREA ela: i¥ol

Tait quififimer set were Ue: | eiteleteerar ail «= SAelgqreqdetea: 1s 1 
afer EST TAY FETA TRASH Seca TAHA TC AISEA: 124

ce ass i its having been removed by force 
Brinaing back the cow of plenty—sore distressed (at : 
fies ‘hey on, tage)—together with her calf, and returning safe to his hermitage, Rama (the

* For the strength of an Aksauhini see foot-note below I. viii. 48.

slayer of hostile warriors) duly made her over to his father (sage Jamadagni). (36) Rama 
recounted to his father as well as to his (elder) brothers his own achievement and also that 
which was done by Arjuna. Having heard the account, Jamadagni spoke (as follows):—(37) 
"Rama, O Rama of mighty arms you have committed a (great) sin In that you slew for no 
purpose a ruler of men, who represented all the gods (in his person). (38) We, Brahmanas 
O dear child, have earned a title to adoration through forgiveness alone, by virtue of which 
Brahma, the adored of the (whole) world, attained to the position of the supreme ruler (of the 
universe). (39) Through forgiveness the glory of a Brahmana shines forth like the brilliance 
of the sun. (Nay,) with the forgiving the almighty Lord Sri Hari is quickly pleased. (40) Slaying 
a king whose head has been (duly) consecrated (at the time of coronation) is more sinful than 
the killing of a Brahmana. Therefore, O dear one, atone for the sin by reverently visiting the 
holy places with your mind fixed on Sri Visnu (the immortal Lord). (41)

Thus ends the fifteenth discourse in Book Nine of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

“er tS ~~ a4 
PICISS Sms

BIA WeSaseara:

Discourse XVI 
Extermination of the Ksatriyas by ParaSurama : an account 
of the posterity of the sage ViSwamitra 
My JaaI 
fascia =| aera «= ee dacat dieters afteanssemmrast | 2 | 
Helfae What Aa Weal Uses West isda | 2 | 
facia miscddeist dl adtidadet a aem fff! 3 | 
wei tf faster Wt: aafeesa | sre Het awit Wea qeneiie: |X | 
aaa gratia usm: sepfadissetc| wtat Uae: urate A aft & | 
UA: aller: at Mig AT Pela Wa WA: Wey Aadays 1 & | 
aurea sta: asada: laa sat wars sifad areas ai © | 
Pes Patent Prareret saree | fag fegnaaictat «= Wage «=| ARSE C 
wae : 2a rites : Admonished by his father (as aforesaid)* and saying "So be it’, - 
Odeliaht ofth sats to his hermitage (only) after having performed pilgrimage for a ye" 
moth a aati rus} (1)Ona certain day, having gone to the Ganga, Renuka (Parasu ramas 
scoriienn { ae Citraratha (the king of the Gandharvas)—adorned with a lotus garland— 
atthe be 3 tite Fa (2) Itwas for water that she had gone to the river. (But) gazing 
porting “aandharva, she did not remember the time scheduled for offering oblations

a oie fire yee the water was required by her husband), her heart being seized 
° eo ©) Perceiving the delay thus caused, and terribly afrai

* Vide verses 38—41 of Discourse XV above.

Dis. 16

| 
BOOK NIN 
SssHPESSRERE ASO RENEE RS tSbANesnaNenEesausenneionwasussiatTE ae Eeeer pee 
of the sage’s (her husband's) curse, she return 
him, stood with joined palms. 
wife, the sage exclaimed, "My

ed (forthwith) and, placing the pitcher before 
2 enrages to know (through Yoga) the (mental) lapse of his 
: : NS! GO away with this sinful woman." Though enjoined thus, 
they did ip ae out his command. (5S) Peremptorily urged by the father, Parseuran., who 
knew well the power of the sage's deep concentration of mind and austerities killed his 
brothers alongwith the mother. (6) The gratified Jamadagni (the son of Satyavati) asked him 
to seek a boon. Rama for his part requested that those despatched by himself might be 
restored to life and forget their having been killed (by him). (7) They instantly rose (quite)

whole (again) as if after Sleep. Parasurama put his dear ones to death (only) because he 
knew the power of his father's austerities. (8)

aT UN ISM wer: elegant wadkiacam aR anf a wie | 
Unaisssadt WA wuak ai maa facrefiaat werfesst sara igo 
ere stdtaareaferafed «ari amaeqeeles «ER OTe: 1221 
area: =p Weeden: i waa AR Sep AR TAT: 1221 
Woeat gaatetal Perenssamarcet i wa wafe aafa fear: adit 1231 
qua NT Wed aeTISSoTAIATEI cael fiat aati eel 
qe GaaTaaiftatnaaalied: | at ad AA aig AAA at AAT R41 
fanaa fide frame wey MAMI sy wel Wa: aaa at et iee 
Those sons of Arjuna that had been vanquished by Rama's valour found peace 
nowhere, recollecting as they did the death of their father (at the hands of Parasurama), O 
king! (9) One day, when Parasurama, alongwith his (elder) brothers, had gone to the woods 
from his hermitage, Arjuna's sons (who were anxious to repay their grudge) came to the 
hermitage, finding a suitable opportunity (to accomplish their object). (10) Perceiving the 
Sage seated in the hut consecrated to the sacrificial fire, with his mind fixed on the Lord of 
sacred renown, they of sinful resolve made short work of him. (11) Though entreated by the 
helpless mother of ParaSurama (to spare her husband), those vile and extremely heartless 
Ksatriyas forcibly lopped off the sage's head and took it away (with them). (12) Stricken with 
agony and grief and violently beating herself with her hands, the virtuous Renuka loudly and 
plaintively cried, "Rama ! O Rama !! Come, dear child !!!" (13) Attentively hearing that cry of 
"Oh Rama!" uttered as though by one in distress, Parasurama, who was ata distance, hastily 
returned to the hermitage and beheld his father done to death. (14) Utterly confounded with 
an outburst of agony, anger, indignation, affliction and grief, ParaSurama then cried:—'Ah 
noble and most virtuous father, leaving us, you have ascended to heaven!” (15) Wailing thus, 
he himself tightly gripped his battle-axe and, entrusting the father's dead body to the care of 
his brothers, made up his mind to extirpate the Ksatriya race”. (16)

mat urfeerdt wed werefererfbrerey| tat a aitetst Tory weet coh Tere 1 R91 
aaa aa CETTE ed Het Pagaet AAT HFORTLT 18 CI 
Bema: yfret gear Prebrat wy: | aera aes UTE Gar TT NS 
fig: saa wera fart orera aff | wacaTa SATTAATESTAE: 120 | 
at wreff feat BR went aferot fear! sted ste A sa Set fear ee

* Tradition says that in her deep agony caused by her husband's brutal murder Rama's mother beat her breast twenty- 
one times. In order to pacify her, Paragurama too wiped out the Ksatriya race as many times.

ayaeal SaraeeaT: esque a weld: | aatadquss Bea: «= ONAL 122]

sTaeraista star VA: SHOoTaa: | ATAPI Us, adhere A TEL 1241 
3IRaSea Teast ~Jedaus: Wattedelt: | SOtaaTaatd: fagreidanni: 1261 
we yy fame wa after: | stadt ot at Yalse TEAM FAIR!

Going to Mahismati (that had been) completely robbed of its splendour by the (sin of 
the) murderers of a Brahmana (sage), Parasurama raised In the heart of the city a huge 
mountain of their heads and with their blood created a ghastly river that inspired terror into 
(the heart of) Brahmana-haters. Making the murder of his father an excuse—on the Ksatriyas 
having taken to unrighteous ways—the mighty Parasurama rid the globe of the Ksatriyas 
thrice seven times and (from their blood) created at Samantapancaka (Kuruksetra) tanks 
filled with blood instead of water, O protector of men ! (17—19) Having brought (back) the 
head of his father, ParaSurama joined it to his trunk and, placing his body on (blades of) the 
sacred Kuga grass, propitiated through (a number of) sacrifices the (supreme) Deity, his own 
Self, who represents all the gods in His person. (20) (At the end of these sacrifices) he 
actually gave away the eastern quarter to the Hota, the southern to the Brahma, the western 
to the Adhwaryu (and) the northern to the Udgata. (21) He bestowed the intermediate corners 
on the other priests, the central region on the sage Kagyapa, the Aryavarta (the tract of land 
bounded on the north by the Himalayas and on the south by the Vindhya mountains), on the 
Upadrasta (the supervisor) and the region beyond (viz., that lying to the south of the Vindhya 
range) on the Sadasyas (superintending priests). (22) And then, having washed off his entire 
sin (incurred by killing numberless Ksatriyas) through a bath, taken at the conclusion of the 
Sacrifices in (the waters of) the Saraswati, a river representing the Vedas, he shone like the 
cloudless sun. (23) Having regained his own body (which was now completely) spiritualized 
(consisting as it did of consciousness alone), Jamadagni too, the adored of Parasurama, 
became the seventh in the group of the seven seers (looking after the welfare of the 
universe). (24) Indeed, Jamadagni's son, the worshipful ParaSurama too, who has eyes 
beautiful as a pair of lotuses, will propagate the Vedas (as one of the seven seers), O king, 
in the ensuing Manvantara. (25) He stays even to this day on Mount Mahendra, having 
renounced (all forms of) violence and with a perfectly serene mind, his exploits being sung 
ee Gandharvas and Caranas. (26) Descending in the midst of the Bhrgus, the 
gnty ord Sri Hari, the Soul of the universe, thus slew several times kings (Ksatriyas) 
who constituted a great burden on the (bosom of the) earth. (27)

meres: af Fa Ure: | ATT AAA BM OY Hglaelay 2c! 
aR Wal Wa IME EST nyRE wa F1R¢! 
Set WAM set a anfas sneiind gare wae ue yeneuran 1301 
3 aes fa Gea: OR: | Meal Cary SSeS, AAS UTA, 138 | 
& We ATE: | caret sit Wt: Yaa: Wala: 132 
TQS Sg: GAs AR a ae! arma ATah: wal ear wert Shar: 1331 
B Sart AST: Te SEAT a: | sara, oT ARABS eH 1 
SB TAR sgrarast at wr fei feanfio: gare dhest afer |

is. 17 
D WAMreeeeeNENeenTTEEEEREKrErannencc OOK NINE 65

tart Asqyert dhaaend arL 1341 
= i ie aR Seutemad | ara AWsSchenicdwtashdaalad: 13%! 
= q feat: gafaemi verano akg ad yenierriszet

mat We Area TEU oe Usa Fa Hessen: 126

Perc ikea hfe at See ae sage) Viswamitra possessed of extraordinary 
aie (his) asnatiamen a oe 0, shedding his Ksatriyahood, attained Brahmanical glory

aie aie gaan ) And ViSwamitra had one hundred and one sons, O protector 
of men: ine iitty-tirst son (who formed the middle of the whole lot, was (named) 
Madhucchanda; (hence) they (all) came to be known as Madhucchandas. (29) Adopting 
Ajigarta s son Sunahsepa, also known as Devarata, a scion of the sage Bhrgu, as his own 
son, the sage Viswamitra said to his sons, "Let this boy be treated as the eldest (of you 
all)."(30) He was the same Sunahsepa (a descendant of Bhrgu) who was sold (by his 
parents) to be used as a human victim in the sacrificial performance of King Hari$candra.* 
(Having sought the protection of Viswamitra,) he was freed from bond in the shape of a cord 
by extolling (as instructed by Viswamitra) gods such as the lords of creation. (Thus) saved 
by the gods (Varuna and others) in a sacrificial ‘performance meant to propitiate the god 
Varuna, the ascetic boy became celebrated among the scions of Gadhi by the name of 
Devarata. (31-32) The (fifty) sons of Viswamitra, older than Madhucchanda, did not approve 
of Sunahsepa being treated as the eldest. Full of anger, the sage (Viswamitra) cursed them, 
"Become Mlecchas (barbarians), O evil ones!" (33) Alongwith his fifty (younger) brothers— 
so the tradition goes—Madhucchanda then said: "We shall abide by whatever you enjoin on 
us." (34) They (accordingly) took Sunahsepa, a seer of Vedic Mantras, as the eldest (of them 
all) and said to him, "Indeed we are (all) your followers (younger brothers)." (Gratified at this) 
ViSwamitra said to these (latter) sons, "You will be blessed with sons—you who have made 
me a father of worthy sons by conceding my superiority (acceptting my command). (35) This 
valiant Devarata is one of you (as gooda scion of Kusika as you), O scions of Kusika! (Hence) 
follow him (as an elder brother)." There were other sons too of Viswamitra—Astaka, Harita, 
Jaya, Kratuman and so on. (36) Thus, of course, the line of Kusika was ramified into various 
off-shoots due to the sons of Vigwamitra. And it acquired a different Pravara (branch name, 
viz., that of Devarata) inasmuch as it was given a new shape (with Devarata as the eldest

son of VigSwamitra). (37)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse in Book Nine of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

(RIOD OD

hai ee ees. Se

* Vide verses 20 and 21 of Discourse Vil above.

—

rr. ==” ™

ttt wo ote hei 
o. nt tet fat th mene be

7

nthe

~

Wh a |

31D Aye seara :

Discourse XVII

The posterity of Kings Ksatravrddha, Raji and others of the Lunar Dynasty 
Ay Sa

a: URGE: W AGM Gag: ages wt wis aa! 8

area: Gat TRMAE Sh RAAT Ys: et TI gaat YA: 1 8

SRT aie ust dees: fren | earahcias sTgaetadh: |X |

an araeaiat: «= Saale: | A: Sa A MTT: 1G I

falar gnterena set sft Ba 1a Ua Bae ae Tate Seth: |

AM HasAAl Mniswchiaaeda: | & |

uiadaealir «489 Wibadadia «=a atenieadt UM Rie ayst gar! © |

Seochil, Aaeae AAAS Pera: | ed: Ate «Atehdwirad | ¢ | 
Odea, Har: fata: idifretrea 9 sactisat arisyfreygqa: 1 et

Sri Suka began again : Nahusa and Ksatravrddha, Raji, the valiant Rambha and 
Anena—these were the sons of Ayu, who was a son of Purdrava™*. (Now,) hear of the posterity 
of Ksatravrddha, O king of kings! KaSya, KuSa and Grtsamada—these were the three sons 
of Suhotra, the son of Ksatravrddha. From (the loins of) Grtsamada sprang up Sunaka, 
whose son, the sage Saunaka, was the foremost of the students of Rgveda. (1—3) Kasya's 
son was Kasi, whose son, Rastra, was the father of Dirghatama. (And) Dirghatama's son was 
Dhanvantari, the founder of Ayurveda (the science of medicine), and a part manifestation 
of Lord Vasudeva, who received a share in the sacrificial offerings and is capable of relieving 
bodily suffering merely on being thought of. His son was Ketuman, of whom was born 
Bhimaratha; and from (the loins of) the latter sprang up Divodasa. From Divodasa, followed 
Dyuman, also remembered by the name of Pratardana. The same, Dyuman was called by 
the names of Satrujit, Vatsa and Rtadhwaja and was also referred to by the name Of 
Kuvalayaswa. From him sprang up Alarka and others. (4—6) None other than Alarka, O 
Pariksit, ruled over the earth for (a period of) sixty-six thousand years, remaining young 
throughout this period. (7) From (the loins of) Alarka Sprang up Santati, from whom followed 
Sunitha and from the latter, Suketana. Dnarmaketu was the son of Suketana, of whom 
Satyaketu was born. (8) Dhrstaketu was the son of Satyaketu, and from (the loins of)

Dhrstaketu sprang up King Sukumara. Then came Vitihotra, whose son was Bharga; and © 
the latter was born King Bhargabhtmi. (9)

Rit aR yu: aarti: iw wa: at msizenfinae: 120! 
Te Rt ME SY aa: | Beer: Berets frvae etarefe: 128 
ea: Waal Sgt Grea: A sear | Ta: Gaara GaToTaaatstarey, 122 | 
cevefeit Gar ers faa gaat yader ate art we 123!

* Vide verse | of Discourse XV above.

Ror tries,

Meet eee tl | |)

Sree Teese: | fear yt arama al ae: 1ext 
‘aks ple TAME Ae: | Teo RASA aed TAAL TA: 1241 
oe META clseeetiia: | Bete Met: AAG AAA sa: 12S I 
dd: hd: adanq Wat gaat 7a: laa aa TOA ARG: 1201 
agers A wa: amet TENA: | TATSTAM YU: TOT ABt SATA NCI

St ASM AE Tea Usa Tara ass GaesSeAe!: 12001

(All) these aforesaid kings in the line of Ksatravrddha were the descendants of Kasi. 
Rambha S SON was Rabhasa, whose son (again) was Gambhira and from him followed 
Akriya. (1 0) Through his wife was sprung a line of Brahmanas; (now) listen to the posterity 
of Anena. From (the loins of) Anena sprang up Suddha, from whom followed Suci. Of him 
was born Trikakud, alias Dharmasarathi. (11) Of him was born Santaraya, who had his object 
(in the shape of final beatitude) accomplished and was enlightened (too so that he did not 
beget any child). Raji had five hundred sons, who were (all) possessed of immense 
strength.(12) Solicited by the gods, he slew the demons and restored (the kingdom of) 
heaven to Indra. Returning it to him (Raji) and clasping his feet, Indra placed himself in his 
hands, afraid as he was of Prahrada and other enemies. On the death of their father, the sons 
of Raji did not return to the great Indra, even though he asked for it, (the sovereignty of) 
heaven and (even) fully appropriated the sacrificial offerings. When oblations were being 
poured by the preceptor (the sage Brhaspati) into the sacred fire (according to the procedure 
laid down for the employment of spells for a malevolent purpose), Indra (the slayer of the 
demon Bala) slew (all) the sons of Raji, who had strayed from the path of virtue, and none 
(of them) was left alive. From (the loins of ) KuSa, the grandson of Ksatravrddha, sprang up 
Prati; then came Safijaya, whose son was Jaya. (13—16) From Jaya followed Krta and of 
Krta, again, was born King Haryavana. Next came Sahadeva and from Sahadeva followed 
Hina; while Hina's son was Jayasena. Then came Sankrti and the latter's son was Jaya, a 
great car-warrior devoted to the course of conduct of a Ksatriya. These are all the kings born 
in the line of Ksatravrddha; now hear of the line which originated from King Yayati (the son

of Nahusa). (17-18)

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse, forming part of an account of the lunar dynasty, 
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

The story of Yayati 
aye SAA 
afin: dafrratitiat: ai aee agrenetatsaita afer: 1 8

tei eq aft: fiat at aaftonmfad! at Stag: Yer STA + Alagqeaa 1 2 1 
frat via wuatfesoar etore fest: 1 siftetssrreet a aenfarnagqa: 1 2 1 
argue fea wig, Wat aera: | Haat sitet arena qaudur: 1 x |

18 
SiR ee ee eee ee ee

Sri Suka resumed : Like the six senses (including the mind) of an embodied soy, 
the following six were the sons of Nahusa—Yati, Yayati, Samyati, Ayatl, Viyati and Ket, 
(1) Yati (the eldest) did not desire the sovereignty, offered by his father, since he knew 
the end of sovereignty, having entered which one is no longer able to realize the Sei 
(2) On his father (Nahusa) having been hurled from heaven and transformed into a 
python by the (curse of) the Brahmanas (the sage Agastya and others) due to the 
former's impudence towards Indra's wife, therefore, (it was) Yayati (who) became the 
king. (3) Yayati (the elder brother) appointed (his four) younger brothers (Samyati ang 
others) as governors in the four quarters (each in one quarter) and, having taken to 
wife the daughters of Sukracarya and Vrsaparva, ruled over the globe (as its suzerain

lord). (4) ; 
Wawa He: AAT TES: | Tera: sere faate: wire: 1 & |

The king (Pariksit) submitted : The glorious Sukracarya was a Brahmana sage and 
Yayati (the son of Nahusa), a mere Ksatriya. How did the irregular marriage of a Ksatriya king 
with a Brahmana girl take place ? (5)

Sh SATA 
Ud ahaa ast AA Sia adie Wega a watt «|

rat I fe Sted «= henitenioaiedigiessten |e | 
T AWSOME HM: HAS: lat Ma qHent fasrg: fasritite: 1 ¢ 1 
diet serd fiat ae cen aefer agai araifa udepifen: fea: 1 ¢ | 
WHssadt aeat Wen: wea aar sepfaar eaariensdt 1201 
oret Friar aren: aot war steTaTe qdadt 9 BWAla wlaxeat 122 
aie da ys qa wa: we a1 ard afte sata: fara: eng afaia: 122! 
a Sate Glee: Wea: 1 wari fasaen uaa: sited: 1231 
aa wari aera: Fereatser A: ferret: | atereare Yat Yet aaftaradt 1e¥! 
MW wri ate TepinTedien samEta atic apaaer ih! 
Serene aT mee ae fHaten 1 fH a welesench Jer atest aa 126 
Wafers: Grek: farenssartgat adi afttsr waa He ara anerr TAT 12

sri Suka replied : Accompanied by a thousand girl companions as well as by Devayani,

the daughter of Sukracarya (the preceptor of the Danavas), Sarmistha, the virgin daughter

of Vrsaparva (the celebrated Danava chief) — 
is who, though was 
(yet) very proud—was strolling, gh belonging to the weaker sex

on one occasion, in the city garden, full of flowering trees and 
pune eee sandy Strands ofa lotus pond swarming with sweetly ining bees Ol 
ee o on Be pond and leaving their clothes on the margin, those maidens with eyes 
ord Gene es of lotuses sported in It, Sprinkling one another with water. (8) Observing 
ithatwer i punted on a bull alongwith His divine Consort (Goddess Parvati) passing 
orca Canneeie S felt abashed and put on their clothes, coming out of the pond at 
op Be eee Spr he raiment of the preceptor's daughter, regan’ : 
boss aged (é , Devayani spoke thus:—(10) "Oh ! just look at t

serine: i this servant-maid in that like a bitch snatching Ae ih Seeten in a sacrifice 
she has put on the clothing which was meant to be put on by us. (11) Even among the

Dis. 18 ] BOOK:

SseseeEheAesnnestewensnesteeseeseswssesaneran Trscseeneyeseniee nese 
Brahmanas—by whom this world has bee 
represent the mouth of th 
of the Cosmic Person

n created by dint of (their) asceticism, who 
© supreme Person (in the sense that they emanated from the mouth 
tiateen @narb and also because it is by feeding them that the Lord is easily 
propitia nd by whom is cherished (as the object of their worship) the (transcendent) 
Brahma (thatis all effulgence), by whom has been revealed the way to blessedness (in the 
shape Of the Vedic religion), whom hail and extol the guardians of the spheres and the 
rulers of the gods, (nay,) even the almighty Lord, the Soul of the universe, the Purifier (of 
all) and the abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity)—we are the descendants 
of Bhrgu ! Her (Sarmistha's) father, a demon chief, is a disciple of ours. (Yet) like a Sudra 
who has learnt by heart the Veda, this wench has put on the garment which was to be worn 
by us ! (1 2—14) Hissing like a female serpent and biting her lips in anger, the ill-treated 
Sarmistha spoke (as follows) to the preceptor's daughter, who was thus abusing her:—(15) 
"Not knowing your own status, O beggar-maid, you brag much! Do you not (all) wait at our 
door like a swarm of crows (the eaters of crumbs offered to them as representatives of the 
feathered kingdom)?" (16) Reproaching in such exceedingly harsh words the preceptor's 
daughter, who was worthy of respect, Sarmistha violently dashed her into a well after 
snatching her clothes through anger. (17)

reat Waa ee sain ai wat agar HA weet at cael sec

oat Sam ae wn faaaai yee aftr ufergsre aaa: 12e1

aq dhoeeaadt safeka | firoimimea ala A oft: ame io!

Seas A Ye Walaa fe Aiwa sae A wat at a ales: 1 
afee HAGAN Aadt alt AA 1221

A MON A wlan Beal AYA! SAA Ada Wore aad qe 122!

aah SaUeMAIG: | AAR Ae Setar Mfasie «dee: 1231

When Sarmistha had left for her home, Yayati, who had been wandering in search of 
game, arrived there by chance.Being desirous of water, he looked into the well and descried 
her (Devayani)—so the tradition goes. (18) Giving to, the naked girl the piece of cloth 
covering the upper part of his body, the kind-hearted king lifted her out, grasping (her) hand 
by his own. (19) Devayani, (the daughter of the sage USana) spoke to the heroina language 
full of love (as follows):—"O king, the conqueror of (your) enemy's cities ! my hand has been 
accepted by you. (20) Indeed, let none else take my hand, now that I have been accepted 
by you. This union of ours, O valiant king, has been brought about by Providence and is not 
man-made inasmuch as this sight of yours has been vouchsafed to me while | was clinging 
to a well. (21) A Brahmana is not destined to be my husband, tanks to the imprecation of 
Kaca (the son of the sage Brhaspati)—Kaca, whom | had cursed ona former occasion, O 
long-armed one !" (22) Recognizing the connection as having been pre-ordained by fate, 
€ven though it was not (at all) acceptable to him (inasmuch as it was against the recognized 
code of ethics), and perceiving his mind too (which could not lean towards unrighteousness)

drawn towards her, Yayati agreed to her proposal. (23)

TA ust aI at al Bt wat fig: eee aa: Aa UME Fre!

* sani : 1 f reviving the dead from Sukracarya at the latter's house. While he was 
Kaca was receiving instruction in the science © Bet

retuming home after pester hig course of instruction, Devayani wooed him, but was refused by Kaca on the ground of her

being like a sister to him. Devayani thereupon pronounced an imprecation on him that the instruction received by him would

bear no fruit. Kaca too stared a counter-curse on Devayani, saying that no Brahmana would take her to wife.

eNO Eee — 
iar eran area: cbitest fare a gt a sere flow at TATA 14 
gamat | aT Nerenfeafarr! Te sere, et area: lett: TAT RG 
aoragna, frei saree aga: | HTS: faa US AA AAAS 1 219 | 
adaafet we 2aart wArTaH! feat eet Act Tet SYM Ag AMAY 121 
amt a Hee ater veda a tien cari Udetd, Baga aaa 1291 
aed yi al BE afigaart | aa wseetismrended + cabfefad 1301 
eased asefist wat wii ma ad wr wen: oft Tet ae 
aayedisrea nf aad wad Mega: ares = faptanaged 1321 
aj a wd da teat oor gd an a ye a iter aici 139 
migsaneat adda 96 peti @aart fegte gat mtefanfedar ax 
fam: att adlfiecraaia sealed ee WadareAicht: 1241 
apremte «0 ltd: §« Sten wat Ser erat We ferceHOTt JOM 1341

On the valiant king having departed, Devayani (too) repaired from the garden to her 
father, weeping (all the way), and forthwith related to him all that had been said and done 
by Sarmistha. (24) Condemning the vocation of a priest and praising the way of life ofa 
pigeon (that gleans grains of corn lying scattered in a field where the harvest has been reaped 
and lives on such gleanings alone), that glorious sage, Kavya (SUkracarya), went out of the 
city (the capital of Vrsaparva), sad at heart, alongwith his daughter (Devayani). (25) 
Concluding him to have hostile intentions (of bringing victory to the gods), and anxious to 
placate the preceptor, Vrsaparva fell (prostrate) at his feet on the road. (26) The worshipful 
Sukracarya (a scion of Bhrgu), whose anger lasts but half a moment, gently said to his 
disciple, "Let Devayani's wish (condition) be fulfilled, O king! 1am unable to ignore her". (27) 
When Vrsaparva remained standing, (even) after uttering the words, "So be it!" , Devayani 
declared what was in her mind, saying, "Given away by my father, whithersoever | go, let 
Sarmistha follow me with (all) her companions." (28) Perceiving the danger to her own people 
from the exit of Sukracarya and the magnitude of good expected from his staying Over, 
Sarmistha waited upon Devayanilike a menial alongwith her thousandfemale companions.(29) 
Giving away to Yayati (son of Nahusa) his daughter alongwith Sarmistha, the sage Usana 
(Sukracarya) said to him, "O king ! let not Sarmistha ever share your bed." (30) Perceiving 
ona certain occasion Devayani (USana's daughter) blessed with ason. Sarmistha (too) whe 
was leading a chaste life, sought during the period favourable for conception the bed in 
seclusion of the very husband ofher friend (Devayani), (with alonging to be similarly blessed 
with progeny). (31) Solicited by the princess for progeny and considering it a sacred duty (to 
grant her prayer), Emperor Yayati (who knew what was right) sought her embrace 4° 
something ordained by destiny itself (and not through concupiscence), even though 
recollecting in time the warning of Sukracarya. (32) Devayani duly gave birth to Yadu and 
Turvasu as well, while Sarmistha, the daughter of Vrsaparva, bore Druhyu and Anu an 
ets (33) Overwhelmed with rage on concluding that Sarmistha (the daughter of the Asura

ing) too had conceived through her (own) husband, the haughty Devayani went away 
her father's house. (34) Having followed his darling, the uxorious Yayati tried to reconcile 
her with blandishments, as well as by kneading her feet and other such devices, but coul? ” 
not please her. (85) The angry Sukracarya said to the king, "O fool! O liar hankering after 
women !! Let old age, which disfigures a man, overtake you." (36) 3 |

Dis. 18 ]

aTMSeaT ATTA FEL glee WA) Seed aaah aaa asters 1319 | 
vt WaT: Aguada at ait what oat Af fet aa: 132 
atepal ae A Wat fastgeiage wadda wa afta: aa: 13e1

Yayati submitted : | am unsated till today with sensuous enjoyments in the company 
of your daughter, O holy Brahmana! (Sukracarya replied ) "Old age may be exchanged (by 
you) at will with the youth of any other who may voluntarily accept it." (37) Having obtained 
a solution (of his problem) In this form, Yayati (returned to his capital and) said to his eldest 
son, Yadu dear, take this old age (of mine), brought about by (the curse of) your grandfather 
(mother's father, Sukracarya) and part with your own youth, my darling ! (for) | am not yet 
satiated with the pleasures of sense and intend to revel some (more) years with (the help 
of) your youth. (38-39)

IGeard

aee FAT RGA STRAT da | sfafear qe wre aqua Aft gaa: 1xol 
ddgater: fi wes wamiseennin wea fre: ive 
aed a GS age qonfseqia aaa aa Al Weeanela 1X2! 
Yadu replied : | have no courage to (accept and) live with your old age, got (by you) in 
the middle of your life. (For,) having not (actually) tasted the vulgar pleasures a man does 
not attain to desirelessness. (40) Though urged by their father, Turvasu and Druhyu and Anu 
too declined, O scion of Bharata, since they did not know what was right and looked upon 
the transient (body etc.) as eternal. (41) (Now) Yayati asked his.son, Puru—who, though 
youngest in age, was superior in point of virtues—and added, “Dear one ! like your elder 
brothers you should not refuse me." (42)

Geel

Al q ole aqers figura: APL! Sie att ae Walele fered Ge 1431

saafatad sata Siewert q Aen: i semissgt galendiatd fag: iv! 
Piru replied : As a matter of fact, what man in this world, O ruler of men ! can requite 
his father, the procreator of his body, by whose grace he can attain the highest (object of 
his life)? (43) The best son is he who accomplishes (in anticipation) whatever is expected 
by his father (without waiting to be told what is wanted by him). A mediocre son is he who 
does (only) that which he is (expressly) told to. The lowest Is he who does his father's 
bidding with irreverence; while he who refuses to do his bidding is (no more than) the

refuse of his father. (44) 
: sft safe: ye: serjerent fig: | aisit cate HAM AMSAT TT su! 
, . ee faqad, Weed, SM: | aetrasite farereesseatectsa: FERS 
SETAE rraraerege: |Saea: eat siegaTe Aaa WE: Iwo 
oma, aye | meafinfieth radeary and Ge xe 
Rafe fink ailsla wecafe: tama ait ait NATE: 1x81 
aaa a fare arate Tee aerate PRI TEAL 4o | 
= aagiaerl aaertshe ager arate: ales: 142 1 
ofa 4 2 TET TAGE Sere ATA ASETGRSEAT: 182

Saying so, Piru most gladly accepted his father's old age. The latter too, O protector of 
men, enjoyed the pleasures of sense with (the help of) his (Puru's) youth, as enjoined by the 
scriptures. (45) Duly protecting his subjects like a father, Yayati (the ruler of all the Seven 
divisions of the globe) enjoyed the sense-objects according to his pleasure, his sengeg 
remaining unimpaired. (46) Devayani too, the beloved of her husband, afforded supreme 
delight in private to her beloved husband from day to day with mind, speech, body ang 
(various) articles (of enjoyment). (47) Yayati (also) propitiated through sacrifices with liberal 
gifts of money Lord Sri Visnu (the Destroyer of sins), the Deity presiding over sacrifices, the 
embodiment of all the Vedas, who represents all the gods in His Person. (48) Like a masg 
of clouds in the sky, this world—which is (no better than) a dream, a hoax and a fancy—ig 
superimposed on God; it now appears as different (in the shape of numberless names and 
forms) and now disappears (during deep sleep as well as at the time of final dissolution). (49) 
Installing in his heart the selfsame Lord Vasudeva, the Indweller of all hearts, who has His 
abode in water and is subtler than the subtle, Yayati, who had no desire (left) in him, 
worshipped Him there. (50) Though enjoying the pleasures of sense—which are only 
conceptual—with his (five) wicked senses as well as with the mind, which is the sixth, for 
thousands of years, Yayati (the ruler of the entire globe) did not feel sated. (51)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse in Book Nine of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Discourse XIX 
Yayati's Renunciation

Ah SAA

TOFS SM, SUTTSTRaMTEM: | qeeaT rad fafefoon metacrnad |e 
TY anlar wat wfgeraftat gfe fit mengeitaha aa apres: | 3 | 
Het Weel ort cafe faferad framers: zeta ufaat wancfererresTTAL | 2 
Te Se set: art fafa aren dtelqeser ferarondor Deri x | 
Bieta are, Gato wea arena femes t en ae wae meso: wTETAA: | | 
Wart [ge 38 teat amatfee a uatsaqwerat agai xfrada: | 
ie ee FSET ST ATAEAT |G 
+ <a oe ee eer men wt ot 
ash = aureteas| srr efit gfe aati | 
ed 
eat ee PUM aati FN Ya: wedsata aria 1go!

; OST HORA Bes alte ux aatafenfe quafer ee!

/ ake =— =. ee

is. 19 : 
Deed BOOK NINE 73

Be Re SESE SESE HE Ge We Me He Re Sr Be Re Be Re Br Gr Sr He Mr he Hr oy 
REAR ASA RET ERC ACARI ERR EH IRA RB 
Te en: Wo Nae: Smakad: | amet afters were arere 122 1 
ae Wiser sitters feu Vela: Raa: 1a gaa waif ge: mmece 21231 
TOSTG SR: aT Wat i east meada wa warlsaeka 1e¥! 
pa a RAF | WASSER Ue: Gat Bara fea: 1241 
a get adfafisiar a a Siete at Gent eaaet adorat st STL ILS!

TAT SET Seat aT anfeemre erat aera fagranta «9 mmaia 12091

wi adeeet a fave, Gadiseepe.| cent Uqaat GN aAgUstad 12ct

sAasal fe ata Seva ume Adel Préenaftenfr wi: «aeiee

Se AAA See Ae leet! daft arent a aa fas see 1201 
sri Suka resumed : Thus enjoying the pleasures of sense, Yayati, who had been 
enslaved by his wife, woke up to his Spiritual fall and, disgusted with the world narrated the 
following (story in the form of a ) parable to Devayani (his beloved wife). (1) "Listen, O 
Devayani (a scion of the sage Bhrgu), the true story of one on this earth who had a conduct 
similar to mine and who was full of lust (lit., lived in a village), yet for whom (and others like 
him) the wise residing in the woods constantly grieve. (2) Hunting for his beloved object in 
a forest all alone, a certain goat saw a she-goat fallen in a well, subject (as she was) to her 
own destiny. (3) Intently thinking of a means of rescuing the she-goat, the passionate goat 
created an outlet (for her) by digging out the earth at the brim with the end of his horns. (4) 
Coming out of the well, that beautiful she-goat, it is said, fell in love with that very goat. 
Observing him selected by her—stout, mature, most lovable, capable of procreation and 
expert in the art of copulation as he was—many more she-goats, who longed for a beloved 
companion, also conceived a passion for the goat. Enhancing the delight of those numerous 
she-goats, that king of goats revelled with them alone and ceased to think of himself, 
possessed as he was by the devil of concupiscence. (5-6) Perceiving that very goat enjoying 
himself with another most beloved she-goat, the one that had fallen into the well and 
(consequently) got bewildered, could not brook that act of the goat. (7) Deserting that lustful 
goat, who though disguised as a friend had played her false and whose love was (only) 
momentary, given as he was to the gratification of his senses, the she-goat returned full of 
agony to her owner. (8) The goat too, a slave of his beloved she-goat, felt (very) wretched 
and followed her, uttering a bleat all the way in order to pacify her, but could not reconcile 
her. (9) There (in her owner's house) a certain Brahmana, who was her owner, amputated, 
in anger, his dangling scrotum and rejoined it In the interest of the she-goat (herself), 
proficient as he was in (all) such expedients. (10) With his scrotum restored, the goat too 
revelled for a long time indeed with the she-goat that had been found (by him) in the well, 
O dear one! But he does not feel satiated with sense-enjoyments till this day. (11) Bound in 
rds of your love and deluded by your charm, O pretty one, | fail to 
recognize my own self, wretched as | am. (12) (All) the rice and barley, gold, animals and 
women that exist on earth—they cannot yield satisfaction to the mind of a man who is 
buffeted by lust. (13) The craving for sense-gratification never ceases with the enjoyment of 
Sense-objects. On the other hand it grows stronger and stronger like fire fed by ghee. (14) 
When aman does not entertain the notion of diversity (in the form of likes and dislikes, which 
are undesirable,) with regard to any living being, then to such a man, looking upon all with

the same way with the co

IMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 
74 cemee ee reer OO saaneaanttthtnheeneShti ih ithee here aes

the same eye, all the quarters turn blissful. (1 5) One arene Se reece ae! 
et rid of the thirst for pleasure, which is productive of Sorrow, ; 3 ily 
afien up by the Eilaiindsd and which does not get worn out even though one's body grows 
old. (16) Aman should notsitclose (even) to his Ha sister 6: eee ei ve pein 
) : thousand years while 
senses lead astray evenalearned man. (17) Full one ) 
| have been Bifley peaiedly énjoying the pleasures of sense. And yet each time (1 enjoy 
them) my thirst for them is renewed. (18) Therefore, giving up this (thirst for pleasure) and 
fixing my mind on the Absolute, I shall roam about with deer, being rid of the pairs of opposites 
(such as joy and sorrow) and free from egotism. (19) Knowing both that is seen and heard 
of as unreal and foreseeing transmigration and the degradation of his soul to follow from their 
thought (etc.), he who neither thinks of nor enjoys them is the knower of his self." (20)

Sqaal Tea wat ae Wa aaa wat aed aerate farmayE: 1281 
fifa afanadet ei ciao agqisdet dy am SATATM AGL 122 1 
qs Aa Ered faa | stirrer at VATAT aT aT 1231 
aad ada wet fasay asia waa dis sia ga fest: 12x 
a wa fide see = faaaiateg: | 
uses Ref armed oN Wa Wadi sel: 1241 
Tal MM saat A Welw: alia: eae ufteraaay 12e1 
a dard weet sorna wean fagdetaron aretfarfad sat: 12 
ada wetepa woe niet pel aa: Gees SeliemPAIe: 12C1 
Tea wad aed aadiadudiiara wea ged AA: 1281 
Sit AAS ad ASI RASA Ged AHH Uplafaaseaa: 12° |

Having spoken thus to his wife (Devayani) and returned Puru's youth to him, Yayati 
received (back) his own old age (from him), all craving for enjoyment having left him for 
good.(21) He appointed Druhyu as the ruler in the south-eastern quarter, Yadu in the south, 
Turvasu in the west and Anu in the north. (22) Having duly installed (on the throne) Paru, the 
worthiest, (though the youngest, of all his sons) as the suzerain lord of the entire globe and 
master of its wealth, and placing his elder brothers (Yadu and others) under his control, 
Yayati retired to the forest. (23) He renounced in a moment the pleasures of the six senses 
(including the mind), constantly enjoyed (by him) for very many years through their objects, 
(even) as a bird leaves its nest when fledged. (24) Having totally shaken off all attachment 
(to the body and whatever is connected with it) and dissociated himself from his subtle body 
(a product of the three Gunas), by virtue of his self-realization in that forest, the celebrated 
Yayati attained absorption into the supreme Brahma, known by the name of Vasudeva, 
which is free from the taint of Maya—a state which is obtainable (only) through devotion to 
the Lord. (25) Hearing the (aforesaid) parable, Devayani took it as a taunt to herself; (nay) 
she thoughtit to be a joke uttered (by her husband) in the agony of love subsisting between 
a husband and a wife. (26) Realizing the association of near and dear ones, who are (all) 
subject to the control of the Lord, as akin to the gathering of travellers in a place where wate! 
is supplied to the passers-by, and as having been brought about by the Lord's will (guided 
by their past Karma), Devayani (a scion of Bhrgu) renounced attachment to everything; 
regarding all to be as unreal as a dream, and focussing her mind on Sri Krsna, gave up her 
subtle body (attained Liberation like her husband). (27-28) Hail, hail to You, the all-tranquil 
_ and all-pervading Lord Vasudeva, the Maker of this universe, the Indweller of all create

Dis. 20 
Pr Br Be Be Se Ge Be Br Kr Br Ve He Hr Hr

BOOK NINE 75

Be Br Fr Fr dr 
BER BBR Bt Be He Be he He He Me Be Sehr Ge He He RAH RHA Sr Br Sr Kr Kr Ke Re Kr Ke Be Ke Ke He Be He Re Be He Be Ke Br He He Lr He Be Be Ke Be Be Ge Be Fe Ge Be Re Be Be

beings. (29)

Thus ends the nineteenth discourse, in Book Nine of the great and 
glorious Bhaga vata-Purana, otherwise known

as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31y faanseara: 
Discourse XX

The posterity of Piru and the stories of Dusyanta and Bharata 
AIP SAA

Wat sae aa unis samaiaa weal dear waders whit 2 | 
TAS WA, Wt: wieratecgqaa: i sdhisa ame aeerecetsserct 2 | 
TH TE Wieene setae: | denfrereearedt Were: Ba: 1 3 
Ge FAY whey HAGE seg: Tidgs waaadaa: | ¥ t 
SAS: UT aAQSTaN: a: | EaTEMPAA AST STA: | I 
mara raunisud aaa yz gqutagatssfaca: cuatssfaeneasi: | & | 
ae Renfree, Tenvaren festa: | Gatsyd Gad Val eraeicagea Ad: 1 9 |

Sri Suka resumed: | shall (now) give a detailed account of the line of Pru, in which you 
were born, O scion of Bharata, and in which (many) royal sages and Brahmanas, each 
propagating his line, appeared. (1) Now, Janmejaya was born of Pdru and Janmejaya’'s son 
was Pracinvan, from whose loins appeared Pravira. From him indeed followed Namasyu 
(and) to him was born Carupada. (2) From his loins appeared a son named Sudyu, of whom 
was born Bahugava, and from him followed Samyati. His son was Ahamyati, whose son was 
called Raudraswa. (3) Rteyu, Kukseyu, Sthandileyu, Krteyu, Jaleyu and Santateyu, 
Dharmeyu, Satyeyu, Vrateyu and the youngest known as Vaneyu—these ten were the sons 
of Raudraswa, born ofthe celestial nymph Ghrtaci, (even) as the ten Indriyas (the five senses 
of perception and the five organs of action) are evolved from Prana, the chief of the five vital 
airs (viz., Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana), the life of the microcosm. (4-5) 
Rteyu's son was Rantibhara, who had three sons—Sumati, Dhruva and Apratiratha, O 
protector of men ! Apratiratha's son was Kanva. (6) His son was Medhatithi, from whom 
Originated the Brahmanas, Praskanva and others. Sumatis son was Raibhya; (and) 
Dusyanta is held to be his son. (7)

Sard Yat aa: Hoag Wa: ae THA AUSeet Tania tc | 
fasted det Saurafia fara ant at aulet we: apfameea: 1 <1 
areata fen: SMART: | US HMA: TE WHAM FAT 1g0 | 
at w@ wueuaia aenfa agai fe a faatida at sae Pit at eet 
Shh Usieiaqal ace al qaem ia fe aa: akarorment wet wad ie2

(One day,) surrounded (accompanied) by a few bodyguards, Dusyanta, who had gone

a hunting, arrived at the hermitage of Kanva. He saw sitting there a charming damsel, who

was a compeer of Rama (the goddess presiding over beauty and prosperity) and a 
Sersoninaation as it were of the enchanting potency of the Lord, and was illuminating the

; +h her effulgence. The king instantly fell in love with her and spoke to her. (8-9 
ean velclced at her sight and sore stricken with love, he questioned her in soft words (as 
follows), gracefully smiling, his fatigue having completely disappeared:—(10) "Who are you 
with eyes resembling the petals of a lotus ? Whose daughter are you, O charming one ? Ang 
what is the purpose of your staying in this lovely forest? (11) | clearly perceive you to be the 
daughter of a Ksatriya, O pretty one! For, nowhere does the mind of the scions of Puru fing

delight in (leans towards) unrighteousness.” (12)

fenfiaraaé Sahl Bawa all Adds Wa ual ax feo Harm a 1231 
rent eta yeast a a: ypadt aha Hara sera aig ted text

Sakuntala replied : Certainly | am the daughter of Viswamitra, forsaken by Menaka in 
the forest. The worshipful sage Kanva knows this (life-history of mine). What may we do for 
you, O hero? (13) Have your seat, O lotus-eyed one, and indeed let our hospitality be 
accepted (by you). There is (enough of) wild rice, which may (kindly) be partaken of; (and)

stay (here) if it pleases you. (14) 
Gerd Saad

saaaiae «AY Sa: 9 apfeenraad i ea fe quid Ual Heaemt: Aaal ATLL | 
Shea | aeeMqGaA | eEMOMLI Treeafakem We aRenleaaiad 126 | 
amaaatat «= usifaifeert «= dtetnredy | Sls AQT Gla: Hears Al Bae! 
Hua: PARA Ad sh Walaa: fal: | Aceal Wrsratal chishd WH A Alerh: 1c 
Dusyanta replied : What you Say is (quite) becoming of you, born (as you are) in the line 
of Kusika, O beautiful one! For, princesses choose a suitable partner by themselves. (15) 
The king, who knew what was enjoined ata particular time and place, married, consistently 
with the ethical code, Sakuntala—who had (tacitly) expressed her consent—according to 
the Gandharva system (which is based on mutual consent alone). (16) The royal sage, who 
was possessed of unfailing procreative energy, deposited his seed (at night) in the womb of 
his wedded wife (Sakuntala). The next morning he went (back) to his capital. (And) in course 
of time she gave birthtoason. (1 7) The sage Kanva performed the appropriate (purificatory) 
rites relating to the (new-born) prince (commencing from Jatakarma, the rite performed at

the time of the birth of a child), in the forest. While (yet) an infant, he used to play with lions, 
binding them with his superior strength. (18)

aq 8 86geefamrrea «= SHeIAT | BteatieTa WAC raHALTA, | 8 | 
aq A We Ut waigrahtadt i svadt adymat @ armerenifuit 1201 
aret sem fad: Gat GA Sie: A Ue a: | AR UT Se Tate: SaERAOMT 122 
Viet: wat aft aa FARA! A AA Ae WHA AAAS Aare 122!

Sakuntala (the jewel among young women) sought the presence O husband 
(Emperor Dusyanta), taking alongwith her that oy of reraldable ane Gees with a 
minute ray (of the divine essence) of Sri Hari. (19) When the king (Dusyanta) did not accept 
(as his own) Sakuntala (his wife) and her son, who were (both) irreproachable an ethereal 
voice in the heavens spoke (as follows), all living beings listening:—(20) "Mother is but 2 
leathern bag (to hold and develop the seed). The son belongs to his father (alone); nay, he 
is the same as his father“ (of whom he was born). (Therefore,) O Dusyanta! havet your son

" This is corroborated by the Sruti, which says:— ene 4 yaamnfa’.

t The command of the ethereal voice asking Dusyantato accept the child ( 4%%4@1) was responsible for the child being given 
the name of Bharata.

Dis. 20 | BOOK NINE. 77

BASE SR a BR Be Re te Be Be Br Br Be Br Be he dee tee Be tr tebe

I TS I nme Ber Br Br Bre Br Gr Ke Hr Kr Ge Ke Br Hr Be Sr Ke HOKE Ke Ke Ke Ge BER BTR HT He ECR Hr eRe Be RB Ree RR RR BR

(and) do not spurn Sakuntala (your wedded wife). (21) A son who procreates (and thus 
propagates his line) leads (his father) out of the abode of Yama, O ruler among men! 
Sakuntala truly says that you are the procreator of this child." (22) 
at Teen: | afer tad aa attaryal Ya 1231

Uh dfeureetsea usreststser Ulead: | st Tether aishafamisares fay: 12¥1

usin = Aetietaray = arferfa: | aaa Waa «= AAA OY: 1241

i Gea eat afer aero mr AAT 12 |

TAS Ta seen Ferrey zor! aera saat yeaa 1201

Tieesat: HU fwd alga ser ait went Raat aad ici

Wee ed at Age amt yn: Aart seats arevat Ged gor 1291

reat QU tar, a witeifa Afri safe vai ate: sofia: gamer i3et

wee Sed: I wa Veet aavraenreeitica AMAATA, 132 |

a ame clateoremadafiae Bre ach aeaied SOI Wa £1331

After his father's death Bharata too became a universal monarch of great renown. The 
glory of the said monarch, born with a ray of Sri Hari, is sung on earth (even to this day). (23) 
He bore the mark of a discus in his right palm and that of a lotus-bud on (the soles of both) 
his feet. Having been (duly installed on the throne after being) consecrated by means of a 
grand (religious) bath, the powerful emperor performed (as many as) fifty-five horse- 
sacrifices on the banks of the (holy) Ganga in order of sequence (from the source to the 
mouth) and seventy-eight sacrifices (lit., he tied seventy-eight holy horses) along the 
Yamunain the same order, choosing Dirghatama (the son of Mamata) as his priest and freely 
gifting (ample) wealth. The sacrificial fire of Bharata, the son of Dusyanta, was set up on 
an exceedingly excellent (most sacred) site where a thousand Brahmanas divided among 
themselves cows (gifted by Bharata)—each getting as his share a Badva (thirteen thousand 
and eighty four*). (24—26) Having (thus) performed one hundred and thirty-three horse- 
sacrifices (lit., having tied to the sacrificial post 133 horses) to the (great) wonder of (other) 
kings, Bharata (the son of Dusyanta) not only overcame the Lord's Maya (the deluding 
potency) but (also) attained to Lord Sri Hari (the adored of the gods). (27) In the sacrificial 
function called 'Masnara'’ Bharata gave away (to the Brahmanas) fourteen lakhs of dark 
elephants of excellent breed with white tusks—all adorned with gold. (28) Neither did kings 
that have gone by nor will future kings emulate the great example of Bharata any more than 
One can touch heaven with one's hands. -(29) In the course of his conquest of the (four) 
quarters he crushed all the Kiratas, Hinas, Yavanas, Andhras, Kankas, Khasas, Sakas and 
Mlecchas as well as kings who despised the Brahmanas and the Vedas. (30) He (Further) 
recovered wives of gods that had been carried away to Rasatala (the sixth subterranean 
region from above) by the demons, who having conquered the gods in the past had occupied 
(Various) parts of Rasatala. (31) (During his reign) heaven as well as the earth yielded to 
his subjects. all the objects of their desire. (In this way) he held sway in all the (four) quarters 
for thrice nine millenniums. (32) Realizing his sovereignty, that had carried his fame (even) 
to the guardians of the spheres, imperial fortune, his authority, which was unobstructed

Gg er on = ot ie eee 
+ aera creer TEMPER RTARTa: | A ACTA AAT

Reape "Ae SOLS -" «

(everywhere), nay, (his) life (itself) to be unreal, the aforesaid emperor withdrew himself from 
the world. (83)

SEI qa Sars: usaf: GAA: | TARTS, VAT, ATTSAT Bert

aad fat aa vet aaa: Aaa Aenea = Fed || AREISTATIGg: 124

ae ¢ dear seat: sq art ast area emerge 1361

4 wpe saat adameaigar aaa Tea VOHRA AT A: 1301

aa ow amit ae ast geet ant agaet flat atapteneaay 1301

Saat BRa wet fares! args Hediste aise fartsisarg 1381 
ofa Seas FE USE fecal Aah fazWseara: 10 |

Bharata had three beloved wives, (all of them) daughters of the king of Vidarbha, O 
protector of men ! They disposed of their own sons for fear of being forsaken by their 
husband, because it was remarked (by him) that the sons were not after him. (84) On his 
race being thus threatened with extinction, the Maruts (wind-gods) handed over a son, 
Bharadwaja by name, to the emperor, who was propitiating them through (a sacrifice known 
by the name of) Marutstoma. (35) Proceeding to copulate with his brother's wife (Mamata), 
who was (already) pregnant, Brhaspati forcibly discharged his seed (in her womb), cursing 
the foetus* by which he was stopped. (36) Addressing Mamata (as well as Brhaspati), who 
was inclined to abandon the child (into which the seed was immediately transformed), 
terribly afraid as she was of being forsaken by her husband (Utathya), the gods uttered the 
following couplet, explaining the etymology of the child's name (and giving utterance to a 
disputation between Brhaspati and Mamata):—(37) (Says Brhaspati to Mamata): "O foolish 
one, nourish (Bhara) this child, born of two, (viz., my brother and myself, because begotten 
by me through my brother's wife)." (Mamata replied:) "O Brhaspati ! nourish this child 
(yourself), born (as it is) of us two (and particularly because | was forcibly impregnated by 
you).* Since, having spoken thus, the two (father and mother) went away (leaving the child), 
hence this child is (named) Bharadwaja. (38) (Though) urged by the gods in this way (in order 
to absolve Mamata of guilt in the eyes of her husband and thus disarm _ her fear of being 
forsaken by her husband), Mamata (as well as Brhaspati) abandoned the son (Bharadwaja), 
regarding him as useless (because born of an illicit union and hence a source of infamy). The

Maruts (however) brought him up and (by them) he was handed over to Bharata on the 
latter's line being threatened with extinction. (39)

Thus ends the twentieth discourse in Book Nine of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

GIR Shimmy

* This forcible impregnation resulted firstly in the child in the womb (named afterwards as Dirghatama) getting blind 
through the curse of Brhaspati and secondly in the seed discharged by the latter being kicked out by the foetus and assuming 
the form of a fully developed male child as soon as it dropped on the ground.

ST ep feat SEAT:

Discourse XXI

The posterity of Bharata and the story of Rantideva

SH STI

fame Ot Nett «teeta: | Herta’ aa ae agit ATH: 1g I 
Ws Wieas ug: ugaidetae fe am sem a aa! 
faaiere cet wet wel quam: i fifimeae eer ameme dled: 13 
adierpacahtaeerattad: faalydaeadad aa sraeakerai x | 
PMSA ATS wiaraaent: | staf: ares MHA ara! & | 
TH Hae sates sgahad: | et ada Gaga A Yaa Waal fest: 1g |

Sri Suka resumed : The son of Vitatha (Bharadwaja) was Manyu, of whom were born 
Brhatksatra, Jaya, Mahavirya, Nara and Garga; and Nara's son was Sankrti. (1) Sankrti's 
sons were Guru and Rantideva, O delight of Pandu ! The glory of Rantideva is, as a matter 
of fact, sung both in this world and the world beyond. (2) In the case of Rantideva, who 
subsisted on whatever was obtained without any effort and who, though feeling hungry 
(himself), gave away all that was got, and was thus rendered (utterly) destitute (having no 
provision even for the evening much less for the next day), and therefore suffering terrible 
hardship, alongwith his family—who were reduced to (great) straits—(nay), trembling due 
to (2xcessive) hunger and thirst, yet calm, passed (not less than) forty-eight days—so the 
tradition goes—without his taking (even) water. In the morning (of the forty-ninth day) there 
came to him (by chance) ghee, rice cooked in milk with sugar, Samyava* (a kind of porridge 
made of wheat flour with ghee and) milk, as well as water. And when he was intending to partake 
of it, there arrived, at that (very) time, a newcomer in the person of a Brahmana. (8—5) Viewing

Sri Hari everywhere and (therefore) full of reverence, Rantideva welcomed him and gave 
to him a proportionate share (of those dishes). (And) the Brahmana went away after taking

that food. (6) 
st «tear fase velo | fae Ss A GIT Bt TTL! © | 
at aa qaismefte: abrrga: ius A sada Grong qyad |< | 
a sealaiars aq TIA TS Sea AA MA: saat fry: 1 < | 
UMaararasd qaenURAUT | UI: Usa SAA A igo! 
Ta at went at frera faqesrr| puaT PAA SST A: 1881 
= amas Tete weeegemgde atl 
ant saasfaesenierafedt a AIGIET: 182A 
ayer maa at 0 we: = Aenferereanten: 1 
aa faqa: paul Sralsisitlasisiasieoldured 123 1 
oo 
* HAY FaRATTS MATT: |

\

sf wera ont fram: feuraari generereaaht § Preriaeot Fa: ew

ae fiyaaeiien: wed: elt! Seat aalaaiepaia fasfartia: ieu)

q § at anes fragt farawe: | araed ait Tae GH AA: TRG

: ; fi pads: | al Wuraat WS, Ga, TASHA 1291

ASTASTANTAA Wraeadafas: | sve alta: ae ARTUTERTAT: 1821 
in the meantime, O ruler of the earth, while he was going to eat, having divided the 
remaining fare among themselves, yet another stranger came. Remembering Sri Hari, he 
gave away to the newcomer, who was a Sidra, a share of the food (already) divided (among 
themselves). (7) When the Sudra had left, there came to him another stranger Surrounded 
(followed) by dogs. He said, "O king, let food be given to me, seized (as | am) with hunger 
alongwith my followers (the dogs)." (8) Receiving the newcomer kindly, the king gave away 
with great reverence whatever was left to the dogs as well as to their master and bowed to 
them (as so many manifestatations of the Lord). (9) There was but some water left, which 
was barely sufficient to slake the thirst of (only) one individual. When he was about to drink 
it, there unexpectedly came a Candala (one belonging to the lowest rank in Hindu society) 
saying, "(Kindly) give the water to me, an unlucky fellow." (10) Hearing that pitiful request, 
uttered with great effort (due to exhaustion), the king, who was sore stricken with pity, spoke 
the following nectar-like words:—(11) "| do not seek from the Lord the highest position 
attended with the eightfold Yogic power (Anima and so on) or even final beatitude (cessation 
of rebirth). Dwelling in their heart (as the sufferer) | would (rather) undergo the suffering of 
all embodied souls, so that (through such vicarious suffering of mine) they may be relieved 
of misery. (12) My exhaustion due to hunger and thirst, the weariness of my limbs, low spirits, 
langour, grief, despondency and infatuation have all disappeared on account of my giving 
away the water, which meant life to this miserable fellow, anxious to survive." (13) Having 
expressed such noble sentiments, the king, who was full of fortitude and merciful by 
nature, gave the water to the Candala, though himself dying of thirst. (14) The Lords of the 
three spheres (Brahma, Visnu and Siva), who bestow rewards on those who seek them, 
and who appeared (a short while ago) in (three) illusory forms (viz., those of a Brahmana, 
Sudra and a Candala) created by Lord Visnu (in order to test the fortitude of Rantideva), 
(now) revealed themselves (in their own form) in his (Rantideva's) presence (15) Greeting 
them (all), Rantideva, who was (entirely) free from attachment and whose craving had 
altogether ceased, simply fixed his mind on Lord Vasudeva with (great) devotion (and did 
a ee re of them). (16) Maya (the Lord's deluding potency)—consisting of the three 
Sie s ‘ va, pak and Tamas)—dissolved like a dream into (its own source, viz.,) the 
eee ii the case of Rantideva, who concentrated his mind on God and sought 
oon trom Him (than Devotion to His feet). (17) By virtue of their close association

with him, all that followed in the footsteps of i : 
to Lord Narayana. (18) Ps of Rantideva became Yogis exclusively devoted

TmHiketradt mrad: ee wal Gard | eiaarat rersate ce Aeraler: ala: 128 
Gate A seri Aa: | aR aatsuaRit AGATA | 20 | 
semiiet fetes genie vier: | steriiee azar: |: fretenca fest: 122 
a, qe Gl Gea: | qeenaenneel UT stdistase: 122!

fageete Cais aastad | serra eced: Hal aay Aa: 123! 
Sead: «= OR: | Gee: | OTE wen arerer Uae AUT IVY!

Sr or Br Br Br Re 8: Br Fr SESESE RS Bt BR BRR RB Re He Re He HH Be Be te PH eee

ee nn lL We Be He Gr Sr We Br Gr Se Be Ge Ke Ke Ke He Be Ke Be He He Ke Fe Ke Ke He Be He Ke Be We Ree He He We We Be Be Ke Bt Be He Fe Bs Bt He

Sea VSAM agetsised| a art we wate Srgevarend Aaa 1241 
Spiraea | ahr WAR 81 Sereda Vestal AedlGal: 1261 
From (the loins of) Garga Sprang up Sini, of whom was born Gargya. From him, indeed, 
even though he was a Ksatriya, started a line of Brahmanas. From Mahavirya appeared 
Duritaksaya, whose sons were Trayyaruni, Kavi and Puskararuni, who attained to 
Brahmanhood though bornina line of Ksatriyas. Brhatksatra's son was Hasti, by whom was 
built (the city of) Hastinapura. (1 9-20) Hasti's sons were Ajamidha, Dwimidha and Purumidha. 
Priyamedha and other Brahmanas were the progeny of Ajamidha. (21) From (the loins of) 
Ajamidha sprang up (another son) Brhadisu, whose son was Brhaddhanwa. Ofthe latter was 
born Brhatkaya, whose son was Jayadratha. (22) His son was Vigada, to whom was born 
in course of time Senajit, Ruciragwa, Drdhahanu, Kagya and Vatsa were the (four) sons of 
Senajit. (23) Ruciraswa's son was Para, whose son (again) was (named ) Prthusena. There 
was (another) son of Para, Nipa by name, who had no less than a hundred sons. (24) 
Through Krtvi, the daughter of Suka* Nipa begot (another son) Brahmadatta. The latter, 
(who was) a Yogi, begot through his wife Gau (Saraswati), (a son named) Viswaksena. (25) 
Inspired by the teachings of Jaigisavya, it is said, he produced a work on Yoga. From (the 
loins of) Viswaksena sprang up Udakswana and from him followed Bhallada. These are 
the descendants of Brhadisu. (26)

ade fetes apfanteaa: we: iam wef acta: gure 1201 
aoraia, qatar ut: alana: | pfafewaarane at ant sear sat By |e 12 1 
Gem: srerarat a tal eeraeredd: iter ater: Aaiisa qeteer feqera: 1281 
ait seat A Yeticissstsvad! aeaasaica ae: aha: qed: 1301 
Ura: BMPaAGA: Teolschatatsvad | Waa USA Resa: 138 1 
adr geey: aifaca: Get: Yat: | Wels: Me UAT A ast arora fe 1321 
faganometa sft waledigdl qe cal fda at atari 1331 
Dwimidha's son was Yavinara, whose son is remembered by the name of Krtiman. His 
son was Satyadhrti by name, whose son, Drdhanemi, begot Suparswa. (27) From Suparswa 
followed Sumati, whose son was Sannatiman. From (the loins of) the latter appeared Krti, 
who having received instruction in Yoga from Hiranyanabha taught (separately) indeed the 
six Samhitas (or collections of sacred texts) known as Pracyasamas. His son to be sure was 
Nipa, from whom followed Ugrayudha. His son was Ksemya, of whom was born Suvira, 
whose son was Ripufijaya. (28-29) From (the loins of) the latter appeared a son named 
Bahuratha. (Dwimidha's younger brother) Purumidha remained issueless. Ajamidha's son, 
through his (second) wife Nalini, was Nila, of whom was born a son, Santi (by name). (30) 
SAnti's son was Suganti, and Susanti's son was Puruja, of whom was born Arka. His son was 
Bharmyagwa, who had five sons (viz.,) Mudgala, Yavinara, Brhadisu, Kampilya and 
Safijaya. Bharmyaswa said, "These five sons of mine are competent enough to protect five 
lands." Hence, they were known as the Paficalas. From Mudgala sprang up a line of

Brahmanas called the Maudgalyas. (31—33) 
rept agora weata, featana: TAAL STE SHTCRT Ta AT ATT 1B |

Sa) renounced his father's home even without being ‘invested with the sacred thread, 
and remained a celibate ever afterwards, he is said to have left for the solace of his disconsolate father a shadow-form of his,

known by the name of Chayasuka, who lived as a householder and begot children.

.

XY

* Although Suka (the son of Vedavya

ae aaa: Tal erqaafarenea: | BaheTeM Targa aiegtare, Tene 1341 
srerasadg Ufa eR a ET PUSS a Ta AS | 
SAU: HAR: HM ST HOTATAAAT PUT 13 E | 
ef SHERSITaR HEI URC Slee ATH A HS AMSEATA: 128

From (the loins of ) Mudgala, son of Bharmyaswa, appeared a pair (a son anda 
daughter), of whom the male was (named) Divodasa and the girl became known as Ahalya: 
of the latter through the sage Gautama (her husband) was born Satananda. (34) His son, 
Satyadhrti, was an adept in archery. His son was Saradvan, so-called because his seed, it 
is said, fell at the sight of Urvasi on a clump of reeds (Saras). The seed (however) assumed 
the form of a blessed pair. Seeing that pair, King Santanu, who was wandering in pursuit of 
game, picked it up out of compassion. The boy came to be Krpa, (a teacher of the Kauravas) 
and the girl Krpi, who (later on) became Dronacarya's wife. (35-36)

Thus ends the twenty-first discourse in Book Nine of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known

as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS eS

Discourse XXIl 
The genealogy of the Pajicalas, the Kurus and the kings of Magadha

ay Sava

frags ‘Reatereresrerreaegt TI Aeea: Pecalsa Uaal sqrt! 2g | 
qa UA Ae adler yet: Ga: 1 gael stadt ael yaa: Wai: 1 2! 
Teas, qesqutat: Used Stl aissdicad Wa wet: Parone: | 3 | 
Tea Wea pedaut: pe: ata qeasighiaena: ae: gar: | x | 
Weis Ca AasaA ad: . Hdl | aaeralatted FesIMqaeda: | & |

PUPAA RATA AANA cea: | TEs aaa 
: . SHSAueTa «= dedi: | & | 
Sa Aefedisaad «= eratetcadt Mg: | Ste aa Aratat yen; A Ges | 9 | 
aq WE aieege sar atta | site siete stew saraswat aa: | ct 
ane Recaisy « aaftrdagasran: | wfkeraelsy, Geet amt wea: |< | 
aq UeeMSHa See UASaSAA BEL IR! 
aig mleteTee cenfafea «a | seer fectesue welcErel STAT: 122 
cara: Ire atgten sit ater: | fet fess enfieg at wa: 1221 
WABI ay al Meettaiad: | at st Haat wars sitet dlaaafa a: 123! 
wert carat eon ta Wey: 1 aT Be AeA a aad aar fay: 1ev1

raya ere: :

ae Rea Ie ETT Uplate

wage feshy oeera asad wafawieaeidder fifi firt 1261

e TETRIS, a mat at aed wi tenfrerena HOMAMAASA: 1219 |

arreet et AL amet wraftraht Selchid, Aransye wheysrareda: 1c 1

WMA WAM Agar ster anata 1 aderiferet Sl Ugetad: cia: 1291

agate xwetshr af | dtfaa: | aratefarerat aa fasige: Od: 1201

lataactiareast § arat feorgal ea: | Tet TUR Glaneadiuit et: HET 1221

Wd Wt Weis wa Wate wit fafardtaisetae anfsreerga ser! 23!

waeigaeit «— atiscenratiod: «== sti dakereeneeal a aan ya: 12x!

esa a wgaitkat arene: | qs a ung a feet aresism 1241 
Sri Suka resumed : From (the loins of) Divodasa appeared Mitreyu; and his sons, O 
protector of men, were Cyavana, Sudasa, Sahadeva and Somaka, the father of Jantu. (In 
fact,) Somaka had a hundred sons, of whom Prsata was the youngest. His son was 
Drupada, whose sons (again) were Dhrstadyumna and others; while Draupadi was his 
daughter. (1-2) From (the loins of) Dhrstadyumna appeared Dhrstaketu. These are the 
scions of Bharmyaswa, also known as the Pajficalas. From (the loins of) Rksa, who was 
another son of Ajamidha, appeared Samvarana. (3) From his loins appeared, through 
Tapati, a daughter of the sun-god, Kuru, the lord of Kuruksetra. Pariksit, Sudhanwa, Jahnu 
and Nisadhaswa were the sons of Kuru. (4) Sudhanwa's son was Suhotra, from whom 
followed Cyavana; and of Cyavana was born Krti. His son was Uparicara Vasu, of whom 
were born Brhadratha and others. (5) (Of them) Kusamba, Matsya, Pratyagra, Cedipa and 
others were the rulers of the kingdom of Cedi. From (the loins of) Brhadratha sprang up 
Kusagra. His son was Rsabha. Of the latter was born a son, Satyahita (by name) whose 
son was Puspavan and the son of the last-named was Jahu. From (the loins of) Brhadratha 
through another wife appeared two halves (ofa fully developed human foetus). (6-7) They 
were thrown away by the mother and were sportingly joined together by (an ogress 
named) Jara, uttering the words ‘Live! Live !!" and there appeared the son, Jarasandha 
(united by Jara) (by name). (8) Of him was born Sahadeva, and from (the loins of) 
Sahadeva appeared Somapi, from whom appeared Srutasrava. (Of the four sons of Kuru,) 
Pariksit, (the eldest) remained issueless, while Jahu's son was named Suratha. (9) From 
the loins of the latter sprang up VidUratha, of whom Sarvabhauma was born; and from 
Sarvabhauma followed Jayasena, whose son was Radhika and from (the loins of) the last- 
named indeed appeared Ayuta. (10) From (the loins of ) Ayuta, again, sprang up Krodhana, 
of whom was born Devatithi; and his son was Rsya. The son of Rsya was Dilipa whose 
Son, again, was Pratipa. (11) Devapi, Santanu and Bahlika—these were the sons of 
Pratipa. Relinquishing his (claim to the) ancestral kingdom, DevapI, for his part, retired to 
the forest. (12) (Hence his younger brother) Santanu, who was called by the name of 
Mahabhisa (a great physician) in his previous birth, became the king. (Even in that life) 
whatever old man he touched with his hands would regain his youth and also experience 
great relief. Through this act of his he came to be known as Santanu (affording relief to 
One's body). (Once upon a time) when Indra (the god of rain) did not send down showers 
in his kingdom for a period of twelve years, Santanu (on approaching and seeking the 
advice of Brahmanas) was replied to by the Brahmanas (as follows):—He (too) who (like

~

(Vicitravirya) Dhrtarastra and Pandu (the former th ika 
Pati pepe Le rough Ambika a through 
Ambalika) as well as Vidura (through a maid-servant). (25) Reh aaah :

ee

* The Smrti says:—

*"H . : 
i : ee or instals the sacred fire (offering oblations to it thrice everyday) in the presence of (before) an elder 
6 recognized as a Parivetta and the elder brother so ignored should be called a Parivitti.”

Satyavati (also ; 2 
f Satyavati (also known as Matsyagandha or Yojanagandha) was really adaughter of Uparicara Vasu (mentioned in vers?

5 above), i 
ve), whose seed was swallowed by a fish and ultimately developed into a human foetus, which was cut out of the belly

of the fish by the aforesaid ferrymen and presented to th 
7 eir chief ; 
+ For their names vide I. iv. 21-22. who brought it up as his own child.

we we eee ss pS

Dis. 22 ]

Teal

NESS BS DA A aa geen sagt greret anf peaent 126 |

. Tepes ast: grat ween: sna anise qa: 1291 
ee eas ee ae Were born to Dhrtarastra by (his wife) Gandhari (a princess of 
? eet modern Afghanistan), O protector of men ! Of them Duryodhana was the 
el a foes lee a a Daughter also, Duhgala (by name). (26) Through Kunti, the (elder) 
wité O aa a Ys O was prevented from copulation due to a curse (pronounced by some 
sage i O ad been shot dead with an arrow by Pandu while pairing with his wife in the 
form of a pair of deer), three car-warriors—Yudhisthira and others (viz., Bhima and

Arjuna)— appeared (severally) from the loins of Dharma (the god of piety), Anila (the wind- 
god) and Indra (the lord of Paradise). (27) (theg piety), (

THO: WAT Aat ATaqeal: | soe us uss: gare fieiswei2c! 
afetsad, siifea: sraat Grad! Satria” Watered ATES: 12k 1 
aecaaat Tegra = =—- gaat | aferisae, qf Ue tacts ales: 1Z01 
vretgSaat 9 eat added: | deta Wet a faserga ueddt ise 
ayaa Age Pit das: isuedqemat a gat ayaa 
mforgrad: dist aca: Ufemrad: 1321

qa Wd: 8 yqusrarmitaqenad | aalferaite GR Sat dat War. 133! 
ufaittre 8 peq AUislalreltsaT | A HOGS Gaile Atleast 1 BY |

(And) through (his second wife) Madri appeared Nakula and Sahadeva from (the loins 
of) Nasatya and Dasra (the two ASwinikumaras). Of these, five sons, (all) your uncles, were 
born (one of each) through Draupadi. (28) Prativindhya was born of Yudhisthira; Srutasena 
from Bhimasena, (who was voracious as a wolf) and Srutakirti, from Arjuna. Again, Satanika 
was the son of Nakula; while Sahadeva's son, O Pariksit, was Srutakarma. Besides (these) 
there were other sons (too). From (the loins of) Yudhisthira through (his other wife) Pauravi 
appeared Devaka; from Bhimasena through Hidimba (an ogress) sprang up Ghatotkaca, 
and from (the selfsame) Bhima through Kali (his third wife) appeared Sarvagata. And through 
Sahadeva, (his second wife) Vijaya, the daughter of Parvata, bore Suhotra. (29—31) Nakula 
begot Niramitra through (his second wife) Karenumat! and Arjuna begot Iravan indeed 
through Uldpi; while through the daughter of the king of Maniptra (the modern Manipur in 
Assam), he begot Babhruvahana, who though sprung from the loins of Arjuna was 
recognized as the son of his maternal grandfather (inasmuch as the princess of Manipur was 
given in marriage to Arjuna on the express understanding that the son born of her would be 
taken in adoption by her father). (32) Of Subhadra (the last wife of Arjuna and the younger 
sister of Lord Sri Krsna) was born your father, the valiant Abhimanyu, who conquered all the 
Atirathas* (great car-warriors who encountered him on the battle-field). And from him 
through Uttara appeared you (O Pariksit!). (33) (All) the Kurus (with the exception of the five 
P&ndava brothers) having perished, you too had (almost) been burnt by the (fierce) blaze 
of the mystic missile presided over by Brahma (the creator), released by Aswatthama (the 
Son of Dronacarya). But by the (supreme) might of Sri Krsna you were rescued alive from

(the jaws of) death. (34)

* A car-warrior who encounters numberless adversaries on the battle- field is known as an Atiratha: “siffary aerate seq

Wako stareg a:

Be Br Sr Sr He Ke Be He He Se Sr Se Hr Br Hr He He Ae Hr re te

aan: AAT Saag: | Serer aaa sqaAy Star 13& 1 | 
saasteat fafeat aaa TAL | BU a Adana a eer watad: 1361 
aed oma gt deme Sara Oita Gat frat aaah area: 1 310 | 
AS UA: Vareal AGATA FST VSL! Ste feRATAT Sen, UAC 13 C1 
AeA ARTA ; \artagretenia freee AGA: 131 
Tea BA AE slaMSat Bre seals | Swansea HAA: YA: 1X0 | 
qed dia qauisa deh: gtaae slant Taga Tee: vet 
ukga: aaeretenat AAAs: | qaseaetat SaaS eas 1S | 
faridesatarasdtdich: elas: | eee SAAT ARIAT: 13 | 
SUSIE «AAR Alaa FA: | AMAA aA siknl ag aaftlacha: ixv! 
aah WA Is Ge saa a Hei ase ATEN Alaa aah FT rsa 
Here are your (own) sons, O dear Pariksit—Janamejaya and others following him, (viz.,) 
Srutasena, Bhimasena and Ugrasena; each of them possessed of (great) valour. (35) 
Perceiving you to have met your death through (the serpent) Taksaka, the said Janamejaya, 
full of rage, will (attract by means of spells and) actually offer serpents as an oblation to the 
flames in a serpent-sacrifice. Having conquered the entire globe on all sides and appointing 
Tura, the son of Kavasa, as his priest, Janamejaya, (who will be celebrated as) a performer 
of horse-sacrifices, will propitiate the Lord through a number of (such) sacrifices. (36-37) His 
son, Satanika, will learn the three Vedas and receive the knowledge of rituals from the sage 
Yajnavalkya and acquire knowledge of (the use of) missiles (from Krpacarya) and will attain 
the highest knowledge (knowledge of the Self) from the sage Saunaka. (38) Satanika’s son 
will be Sahasranika, and of him will be born ASwamedhaja. His son, again, will be 
Asimakrsna, whose son on the other hand will be Nemicakra. (89) On Hastinapura being 
washed away by the river (Ganga) he will duly settle down in (the city of ) Kausambi. The son 
sprung from his loins is called Citraratha, and of him willbe born ason named Kaviratha.(40) 
From him, again, will follow Vrstiman, whose son, Susena, of course will be a king. His son 
will be Sunitha and Sunitha's son will be Nrcaksu, from whom will follow Sukhinala. (41) His 
son will be Pariplava, from whom will follow Sunaya and his son will be Medhavi. Medhavi s 
son will be Nrpanjaya, of whom will be born Durva and from (the loins of) the latter will appear 
Timi. (42) Timi's son will be Brhadratha, from whom will follow Sudasa, and his son will be 
Satanika. From (the loins of) Satanika willappear Durdamana, whose sonwill be Vahinara.(43) 
From Vahinara will follow Dandapani and of Dandapani will be born Nimi, whose son 
Ksemaka will be a ruler of men. An account of the line of Puru, from which sprang up races 
of (both) Brahmanas and Ksatriyas, and which is esteemed by gods and Rsis (alike), has 
indeed been told (by me). (44) Having reached up to Ksemaka, this line as a matter of fact

will come to an end in (the age of) Kali. Now, I shall e adha 
_ (South Bihar). (45) numerate the future kings of Mag

aaa =| aed amidase: | adisqaraerenta firefisitser AGT: 1¥EL

Waa: Tae qeatisa andi! aa: gaara fas: afserer aftreaft iv!

RASA YATRA etga: Wed: | Pisa Watt: wat wba dd: vel

wie: warren feafie aq figaa: andes yoren aren: AEeaeTTL Xe | 
Tid Sree FEM Tse Usaha ase. IRQ]

Dis. 23 ] 87 
SdaSRORENNDNO DS ANES HONE NEENEeR Hi SeAEeannrm ocuinnihT SERNA EEa EEE Ae

The son of Sahadeva 
From him will foll 
Sunaksatra. From

(Jarasandha's son) will be Marjari, of whom will be Srutasrava. 
Ow Ayutayu. His son, again, will be Niramitra and his son will be 
* (the loins of ) Sunaksatra will appear Brhatsena, and from him will 
follow Karmajit. Then will come Srtafijaya and (from the loins of) the latter will spring up 
Vipra, whose son will be Suci. Then will come Ksema, from whom will follow Suvrata. 
From (the loins of) Suvrata will appear Dharmasitra, from whom will follow Sama. Then 
will appear Dyumatsena, and from Dyumatsena will follow Sumati, of whom will be born 
Subala. (46—48) Then will come Sunitha, of whom will be born Satyajit. His son will be

Viswajit, from whom will follow Ripufjaya. And the (said) Brhadratha's line will rule for 
a thousand years. (49)

Thus ends the twenty-second discourse in Book Nine of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise

known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CDSS SIS

SIA Haas Sea:

An account of the posterity of Anu, Druhyu, Turvasu and Yadu 
Sh SATA 
Sl: WARM: WAM Fa: AA: | AMAU Blea: Taealeiegdedd: 1 2 
THASRRT «U Aelaitet «Aaa: | sais «6 eM ote 1 2 I 
Rrfereta: Afadasanaiteet: | qeted: Yas Aa: cheba sie: | 3 1 
firasran vwardhafaets: ease: i det Baise |aar ate: Waraisvad | ¥ | 
sieapanlegiM: Aes: | ARR dicta ae: at aelfart: 1 & | 
Sah: Sarat fara, VSAM Mais A SAIS Si Mee feared: 1 & 
ait emit ae wa feoretsom: 1 dang git See SIN: TAT! © | 
Ut Wat Wass sae aM casatit A war snbraghuitgay | < 1 
ATerag rerfea fet srertexgarent: la qd Usa Freee nea: 1 ¢ | 
TeTAae SERA BA SSH: Ta: | AG WATel GACT Ad: 1201 
gy AM: | See | STIRS «Seed: 1291 
bee gfamnad iad || dee eH feereta: 1221 
aisat wed ated FeEErid Rea Grama HritTettsAIT GL L3 | 
ayaa: gaara: ate | sidind: gts we ay: ARTETTTSTETA: ext 
STCSTRTRT TRRTRTRT rede |e: | YAR SAAT TAT: eh TAL RI 
anfarisyaqaet faerie igdetas at afadadintsa argary ia 
Buareadseata 8 hte SER: | TEATS: «UA UPA 12001

$11 Suka resumed : Sabhanara, Caksu and Paroksa were the three sons of Anu. From 
(the loins of) Sabhanara appeared Kalanara and his son was Srfijaya. From him followed 
Janamejaya, whose son was Mahasila and his son was Mahamana. Usinara and Titiksy 
were the sons of Mahamana. (1-2) Sibi, Vana, Sami and Daksa—were the four Sons of 
Usinara. (Similarly) Vrsadarbha, Suvira, Madra and Kaikeya were the only four sons Of Sibi. 
And Titiksu's son was Rusadratha, of whom was born Hema; and then came Sutapa, whose 
son was Bali. (3-4) Through the wife of Bali (who evidently remained issueless) appeared 
from (the loins of) the sage Dirghatama (six) sons—all rulers of the earth—bearing the 
names of Anga, Vanga, Kalinga, Suhma, Pundra and Andhra, the first three being the 
foremost of them. (5) They founded after their own names six principalities, (all) lying In the 
east. Of Anga (the eldest of them) was born Khanapana, from whom followed Diviratha; and 
from Diviratha followed his son Dharmaratha, of whom was born Citraratha, who had no 
issue and was (better) known as Romapada. To him, his friend, the (celebrated) King 
Daégaratha (the father of Lord Sri Rama) gave in adoption his own daughter santa: the sage 
Rsyasrnga married her. On Indra (the god of rain) withholding showers, courtezans drew (to 
the Anga territory) the sage Rsyasrnga (born ofa deer) by their dance and music, (both) vocal 
and instrumental, as well as by their coquetry, (loving) embrace and presents (of various 
kinds), Conducting a sacrifice in honour of Indra, the sage also secured progeny for the 
issueless king (Romapada). And through a similar sacrifice conducted by him the issueless 
Emperor DaSaratha (too) got (four celebrated) sons. Of Romapada was born Caturanga and 
his son was Prthulaksa. (6—10) Prthulaksa's sons were Brhadratha, Brhatkarma and 
Brhadbhanu. From (the loins of) the eldest (Brhadratha) appeared Brhanmana, the son born 
of whom was called Jayadratha. (11) His son by (his wife) Sambhuti was Vijaya, of whom 
was born Dhrti. From Dhrti followed Dhrtavrata, whose son was Satkarma and from (the loins 
of) the latter appeared Adhiratha. (12) While sporting on the bank of the (holy) Ganga, the 
latter, who was issueless, (caught hold of and) adopted as his son the baby (Karna) born of 
Kunti (while she was still unmarried) and (therefore) abandoned by her (for fear of obloquy), 
enclosed in a box. (13) Vrsasena was the son of the aforesaid Karna, who (eventually) 
became a king. Again, Babhru was the son of Druhyu and Babhru's son was Setu. Of him 
was born Arabdha, whose son was Gandhara and Gandhara's son was Dharma. From him 
followed Dhrta and Dhrta's son was Durmana. From (the loins of) the latter appeared 
Praceta. The hundred sons of Praceta became the rulers of Mlecchas (barbarians) and 
settled in the northern quarter. Again Vahni was the son of Turvasu and Vahni's son was 
Bharga, from whom followed Bhanuman. (14—16) His son was Tribhanu and Tribhanu's 
son, again, was the generous-minded Karandhama. His son was Maruta, who, being 
issueless, adopted as his son Dusyanta (a scion of Piru). (17)

gard: A Gt @ det wae: | aardeipgrer «= aatist Ay 1261 
aunt merged ware gor aaah ae: age dvd: wT 128 
aman 8 aT ALATA Apia: | aat: TRAE Ae RG sat: 1201 
aa: Yaa ai Nees: | Meet «Aust «= AA ARM: 1221 
org cera Fa: gee: fit aa: i aefeemat grt, aatas: 122 
get wae ere: patty: | anf: gaat a apie erenreien: 1231 
oat: = dda AAS MISMEL | SAA ATE, STPAATAENTTT: 12 | 
Af arddteher aft aretha uniter: | aqeradtmayreiteisrentehir: L2ul

is. 23 
De at bvvasnwassave cone Wein: BOOK NINE 8S

SW) Olewelat ap ae throne, however, the said Dusyanta reverted to his own line.

(Now, ~ Jewel ormen, | (proceed to) give an account of the posterity of Yadu, the eldest son

of Yayatl, which is productive of extraordinary religious merit and capable of wiping out all

the SINS of men. A man Is completely rid of all sins by listening to an account of Yadu's line,

in which the almighty Lord, the supreme Spirit, took His descent in the semblance of a man. 
Sahasrajit, Krosta, Nala and Ripu were the four celebrated sons of Yadu. Of these (four),

the son of the eldest was Satajit; and Mahahaya, Venuhaya and Haihaya were the sons

of Satajit. (18—21) Haihaya's son again was Dharma and from him followed Netra, the

father of Kunti. From (the loins of) Kunti Sprang up Sohajhiji. Then followed Mahisman,

whose son was Bhadrasena. (22) Durmada and Dhanaka were the (two) sons of 
Bhadrasena, the latter of whom was the father of Krtavirya. Krtagni, Krtavarma and Krtauja

were the (other) sons of Dhanaka. (23) Arjuna, the son of Krtavirya, became the ruler of

(all) the seven divisions of the globe. He (further) attained from Lord Dattatreya, a part 
manifestation of Sri Hari, proficiency in Yoga (concentration of mind) as well as great 
achievements (in the form of the eight mystic powers). (24) Surely, no (other) kings (lit,

rulers of the earth) will attain to the level of Arjuna (the son of Krtavirya) in point of sacrificial 
performances, munificence, asceticism, Yogic power, learning, valour, victory and so

on.(25) Indeed for eighty-five thousand years he enjoyed the objects of the six senses,

which could not be exhausted, his strength (of body, mind and senses too) remaining 
unimpaired and his very thought proving (for the people who remembered him) a security : 
against loss of wealth. (26) Of thousands of his sons, only five survived in battle (with | 
ParasSurama)—Jayadhwaja, Surasena, Vrsabha, Madhu and Urjita. (27) |

TIS WeA Wad AY al ad Westgrentdasiadedd 1221 
at SST ater qfeor: Gat Ael: Ga: | AST aa alee GAs Ad: POL 12 | 
TMI GOTH Ws, Tease aire: | AA A ws: Wal gfertateta: 1301 
oer ewalpa del feared: | aera vest AeAyd 1321 
ACE AENAT HAA TST: [ta Uclaea aaa Aaa: 1321 
Seas «GATT Aa aT VENA GAA STS: 133 1 
aqat aaa dal BAA Aal dea Tle GAA: AT Rv! 
USSR TG SITET fata: | RIMSII UTat Srearafersart, 13% | 
Taresaeae disai SITES | TA at Friese seat afrraftat 131 
et men Ted wera tig caeftied wat atirstctia 1301 
ai aaarauat a aT A ged se sree TT TRAIT 13

aja (the eldest of Arjuna's sons) appeared Talajangha, of 
d sons. The race of Ksatriyas known by the name of the 
minated by King Sagara (strengthened by the

From (the loins of) Jayadhw 
whom again were born a hundre 
Talajanghas (sons of Talajangha) was exter

[565] B.M. Part II-—32

glory of the sage Aurva). (28) The eldest of Talajangha's sons was Vitihotra, whose son was 
Madhu and.Madhu's son was called Vrsni. In fact he had a hundred sons, of whom Vrsni was 
the eldest. It was to these (viz., Yadu, Madhu and Vrsni) that the Yadava race owed its 
existence and (again) it was due to them that their descendants became known as the 
Yadavas, the Madhavas and the Vrsnis (as time went on), O king ! The son of Krostu, the 
(second) son of Yadu was Vijinavan, of whom was born Swahi. From the latter indeeg 
followed Rugeku, whose son was Citraratha and from the (loins of the) latter sprang up 
Sagabindu, a great mystic, who had extensive enjoyments and was exalted (in point of 
virtues). (29—31) He was possessed of (all) the fourteen” varieties of excellent jewels, ruled 
over the entire globe and was invincible. Through his ten thousand wives that exceedingly 
renowned emperor begot a thousand million sons (a lakh th rough each). Of those (thousand 
million) sons, of whom six (viz., Prthusrava and others) were the foremost. The son of 
Prthusrava was Dharma by name, whose son was USana, who performed a hundred horse- 
sacrifices. His son was Rucaka, who had five sons. (Please) hear of them. (832—34) They 
bore the names of Purujit, Rukma, Rukmesu, Prthu and Jyamagha. Even though issueless, 
Jyamagha, the husband of Saibya, dared not take another woman to wife for (sheer) fear 
(of Saibya). On one occasion (however, having conquered his enemies) he brought as a 
booty from the enemy's house a princess of the Bhoja dynasty (called Bhojya).t Observing

her seated in the (king's) chariot, Saibya indignantly spoke to her husband straight in the

following words:—(35-36) “O traitor, who is this girl made to occupy this chariot meant for

me?" When the reply came, “She is your daughter-in-law," she similingly rejoined, "l ama

barren woman and have no co-wife either; how could there be a daughter-in-law to me?" The

king replied, “She will prove a suitable match, O queen, for the boy whom you will bear."(37-38)

The Viswedevas as well as the manes (took pity on Jyamagha, who was shaking and

perspiring too all over through fear of his wife, and) heartily approved of his words so that

Queen Saibya conceived not long afterwards and gave birth to a handsome male child. He

was Called by the name of Vidarbha and married that chaste girl, who had already been

accepted as a daughter-in-law (by his parents). (39)

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse in Book Nine of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

eS a

* In the Markandeya-Purana, we find mention of the followin

9 fourteen varieties of jewels, viz., the elephant, horse: 
chariot, woman, arrow, treasury,

a wreath of flowers, raiment, a tree, Sakti (ajavelin), noose, gem, umbrella and an aerial car-— 
i : TAIT: | MUA TSA ATA ATER It

ft Among the Ksatriyas it has been customary to call amarried woman in the house of herhusband by the 
family name of her father.

Dis. 24 ]

Be Sr Ge We Be Be Re Be Be Rr ke Ke Be Be Hee Gt Bee CRT Ke Me Re ARE Re Re Re RRL Re Re Ke Be Re A eR eR Re

BIZ ad laantseara:

Discourse XXIV

An account of the posterity of Yadu 
Sa

wet faquisstad wat arat aparenelt 1 qdte wre a faedsoreq 2 | 
wemregat = aysiu: | aaferearad | sftrerergrererafestereait FTI 
woe Hrd: Ditsue serena fea: | ad eel aay wet waa: AAR: 1 3 
sitet Tapia ae sitar: a: | dat Aaxer: Ut Sieal aaeaedd: 1X | 
eet: Wet: | Ut SOIT RTI: | SARARTATRT RT AY: Hhedaited: | & | 
Geeta: FART: aeateda: | ts wissen qfiurdargettserm: 1 & 1 
aeatea EMT: AA Ae Te) see Protfa: fafeor afta az © 1 
CRMs: UAT A Aa: Yat: | aaa «aeenftagatfefa wit c 
ayeaqeadaa: sara vse! ala sO au Mase |e 
ay: AS AWE eadarge: aa: ye: wSsTA we Uealitr UIs 1201 
ASTAAATITAT aquidarqarela | werisnsta eaten ais sides 1221

Sri Suka resumed : Through Bhojya, Vidarbha begot two sons, Kuga and Kratha by 
name, and (also) a third, called Romapada, who was the delight of Vidarbha’'s family. (1). 
Romapada's son was Babhru and of Babhru was born Krti. His son was Usika, of whom Cedi 
was born. And from (the loins of) the latter appeared Damaghosa (the son of Cedi) and so 
on, O protector of men ! (2) Kratha's son was Kunti, whose son was Dhrsti; and then came 
Nirvrti. Form (the loins of) Nirvrtiappeared ason, Dasarha by name, whose son was Vyoma. 
From Vyoma followed Jimita, and his son was Vikrti, whose son was Bhimaratha. From (the 
loins of) the latter sprang up a son Navaratha (by name). And from him followed Dasara 
tha. (3-4) (Dagaratha's son was Sakuni;) Sakuni's son was Karambhi and Karambhi's son 
was Devarata, from whom followed Devaksatra; Devaksatra's son was Madhu and Madhu's 
son was Kuruvaga, of whom was born Anu. (5) Anu's son again was Puruhotra, whose son 
was Ayu; and of the latter was born Satvata, Bhajamana, Bhaji, Divya, Vrsni, Devavrdha, 
Andhaka and Mahabhoja were the (seven) sons of Satvata, O worthy king ! Nimloci, Kinkina 
and even so Dhrsti were the sons of Bhajamana by his one wife; and Satajit, Sahasrajit and 
Ayutajit—these were his three sons by the other, O lord | (6—8) Devavrdha's son was 
Babhru; of these two (father and son) they recite the following two couplets:—"As we heard 
from a distance, so do we observe from near. Babhru is the foremost of men, (while) 
Devavrdha compares with the gods. Men who attained immortality (freedom from birth and 
death) through (the precepts of) Babhru and Devavrdha too numbered fourteen thousand 
and sixty-five." Mahabhoja (the seventh son of Satvata) too had given his mind to piety, and

those born in his line came to be (known as) the Bhojas. (9Q—11) 
aot: uf: wise gerfra vier farereras —— Petsygaiiard: 122 
aaa. waas frmeerad: Git! sferget asa: Rrra Wer: 1231 
Waa: Aetna Was apioretd: | Brenisaae qtr: 9 asareda: 1 2x1

RAR EAA EA ALA LEAD RITE EE TRE 
SEERA MSA A MHeha: | AROS SR VAT gaat faye: 1g 
snag: was Het yefaa fre | ote: qaat a sattansiiaas: 19g) 
aaM Temes sites aati dat WaT FaNTeM FaHrwaaay 1 ei) 
Scares | aT fee: | UMfeiqteeNa Tea «= - GWA: 1221 
eet RRS YR: Haoales: | FRA ad afafderar 9 aaaretd: 1291 
SUR AMG: Ta FI A Tae: | sal Gelereahed: Aa: 1201 
TRIESTE A SAM VaTGRIA | Sa | AAR CAAT: 188 
taarqacasy eal Saqqea: AST WAR: AAA Ydeateat FAIR 
sihaaaeat oa sida aateati decal tat DW aged Sale a: 1231 
Sa: AM ANS: HE: WE: TET TET Pe ABARAT: 121 
a waa BST ACY UsUifeanr | seated AHA ARTA: 1241

Sumitra was the son of Vrsni and (so) Yudhajit too, O chastiser of foes ! Yudhajit's sons 
were Sini and Anamitra and Nimna was born of Anamitra. (12) Again, Satrajit and Prasena 
were born of Nimna; and Satyaka was the son of Sini, who has been shown above to be the 
other son of Anamitra. The son of Satyakaindeed was Yuyudhana (also known as Satyaki), 
whose son was Jaya, from whom followed Kuni; and of him was born Yugandhara. (Yet) 
another son of Anamitra was Vrsni, of whom were born Swaphalka and Citraratha. From (the 
loins of) Swaphalka through Gandini were born twelve celebrated sons (besides Akrura), 
Akrira being the foremost of them all. (18—15) The twelve ‘sons were Asanga and 
Sarameya, Mrdura, Mrduvid, Giri, Dnarmavrddha and Sukarma, Ksetropeksa, Arimardana 
and Satrughna, Gandhamada and Pratibahu. They had a sister (also), bearing the name of 
Sucira. Again, Devavan and Upadeva were the two sons of Akruira. Similarly, Prthu, 
Viduratha and many others were the sons of Citraratha (the younger brother of Swaphalka), 
(all) scions of Vrsni. (16—18) Kukura, Bhajamana, Suci and Kambalabarhisa were the sons 
of Andhaka*. Kukura's son was Vahni, whose son was Viloma and from Viloma followed 
Kapotaroma. His son was Anu, whose friend was (the famous Gandharva) Tumburu, 2 
master of music. Anu's son was Andhaka, of whom was born Dundubhi. Then came Aridyota, 
whose son was Punarvasu. (19-20) The latter had a son. Ahuka, as well as a daughter, 
Ahuki. Again, Devaka and Ugrasena were the two sons of Ahuka. Devavan, Upadeva, 
Sudeva and Devavardhana were the four sons of Devaka. They had seven sisters, the 
eldest of whom was Dhrtadeva, O protector of men ! (21-22) They were (besides 
Dhrtadeva) Santideva, Upadeva, Srideva, Devaraksita, Sahadeva and Devaki. Vasudeva 
(the father of Sri Krsna) married them (all). (23) Karnsa, Sunama and Nyagrodha, Kanka 
and Sanku, Suh, Rastrapala, Srsti and Tustiman were the (nine) sons of Ugrasena. (24) 
Kamsa, Kamsavati, Kanka, Sdrabhi and Rastrapalika were the daughters of Ugrasena, (all) 
wives of Vasudeva's younger brothers (Devabhaga and others). (25)

I faqrenedia, asm: Uceta: | RiPretend asi elect Ad: 1261 
Cag: UAE: Matt «TAM: Weeicer ae after am Usa, 129 | 
* The Visnupurana says:— 
ACIN: Yat: 1 (IV. XIV 12)

Itis on the authority of this passage in the Visnupurana that Kukura and others have been concluded to be the sons e 
Andhaka, although the latter's name has not been mentioned in the text here.

is. 24 i 
ie erenusuneaseetessensegens, ft EOOR NINE

qa a Saarara

aad a Fe Wilh ate qaqitaggwa Aq aa si 1281

as (OMIM Seg ea| Geat A adeat a aReetfl: AAEM: 1301

ad bis US Hah: | Gra: AS: feta Bt PIAS FAAATeL 132 |

ae Tat feat tag scifi wen dtiatienctagra wa weet

Tea . ea tex fafrarrer i serene Tat A ale ca ata 71331

orate aR eft sre waft are afrian a Gat die aA qaeqs 13v1

vit eat A arene wet qa fea a: | we: SAR: Geig fica ga vent: 134!

a Beate PHAR feradt | sitrareatqae 4 ued aelfacna: 136! 
From (the loins of) Vidratha (the son of Citraratha) appeared Stra, whose son was 
Bhajamana. From Bhajamana followed Sini, of whom was born Swayambhoja; and Hrdika 
was recognizd as the latter's son. (26) Devabahu, Satadhanva and Krtavarma were the sons 
of Hrdika. Sura (Surasena) was the son of Devamidha (who is known from other sources* 
to be the fourth son of Hrdika). Sdra's wife was Marisa by name. (27) Through her he begot 
ten faultless sons—Vasudeva, Devabhaga, Devasrava, Anaka, Srfijaya, Syamaka, Kanka, 
Samika, Vatsaka and Vrka. They call Vasudeva—a (fit) receptacle for the descent of Sri 
Hari—as Anakadundubhi inasmuch as on the (happy) occasion of his birth kettledrums 
(Dundubhis) and larger drums (Anakas) of the gods sounded (of themselves). Prtha (Kunti) 
and Srutadeva, Srutakirti, SrutaSrava and, Rajadhidevithese five girls were the sisters of 
the aforesaid (Vasudeva and others). Their father, Sura, actually gave Prtha (in adoption) 
to his friend, Kunti, who was issueless. (28—31) From the sage Durvasa, who got highly 
pleased with her (for her services rendered to him when he called on her father as an 
unexpected guest), she received a (certain) Mantra by means of which gods can be easily 
invoked; (and) in order to test its efficacy she invoked the lustrous sun-god. (32) Astonished 
in mind to behold the god arrived in her presence that very moment, she (apologetically) 
said, "The spell was employed by me for the sake of trial (alone). (Therefore, kindly) return 
and forgive me (my audacity).” (33) (The sun god replied,) “My sight never goes in vain, 
O godly virgin! | intend to beget a son through you. | shall (so) arrange that your virginity is 
not impaired, O beautiful damsel !" (34) So saying, the son-god deposited his seed in her 
womb and returned to heaven. That very momenta male child—who was another sun as 
it were, was born of her without any travail. (35) Afraid of the world (however), she painfully 
consigned the child to the stream of a river. (Later on) your great grandfather, Pandu, of

genuine valour duly married her. (36) 
Wieat J raat qe ave | TATAYS SaaA Faltarat fect: Ga: 1391 
aaa geass arrenticeteradt | Ara teeece USM, hema: Adi: 1321 
TRS «HARSH | EEN STIRS: MIATA A 13S | 
fra: eet: cifadete aad: | eaurreat «=| HATA farchdageet sol 
serercat epee: GAN SUAVE | RTT TST: eT, ev AAT 1H 
Gat wut 4 uauidonfacnr| eftererfecoaratt WIA WA BAH: S21

” The Visnupurana says: 
l

i Sarma, a scion of Karuisa, duly espoused Srutadeva, of whom was born 
Bea wie ae (first) born of Diti (as the demon Hiranyaksa), because cursed b 
the sages (Sanaka and others). (37) And Dhrstaketu, the (then) ruler of the territory of 
Kekaya, took Srutakirti to wife. His sons were Santardana and others, the five princes of 
Kekaya. (38) Through Rajadhidevi (his wife) Jayasena—so the tradition goes—begot Vinda 
and Anuvinda (who became rulers of Avanti); (while) Damaghosa, the king of Cedi, 
accepted (for his wife) SrutaSrava. (39) The latter's son was sisupala, the Story of whose 
birth has already been told* Citraketu and Brhadbala were the sons of Devabhaga by his 
wife Karnsa. (40) Suvira and Isuman were the two sons of Devasrava by Karmsavat, while 
Satyajit as well as Purujit were born of Kanka, through Anaka. (41) Again, Srijaya begot 
through Rastrapali Vrsa, Durmarsana and others; while Syamaka begot through Surabhimi 
HarikeSa and Hiranyaksa, (42) Similarly, Vatsaka begot through Misrakesi—a celestial 
nymph—Vrka and others; while Vrka begot through (his wife) Durvarksi, Taksa Puskara, 
Sala and so on. (438) Through (her union with) Samika, again, his wife Sudamini bore 
Sumitra, Arjunapala and others; while Kanka too, for his part, begot Rtadhama and Jaya. (44)

Unat UWieot war ale Wet sell CaaS AT Asal Artes: | WY | 
ai Wd Ui a ad faye yan ageae Vevat qHartyeareac xe | 
Qual Uses Ciel WR Wa wl URE Pa Wel glemua vol 
Talat dh ye HIST: | HAC HV Mehra Herta | YS | 
Wea «8ST 8«8©6 eee Galea: | Soa eaecniely AaHeIMAshisrd | XS | 
fagst yada | AMEN: | Wiidealens Usteeuufasarea: 1 4o | 
Ws: Heavies SUaYA aM AQeaqagnEn: stars TSA: 1&2 | 
cofadea We Ad UA Wales: aya: YaMBTael Weta? 
Geiagqneid eat wt aqhal aqtar taanas warasisri 43 
aici Ur a Use: | asl AAS re PHU | GY | 
Ser cane aa et: fect! quar a wea aa Usry fran 1 GY I 
Pauravi, Rohini, Bhadra, Madira, Rocana, lla, Devaki and others (Dhrtadevat—and so 
on, all sisters of Devaki) were the wives of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva). (45) Now, Vasudeva 
begot through Rohini Bala, Gada, Sarana, Durmada Vipula, Dhruva, Krta and others (46) 
Bhuta, Subhadra and Bhadravaha, Durmada and also Bhadra and (seven) others—thesé 
twelve indeed were the sons born of Pauravi. (47) Similarly Nanda, Upananda, Krtaka, Sura 
and so on were the sons of Madira. Bhadra (hailing from Kosala), however, brought forth only 
one son (the delight of his race), Kesi by name. (48) Through Rocana from ( the loins of) 
Vasudeva appeared Hasta, Hemangada and others; (and) through Ila he begot Uruvalka 
and others, foremost among the Yadus. (49) Viprstha alone appeared from (the loins Of) 
Anakadundubhi through Dhrtadeva; while Srama, Pratigruta and others were the sons Of 
Santideva, O Pariksit ! (50) Kalpavarsa and other Kings, numbering ten, were the sons 0 
Upadeva; while Vasu, Harnsa, Suvariga and (three others) were the six sons of Srideva. (51) 
* Vide Book VII. 
T Vide Verses 22-23 above.

is. 24 ] o5 
‘ DIE Spee ee Kennnunnenanwnenee OOK NINE

Again, nine sons, Gada and others were obtained b 
he begot through Sahadeva eight sons, the forem

beg ot the (eight) Vasus themselves. Further the highminded Vasudeva begot through 
Devaki (eight) more sons—kKirtiman, Susena, Bhadrasena, Bhadra, Rju, Sammardana and 
Lord Sankarsana, who was the same as Sesa (the king of serpents); while the eighth son 
of (the blessed) Vasudeva and Devaki indeed was Lord Sri Hari Himself. And the highty 
blessed Subhadra, your grandmother, was their daughter, O king! (562—55)

ual ade ate art oes WM: | del FY WTare sed Parad st: 148! 
1 Oe SA eq: aol at udutisnemat fase ae FEU: 141 
aaareisd Ue: fear fei squemtecena DET 1461 
atattigortat URIS: | Ya BRAATOTET STA GaTEMA: 148 | 
eentvaaheattt oar 86 «ata: aed 6 Ta. «STE: I G01 
wot SMAAUTAT sAaaaTAeAL| SET MATT Wy waa aT: 1621

y Devaraksita through Vasudeva; (while) 
ost of whom was Puruvisruta, as Dharma

ofa enudigs ageiediet wedi sinafeecusa ea adareamieet 
VA GWaeHy m: laorHated: Wd pegs: 163! 
farerfatadtanateationacitoan lqete war zal wdalgczean ex!

- ; 1 TT afaareenray | 
Fae 3 aqgdarf: free araf vas gfea: after Fras eu 
Sat Ad: faquere asafeerat ear Roa qaer alee: | 
Sure ae yes: smd: ads smeared seagsg 166! 
PN: TS Ter gat HEA ANH BA FTAA: | 
feet fat crafter tsar ot wt RE, TH 1g 
+ eich Cee GRAS Beda AGA

rowth of sin in this world, the almighty Lord Sri 
ret tiie. (56) Indeed, for the appearance ae mele 
the all-pervading Lord Sri Hari, the (absolutely) unattached peelpredae ts ul Maladie 
there aes round other than His own will to sport. (57) For, the aS IVI ost fe EE ee 
potency) concucee to the birth, continuance and destruction 0 Ses (58) erideav uring 
His gr ee intended to bring Self-Realization through cessaton © disguised as kings, who 
to ES ae “ burden of the earth, which was overrun by demons ae ane eee Madhu) 
aa move the Aksauhinis, Lord Sri Krsna (the slayer oe : 
more than one - Sider brother) Lord Sarhkarsana (better known as Balarama), 
accompanied by (His € t be comprehended even in thought by the rulers of gods. (59-60) 
Peon deeds which Sara on the devotees He spread far and wide Soe ae 
: ele rar i Secon capable of driving away the sorrow, grief andignorance of those

Whenever there is decline O 
Hari actually manifests Himself

_ SO Rasta as dees dy jenn tinlas

, . . s™s r Srey er Sr er r r t ir Sy wy We We We Be Me Be Be Ae Ve eH; WeWe He Br *; m

i in the (ensuing) Kali age. (61) Sipping with the hollow of his joined palms 
nthe earertia ears a etiam the holiest stream of His glory, which is nectar to the 
ears of the righteous, a man shakes off the tendencies of actions (standing in the way of 
Liberation). (62) Through words sweetened by His loving smiles and glances, His valourous 
pastimes and (divine) personality, charming in every limb, He brought joy to mankind, His 
activities being ever praised by the Bhojas, Vrsnis, Andhakas, Madhus, Surasenas ang 
Dasarhas (on the one hand) and by the Kurus, Srijayas and Pandus on the other. (63-64) 
Drinking, full of joy, with their eyes the beauty of His face—rendered (all the more) lovely by 
ears adorned with alligator-shaped ear-rings and lustrous cheeks, (nay,) lit up with a 
graceful smile and ever steeped in joy—men and women not only did not feel sated but grew 
angry with Nimi* (who was responsible for the twinkling of their eyes, that interrupted the joy 
flowing from his sight). (65) As soon as born, Sri Krsna (the supreme Person) went to the 
dales of Vraja from His father's house (at Mathura) and, having heightened the joy of the 
residents of Vraja, returned to Mathura, slew enemies , married numerous wives, begot 
through them hundreds of sons, and worshipped His own Self by means of (a number of) 
sacrifices in order to popularize His own Vedic path (leading to His realization). (66) Intending 
to reduce the heavy burden of the earth by means of the internal discord appearing among 
the Kurus, He swept away by His (mere) glance the armies of kings on the battle-field, loudly 
proclaimed far and wide the victory of Vijaya (Arjuna), taught the highest truth to (His beloved 
disciple) Uddhava and returned with an easy mind to His own (divine) Abode. (67)

Thus ends the twenty fourth discourse, entitled "An account of the posterity of Yadu", 
forming part of an account of the solar and lunar dynasties (of kings), 
in Book Nine of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita, 
composed by the sage Vedavyasa and consisting 
of eighteen thousand Slokas.

Set Bacek Race BS 
Pro I Bek Ft FS

SPECT a

* We have already seen in Discourse Xill above how 
Vasistha—sought and secured a boon from the 
beings and directs their closing and opening.

Nimi—when his body fell due to the curse of his Guru, the sag@ 
gods by virtue of which he resides ina subtle form in the eyelide of all living

Gla: Chey: 
(Yate: )

Discourse | 
The Lord reassures Mother Earth; Vasudeva marries Devaki and Kamsa

despatches the six sons of Devaki

Tear 
aim daft saat argat: i ua asadeat ait aE e | 
as eamsteea ft amadtiaamaduia fawitdiatfor ata a: 12 1 
sate alata Ye: | ca aa Perera i at ate fener | 3 
EGET MICLICIC® TATA SATATCL, | 
me samolequiqaed wm faeda fat aed! x | 
fararaet a AM SATScaAMMaahetases: 
aed aaa Fe a AT: 1 I 
sueatagerad neg Grltatst HeavUsarry | 
pia aft ma one ars A a: aU Tae: | & | 
atatfar ARRaaceuMAdate: Gedeniead: | 
wed «| aa TTI fast 9 1 
: in: he lunar and solar dynasties and (an accounto 
the ae aaenaent ec nee in both the dynasties as weil as ; the Sees 
pious Yadu have been told by you, O jewel among sages! (Now kindly) recount to us exploits 
of Lord Visnu descended in that line alongwith Sn Balarama (His part manifestation). (1-2) 
(Pray,) narrate to us in detail (all) those deeds which the (said) Lord, the Soul of the universe

ings, performed, appearing in the line of Yadu. (3) What mati 
atentee See rafanirnalanuclTeGeels from a recital of the excellences of the illustrious 
Lord—a (sure) remedy for (the malady of) transmigration, (and highly) pleasing to the ear 
AS well as to the mind, and constantly sung (even) by souls from whom the thirst for pleasure 
has departed (for ever). (4) Using Him for a raft my grandfather (Arjuna) and granduncles

Ss ee

CE i ee ee - .

(Yudhisthira and others) indeed crossed the ocean of the Kaurava army—(so) difficult to 
cross because (of the presence) of whales in the form of great car-warriors like Devavrata 
(more popularly known by the name of Bhisma), vanquishers in battle of (even) Immortals— 
treating it as a (mere) footprint of acalf. (5) Again, having entered, discus In hand, the womb 
of my mother (Uttara), who had sought Him as her refuge, He protected this body of mine. 
the seed of the race of the Kurus and the Pandavas, and badly burnt by the (mystic) Missile 
hurled by ASwatthama (the son of Drona). (6) Recount, O sage, the exploits of that Lord, 
disguised as a human being by His transcendental creative energy, who, dwelling (both) 
within and outside all embodied beings, (severally) in the form of the Inner Controller anq 
Time, metes out to them (according to their deserts) death (metempsychosis) as well as

immortality. (7) 
diva: Se wa: asda daa we: Hel serdt feats | 
SAE wa, fag Ast We: | Hare Miche: Are Haarrarararata: |< 
wi aa feuarmagai a saa: i wet mag aa ATAEIAGEUTAL 1 20 | 
Se mara sala aulfor afore: | aqyal Mean Aes: HANATL AM: 12k 1 
Wed ad A W aMfadieaiagada ada sea faa 1eRi 
Sake amt amen medi tert agers eftnergry 1231 
Sankarsana (Balarama) was (first) referred* to by you as a son of Rohini. How could his 
connection be conceived with the womb of Devakit without his assuming another body? (8) 
Wherefore did Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) shift to Vraja from His father's 
residence (at Mathura)? And where (in what different places) did that Lord of the Yadus take 
up His abode alongwith His kinsfolk? (9) What did Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma 
and Siva), do while residing in Vraja as well as at Mathura (the city founded by the demon 
Madhu)? And wherefore did He personally slay Kamsa, His (own) mother's cousin and 
(therefore) not deserving such fate (at His hands) ? (10) Having assumed a human 
semblance, for how many years did He reside in the company of the Vrsnis at Mathura (the 
capital of the Yadus), and how many were the wives of the Lord ? (11) You ought to relate 
fully to me, endowed (as | am) with faith, O omniscient sage, this and all other exploits of

Sri Krsna. (12) This hunger, (so) very difficult to bear, does not (at all) afflict me, although 
| have given up even water, drinking as | am the nectar of Sri Hari's story, flowing from your

lotus lips. (13) 
Yd Sag 
Wt Pera Yen Alea Sarat: a waa feet 
sae PUTA afer aed} APTAATENA: 12% 
Suta resumed : Having heard the said laudable question, O Sauriaka (a scion of Bhrgu): 
and complimenting Pariksit (the protege of Lord Visnu), the glorious sage Suka (the son of

Vyasa), the foremost of the Lord's devotees, proceeded to narrate (as follows) the story of 
Sri Krsna, that destroys the impurities of the Kali age. (14)

7 AIP FAA 
wereat gfera weaffaw | ardanenat X aera Afeat <r: 124! 
aetna: yesteta anit i awit ges MyMedia esl

a ON oa 
* Vide IX. xxiv. 46.

t See IX. xxiv. 54.

: LSPA YAO AEG Bot aat 1291 
TWETATS feet sre aot feed: | safer: areas BAaaAT 1261 
wal oaqueraia ag aden Wels aaa ata: 12°! 
seat SUT cat gureafini ged yer gael aaifea: 1201

at wet TR wifi: frena anf |

mt Ute A ayer: yaar ada at AELIRe

a aegeat anit: waregee audste yf 1221 
aeerye Aas Wea Gee: Wished afer asad ache: 1231 
aah: «= AEA: «= UE set afaat Bat RY: frafeeattiar ex 
frettatar serait ger anitfed smi anfaer symist arate aerererte 1241

Sri Suka replied : Your mind has arrived at a right conclusion, O jewel among royal 
sages, as a sequal to which lasting devotion to the story of Lord Vasudeva has sprung up 
in your heart. (15) An inquiry concerning the story of Lord Vasudeva indeed purifies all the 
three persons, viz., the reciter, the interlocator and the audience (even) as the water touched 
by the Lord's feet (the water in which an image of the Lord has been washed or the Ganga) 
hallows all. (16) Oppressed with stupendous weight by millions of detachments of Daityas 
in the disguise of arrogant kings, Mother Earth sought Brahma (the creator) as her 
refuge.(17) Appearing as a disconsolate cow, its face wet with tears and piteously lowing, 
she sought the presence of Brahma (the supreme ruler) and told him of her distress. (18) 
Realizing her calamity, Brahma accompanied by Lord Siva (the three-eyed One) forthwith 
proceeded to the shore of the ocean of milk (the abode of Lord Visnu) alongwith the (other) 
gods as well as with her. (19) Having arrived there and fully collected (in mind), Brahma 
prayed to Lord Visnu, the Supreme Person, the Ruler of the universe, the adored (even) of 
the gods, in the terms of the Purusa-Sukta (a celebrated Vedic hymn addressed to the 
Supreme Person). (20) Hearing in the course of a trance (state of complete absorption) a 
voice uttered inthe sky (the source of which was invisible), the creator clearly said to the gods 
(as follows): "Hear from me, O gods, the word of the Supreme Person, and then do 
accordingly at once; let there be no delay. (21) The affliction of Mother Earth had already 
been known by the Supreme Person. (Therefore) let yourselves be born among theYadus 
in part manifestation (and continue there) till that suzerain Lord walks on earth, reducing the 
burden of Mother Earth through His own (Divine) Energy in the shape of Time. (22) Lord 
Visnu Himself (the glorious Supreme Person) will be manifested in the house of Vasudeva; 
let celestial women (also therefore) be born for His pleasure. (23) With intent to do what 
pleases Sri Hari, the thousand-headed and self-effulgent Lord Ananta (the serpent-god 
Sesa), a part manifestation of Lord Vasudeva, will precede Him (as His elder brother). (24) 
Commanded by the Lord, the Divine Maya (enchanting potency) of Lord Visnu, by whom the 
(whole) universe stands bewitched, will (also) be born in part manifestation for the purpose

of doing His work." (25) 
yee SAA

yararahteayy: | sraret St Het we: era wer aat 1261 
sees ; f gods and reassured Mother Earth 
7 d: Having thus directed the hosts 0 ed Mc 
wets Con OnaES words, Seale (the supreme lord), the ruler of Prajapatis (lords of

s

created beings), returned to his exalted abode. (26)

Waa ad: ay RATES Ay Ta aa et fect Re: 1221

qi a | aleteratitdaea: qrilge: | eae GaaT Gre ANT LATHE 1291

smaqqa: wa: we: frafaeatiar wat amt We tet Tega: 130 |

aaa outed mami serie cara are Lar aT Paver 138 1

aint ypain: 2 wa WHegdi get can: wee aM gage: 1321

Wedgie = ASA: AA STUSA Tate aaa: FAFA 133 |

ufe osaieot hanIMIENSRNaley | SRMATABA AME aT Al aAgasae 1axt

Sah: A WS: UN distal Houle: | APT STAN: G_aritr: HASASL 1 3&1

a wpftaceniot yea fraama, «so laadal AeT satsr Uae 1361 
Of yore Surasena, the chief of the Yadus, ruled the principalities of Mathura and 
Sirasena, (himself) residing in the city of Mathura (his capital). (27) Since then the said 
Mathura, in which Lord Sri Hari is ever present, continued to be the capital of all Yadava 
kings. (28) Having gone through his wedding ceremony indeed in that city, one day, 
Vasudeva, son of Sira (a noble man of the kingdom of Mathura), mounted the chariot 
alongwith his newly wedded wife, Devaki, while departing (for his home). (29) Surrounded 
by hundreds of chariots plated with gold, Prince Karmsa, the (eldest) son of King Ugrasena 
(the then ruler of Mathura) held the reins of the horses (assumed the role of a charioteer) in 
order to oblige his cousin (Devaki). (30) At the time of their departure Devaka (the younger 
brother of Ugrasena), who was (so) fond of his daughter gave away to his daughter by way 
of dowry four hundred elephants decked with necklaces of gold, fifteen thousand horses, eighteen 
hundred chariots and two hundred graceful servant-maids profusely adorned. (31-32) As the 
procession of the bride and the bridegroom was just going to start, conchs, clarionets, clay 
tomtoms and kettledrums sounded all at once in a most auspicious manner. (33) Addressing 
Karnsa, who held the reins while on the way, an incorporeal voice said, "O foolish one! the 
eighth child of this girl, whom you are (now) conducting, will slay you." (34) Told thus, that 
wicked and sinful fellow, the disgrace of the Bhojas, seized his cousin by the hair, sword in

hand, and proceeded to kill her. (35) The highly blessed Vasudeva pleaded with that hard- 
hearted and shameless fellow of detestable deeds, trying to appease him (as follows). (36)

qed Sara

Torta: «= Bary WISI 1A at ube gaa fagqgreadier 13091 
Farad od Sau MAet | AI Aeagara At Beet saforat ya: 13c1 
ee usanma eet SUPISAR: ere NRT «GTA ay: 138 
mae Ueht ada Teel AM Gorse et aint wa: xol

aa aerate = Sattest «= iar: |

Aa AM sot aa fait weeyfa: xe

ait udt maf eaelfet at freeman Ua |

wy Manfaag Seat | soe: We wt waa 1x2

wali aatecnurisage: aan fauren |

sive SS Sanfetget gar, ay wnat faqeft ist 
EATER, a cetera: | STA: anaes] See UT Way Sy | 
Feces ane pie Ks es

are the glory et Ree dee ec of virtues worthy of being extolled by heroes and 
festive occasion of her weddin "5 (3 hee Rope ll passe rgb i ne 
Heiebirth, © valiant panes 2 (37) The death of those that are born is ordained alongwith

nether it z Griese - Death is indeed inevitable to (all) living beings (no matter) 
W ES : (very) day or atthe end ofa hundred years. (38) When the body is about 
to expire (lit., to be dissolved Into its five constituent elements, viz., earth, water, fire, air and 
ether), the soul (tenanting it), following (the course of) its destiny, helplessly quits the former 
body on (mentally) obtaining another corporeal form. (39) As indeed a walking man paces 
forward with another leg while sticking to the earth by one leg or even as a caterpillar leaves 
a blade of grass (only) when it has caught hold of another, so does the embodied soul, 
following the course of its destiny, leave the former body only when it has caught hold of 
another. (40) Just as a man in a dream state or one whose mind is entirely possessed with 
a longing and who is contemplating on the object of his desire with a mind coloured by that 
which has (either) been (actually) perceived (by himin his waking life) or heard of, visualizes 
a corresponding conceptual form (of the kind actually seen or heard of by him) and 
(unconsciously) comes to identify himself with it, and (forthwith) indeed forgets his (living) 
body, so does the embodied soul quit the previous body on attaining a new one. (41) 
Identifying itself with that (particular) body out of the (numberless) material bodies (which 
are nothing but the five elements) moulded (into diverse forms) by Maya (the creative energy 
of the Lord)—which his mind, consisting of (various) ideas and impelled by destiny, flows 
towards and clings to, the embodied soul passes into that very form alongwith the mind. (42) 
Evenasthe sunorthe moon, with which we are so familiar, when reflected in earthen vessels 
full of water, appears as shaking due to the force of the wind (though not actually shaking), 
so does the soul, entering through attachment the material forms brought forth by its own 
ignorance, gets deluded’ (seized with the fear of death and so on). (43) As such (i.e., 
inevitably exposed to the fear of death), the embodied soul, seeking after its own welfare, 
should not therefore do wrong to anyone; for there is fear to the wrong-doer from others 
(viz., from the individual wronged, its kith and kin and the god of retribution). (44) This 
younger cousin of yours is a (mere) helpless girl ands like a daughter to you. You ought not 
(therefore) to kill this girl, who has just gone through the auspicious nuptial rites, kind as you

are to the helpless. (45) 
ye SAA 
wa a amfattateramistt cen: 1a add wick Seas tes 
fie wer a ater fafererrngyft: tard ars Sftetghte waraue Ive 
Praca deat a Pada aroetsit Safe: xe 
sara yea ya, waa Faunterey Ge A ake Te at Het See 
at fe a wre uimeiggeren | safert frat qa: grata ike 
seep arefrarrarrangedsaa Bieri 
= fe af efasirea: Wieaniaanted: 142 | 
wa fagea a ue araqreieRitt! Waa & aiftigrTTATT 142 |

yaaa «=e ae PTT | TTT qaartt |= faeehaerstateii 43 1 |

Sri Suka went on: Even though admonished through conciliatory words and those 
inspiring fear as aforesaid, Kamsa, who was heartless (by nature) and followed the 
ways of ogres (besides), did not desist (irom his purpose), O Pariksit (a Scion of 
Kuru)!(46) Perceiving such obstinacy of his (in the matter of Slaying Devaki) ang 
contemplating how to avert her imminent death, Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva) resolved 
upon the following expedient in that behalf. (47) (He said to himself, Death should be 
warded off by a wise man so long as his reason and might are intact. If, however, death 
does not turn back there is nothing wrong on the part of the embodied soul. (4g) 
Promising to hand over sons (that may be born to Devaki) to Kamsa (who is death 
personified), | ought to rescue this helpless girl and | shall have to forgo my sons only 
in case they are actually born (hereafter) and provided Karmsa (himself) does not expire 
(in the meantime). (49) Or might not the contrary happen (i.e., might not Kamsa himself 
suffer death at the hands of my sons); (for) the ways of Providence are hard to 
comprehend. What is imminent may turn away and what has turned away may appear 
again. (50) (Just) as in the case of a (forest) fire there is no cause other than destiny 
for its coming into contact with a (particular) tree (however distant it may be) and its 
remaining aloof from another (though quite near to it), so indeed in the case (even) of 
a living being the ground (other than destiny) of its being connected with or dissociated 
from a (particular) body is difficult to conceive.” (51) Having thus pondered to the best 
of his intellectual acumen, Vasudeva (the son of Sura) actually eulogized that sinful 
fellow with great esteem. (52) With @ blooming Jotus-like countenance, yet with an aching 
heart, he smilingly addressed the following words to that hard hearted wretch. (53)

qed Fara 
q dad Wa area aq aMmeynikunt | Gary AAdaeIse Udet waar 4X! 
Vasudeva observed : Indeed there is no fear to you, O gentle one, from this girl

as the incorporeal voice (from heaven) has conveyed (to you). | shall (accordingly) 
make over (to you) her sons, from whom fear has arisen in you. (54) 
Ayah FAA 
waa sagqa muMgietantad | aaearste ft wha: wert wifagrTe Fe 4h | 
aa pict SUG Gaeal WeeaaT | WAT Ways aTet eat Parga GG | 
calit WAS MHS: | Maa Pegur Utsqatatafaact: | 4! 
fe gee I are faget feentfga femerd aaqatot gees fh gare Ge | 
Tea Wie TB: Tea ea Hahah | ASAT Us Wealranaraiq! 48 | 
wicetg Gast A Peek A way) seme qaadniniapet fatea: fencti gol

ills Gest = - aaah: | aaa «| agTaerraditsfahaarata: 1&2!

Sri Suka continued : Karhsa, who knew the truthfulness of Vasudeva’s words, ceased 
from killing Devaki (his own cousin). Applauding him, Vasudeva too reached home full of 
delight. (55) Now, when the time came, Devaki, who (being the abode of Sri Hari) represented 
all the gods (on her person), (successively) brought forth eight sons and a daughter too 
(Subhadra by name) besides, one every year. (56) Much afraid of falsehood, Vasudeva 
handed over to Karnsa with (great) difficulty his first-born son, Kirtiman (by name). (57) 
Indeed what is difficult to endure in the eyes of the righteous? What is needed by the wis?! 
What Is unworthy in the eyes of the depraved? And what is difficult to renounce for thos 
who have cherished Sri Hari (the Self of all)? (58) Rejoiced at heart to perceive such

equanimity in Vasudeva (the son of Stra

O Pariksit, smilingly spoke the following ) as well as his unflinching devotion to truth, Karnsa,

words—(59) "Let this boy return (to your protection); 
Be enth oe Ke) fas ren bioy Obviously my death has been decreed at the hands of 
y y. ) aking the boy with the word "Amen" Vasudeva returned (home).

Prd. (et) ne did not rejoice over those words of Karnsa (the wicked one) of uncontrolled

Tae A at ie aaitet a afi: gure agaren Saamen aefera: 1621 
BS A came suai anti aad age A a dawgaat: 1621 
SaaS Set = See Te: | aaa sami a ater ext 
meatarriy art agt Aat Wit | cae wsfaad faay a waet sf iui 
Eek aaa a fy freiisdt saa i aaleraager sé 
at at MIG Aalst qeaeren | Aha WAG Gen Usa: wre Bla E01 
STATS Galt ST TET faa er Herat TOA aele: A see 16! 
Set a fart agua ad fy gust YXaAr, velaT: 1891 
Se AR SMad AS TASe Seca eA Yale sitnearadasHA weASETA: 12

“Whatever cowherds there are in Vraja, the foremost of whom is Nanda, and again (all) 
those who are their wedded wives, the Vrsnis led by Vasudeva, and Yadava women headed 
by Devaki, nay, (even) the kinsmen, relatives and friends of both Nanda and Vasudeva, who 
are devoted to Karmsa (yourself) are all for the most part gods themselves." This was what 
the all-powerful sage Narada communicated to Karnsa, going to him (of his own accord), and 
also apprized him of the endeavours (of Brahma and the other gods) for the destruction of the 
Daityas, that constituted a burden to Mother Earth, O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata)! (62—64) 
Believing the Yadus to be (so many) gods, and Lord Visnu as about to appear from the womb 
of Devaki for the purpose of slaying him, and binding Devaki and Vasudeva with fetters in 
their own residence after the departure of the (celestial) sage, Karmsa did to death every 
son of the said couple even as he was born, suspecting him to be the (birthless) Visnu 
(Himself). (65-66) Greedy monarchs given to self-gratification on this earth generally, as a 
matter of fact, kill their (own) father and mother, brothers as well as all their relations. (67) 
Knowing himself to have been, in a previous existence, the great demon Kalanemi, slain by 
Visnu and reborn (as Karsa) in current life, he entered into hostilities with the Yadus. (68) 
Nay, putting in prison his (own) father, Ugrasena—the lord of the Yadus, the Bhojas and the 
Andhakas—the mighty Kamsa ruled over the Surasena territory himself. (69)

rst di j j ion to the descent of Lord Sri Krsna 
Thus ends the first discourse, forming an introduction to ¢ A rsna, 
in the first. half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhaga' vata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SSS

wee Te 2 et ET Oe ee ——

eee

aia fedrarseara:

Discourse II

The Lord enters the womb of Devaki and is extolled by the gods 
MY SAA

SISTA UTA aa: \aeat met Us act AMT: 1 2 |

+ difea fafafag: qecsiechaar| mean faeuit Paar face atari 1 3

Wh Aaa «= Wea: udorda | eas sey atey ean sitar x 1

Gq and ma aad saadimt aya daa weitnfaaela: 1 & |

Sri Suka resumed : Conjoined with Pralamba, Baka, Cantra, Trnavarta and Aghasura 
(who in the form ofa python ate much), Mustika, Arista, Dwivida, Putana, Kesi and Dhenuka, 
as well as with other demon kings, the foremost of whom were Bana and Bhauma, and with 
Jarasandha {the ruler of Magadha, whose two daughters had been married to him) as his 
ally, the powerful Karhsa set about (the task of) destroying the Yadus. (1-2) Hard pressed, 
they migrated to the territories of the Kurus, Paficalas and Kekayas, Salvas, Vidarbhas, 
Nisadhas, Videhas and Kosalas too. (3) Remaining faithful to him, a few kinsmen (of theirs, 
however,) continued to serve him. When six boys of Devaki had been killed by Kamsa (the 
son of Ugrasena), a ray of Lord Visnu, whom the devotees speak of as Lord Ananta, entered 
the womb of Devaki as her seventh child, that went to enhance her delight and grief atthe 
same time. (4-5)

ward fagen faa hast Faq aeat feteaat armrat aarfear & |

TS ca ai wR Tires Tet agae sais aatilge | 
Wag Hada faaty aaa fe 1 9 |

qaeM Bot TH WNT a Ae dd Aer Vevat set dfraeai c |

AMMA «sae: «UT | A L ee aaerai aueai Ufaeifa 1 e |

ated Aaa 9 Adenatath! saree: Aaa 1 Yo |

Tea gata we a ad yagi wert fara aenctit aie!

Sal alten HIN wat aah Al Aa ARAM ssetachh Aer

addedond at a we: dato afi watt CIAO Aes AHagapad 123 | 
Perceiving the fear born of Karnsa to the Yadus, His proteges, the Lord too, the Sou! of 
the universe, commanded (as follows) Yogamaya (His transcendent creative energy) :-—(6) 
Proceed, O good goddess, to Vraja enriched by cowherds and cows. Rohini, Vasudeva s 
wife, is Staying in the village of Gokula owned by Nanda; and, afraid of Karnsa, his other wives 
too are residing in secret places. (7) There exists in Devaki's womb, in the form of an embry®: 
My own part manifestation known by the name of Sesa (the serpent-god). Taking it out, place 
itin the womb of Rohini. (8) Then | shall assume the role of a son of Devaki with all My divine 
potencies, which constitute so many parts of My being as it were, O blessed lady; while yOu 
shall be born of Yasoda, the wife of Nanda. (9) People will worship you by means of incensés 
offerings of food and other presents, recognizing you as the supreme controller (of the

wie e

destinies) of men seeking varioy 
Men will erect temples ( S boons and as the bestower of all desired blessings. (10)

eminence among those possessed of strength.“(1 3) MOS En a aden ean aes

ie Ba aT aaah aes: | whey UR AT Wat ad Awe 12% 
Thus instructed by th : ais are ge MICT cae Oa 
Re Paina y the Lord and accepting His command with the words, "O yes, letit be 
so: anda going round Him from left to right (as a mark of respect), the goddess descended 
on earth and carried out His behest as she was told. (14) When the embryo in the womb of 
Devaki was transferred to that of Rohini by Yogamaya (who represents the Lord's trance-

sleep at the time of universal dissolution), the people of Mathura wailed aloud saying, "Ah! 
the embryo (in the womb of Devaki) has perished !" (15)

wary Taare RTT: | aaa «= AA TTTeHee NY: 1261 
T faved Wet art MSTA ser ve: | qreeishagedst Yat Waa FIV! 
at owragemget oo umfet = aA 
ean = MalaeHaT HIBT «— AMISSAaHE | HATET: 121 
a want wdenfaehaey fat a 
weed Bel Aad! Waa Bat adit ee 
at diet ca: swat! fated? vad alata 
amea Toes afeiet «att aS RTT 1201 
feng af wmuiaagy a aedaat a fagiha faman 
fam: weieaat aetst ae: Ba TeHOag: 12! 
a w wat we amd ade AMSAT | 
Ss gay a Hae: ward We was aa ATARI 
sft area wart Biege: SS TY amet Neleletera ets Re | 
arefa: MSIE GE: Waar Her fata eitcheragad THT SATA RI 
The Lord too, who is the Soul of the universe and rids His devotees of (all) fear, entered 
the mind of Vasudeva with all His divine potencies constituting parts of His being as it were. 
(16) Carrying (in him) the glorious presence of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person) and

(Consequently) shining as the sun, Vasudeva evidently grew to be most formidable and hard

to f (all) living beings. (17) Thereupon, just as the eastern quarter 
San Ne eat GD . the glorious Devaki conceived in her mind the Lord

be ighter of all 
ars the moon (the delight Ley (constituting so many parts of His Being), and

: i - the w ar 
cmon peer sae an her) by Vasudeva (through mere signt even as a preceptor 
Would impress on the mind of his disciple a mental image of the Lord). (18) Imprisoned within 
(the four walls of) the palace of Karnsa (the chief of the Bhojas) like an enclosed flame or like 
USeful knowledge pent up in (the mind of ) a (selfish) scholar who keeps his knowledge to 
himself. Devaki, who had (now) turned into an abode of the Lord Himself (the abode of the

106 
KARAAMAKHKKAMNNHA LK LAHORE ae | 
universe), did not shine fully (failed to delight the outside world). (19) Perceiving Devaki__

who bore the invincible Lord within her—illumining the palace by her (uncommon) lustre and 
having a bright smile (on her countenance), Kamsa said (to himself): Hari, who is Joing to 
take my life, has clearly and surely entered her womb, like a lion entering a cave; for she Was

E

' 
| 
‘ 
' 
1 
i

not like this (so bright) before. (20) What should be speedily done by me now with referengg |

to him? For (if | attempt to make short work of him, the moment he is born) he is not Going

to withhold his prowess (even as a new-born babe would do), intent as he is on his purpoge |

(of advancing the interests of the gods). (And if | dispose of Devaki herself, before my enem

is born,) such destruction of Devaki (my cousin), who is not only a woman but enceinte (too),

will forthwith mar my reputation and prosperity and cut short my life.(21) Such a one is indeeg

(as good as) dead, though breathing, who lives by most atrocious deeds; (for) people curse — 
such a man (even during his lifetime) and, when his body gets defunct, he is surely destineg | 
to go to hell (consisting of blinding darkness), the inevitable fate of one identifying oneself |

with the body." (22) Pondering thus, Karmsa, though powerful himself, ceased from that

darkest design (of killing Devaki) and kept awaiting the birth of Sri Hari, cherishing a feeling —

of enmity for Him. (23) Thinking of Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the senses) while sitting, lying 
down, standing, taking his food and walking on earth, he saw the world full of Him. (24)

Se WaT aA AMisaeiat: 12a: aet: ar wWfideoteaz 24 
Wad wart fai wae am Fea a adi 
Aaa AMMA ITEC GC RT TT: 1 REI 
Una sat fanaa sca: ussifae: GST | 
auetsiaett «= aaat aaresct Sig =O Tfeagqat: 1291 
aie wae wd: seed aaa wana 
ama Uqdddeea waa amt a faust 1221 
fait soa «Se ATR ATER I 
aaa 86 ateae «=| aarti We: | - GSM 128 | 
aa anhaeaaeata Sarfrarssa fra | 
aed Wee ii He = WaTfENL I R01 
wat wat weet gay vai ASwaeel: | 
Vaderaleearaaa a fren aTdt: AeqAel WaT 1321 
aSAstleraar enna MATa Sa: | 
aed eT UL Ue: UrreSATgUaSETA: 1321 
qa Aq Wea Aaa: wae wear umbaiy agate: | 
erat faatra fastar fattening sit 1331 
we fs sad var feet wit seasoat ay: | 
terete rer ere eat ere a STA: Uuted 13¥1 
we 4 ware fet wae feamafrertae t 
Woenaaataa Vas Wed aq a a ar TUT: 1341 
4 AMed Wrredfiiataat aa ay arferot:

7 Y 2 
Dis. 2 Janteneannenennteessennenonnns SOOK TEN

guest pnnsessneshensesetetetesneness tierersisnseeey gis ee 
Teasers} 
oa, ime ee ea fererat Sitar «= fH 1361 
TH Aes fara, anh ‘ai a neon 31 
fis: arate 3 Vay = Head-1 391 
eat Wee: Uet gat arttserftreta PAAR: |

: Adadt: | 
4 Ue ARayat a ane ot aa et dent at A Ivol 
fagarat at alam: uz: WarR Wate War Wa a: | 
, TS wa aeuedyiiie agai aaa | caret: 1x8 |

Going thither, with sages headed by Narada and gods accompanied by their attendants 
(such as Gandharvas), Brahma and Siva (the Source of the universe), glorified (in the 
following words) Lord Visnu (who showers all desired boons). (25) "We seek as our shelter 
You of true resolve, existing in the past, present and future (i.e., before, during and after 
creation), the (ultimate) Source of earth, water and fire (collectively referred to in the Vedic 
literature by the term 'Sat'), as well as of air and ether (collectively known as Tyat*) and 
dwelling in the aforesaid (five) elements (called by the name of 'Satyam’), as the Reality 
underlying them (all), the Prompter of truthful speech as well as of undifferentiating vision, 
and consisting of truth, which is (at the same time) the highest means of attaining You. (26) 
This beginningless tree of creation indeed has one ground (in the shape of Prakrti or 
Primordial Matter),a couple of fruits (in the form of pleasure and pain), three roots (inthe form 
of the three modes of Prakrti viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), four kinds of sap (in the form 
of the four objects of human pursuit, viz., religious merit, earthly possessions, Sensuous 
pleasure and final Beatitude), five media of perception (in the form of the five senses of 
perception), six states (viz., birth, existence, growth, ripeness, decay and destruction or six 
forms of anguish, viz., hunger and thirst, grief and infatuation, old age and death), seven 
layers of barks (in the form of the seven constituents of a body, viz., chyle, blood, flesh, fat, 
bone, marrow and semen), eight boughs (in the shape of the five elements—viz., earth, 
water, fire, air and ether—mind, reason and ego) and nine hollows (in the form of the nine 
apertures of the body, viz., the two sockets of eyes, the two cavities of ears, the two nostrils, 
the mouth and the organs of urination and defecation) and a pairof birds (viz., the individual 
soul and the Inner Controller inhabiting it) and is endowed with ten leaves (in the form of the 
ten vital airs, viz., Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana, Samana, Naga, Kurma, Krkala, Devadatta 
and Dhanani a) (27) You alone are the Cause of the aforesaid tree in the form of the 
phiehomandl uate e: Youare its resting-place and youare its preserver (too). Those whose 
wisdom i are Seitr Maya (deluding potency) look upon You as many, (but) not so 
fcc a . ceca 08) Being the Spirit, which is consciousness itself, You repeatedly

e mobile and the immobile creation forms constituted 
Se sroveal) olin weled ey which bring delight to the righteous and are

Re (unmixed wit ees Soto (29) With their mind fixed through concentration 
O lotus-eyed Lord, the select few (those endowed

Narmful (brin ion) to the W 
g destruction) 
©n You, the embodiment of pure Sativa,

"The Sruti text says— ae, Aeafraraae

+h intalligence) cross the ocean of mundane existence like the foot-print of a calf with th 
eh Den veecel in the form of Your feet, made available (shown) by the exalted. (30) Having 
themselves duly crossed the terrible ocean of metempsychosis, (So) very difficult to Cross, 
O self-effulgent Lord, and leaving behind the bark of Your lotus-feet (setting an example of 
their devotion) here (on this side of the ocean) the aforesaid (wise men), full of unboundeg 
compassion (for the afflicted), have reached the other shore (without any exertion), gracious 
as You are to the righteous. (31) Others (those treading the path of Knowledge unmixed with 
Devotion), who regard themselves as liberated, O lotus-eyed One, and whose mind is not 
very pure due to lack of devotion to You and because they have failed to adore Your feet, 
fall down from their position even on attaining with (great) difficulty a high state (in the form 
of noble birth, learning and asceticism, so favourable to Liberation.) (82) Those devotees of 
Yours, who have fastened their (deep) affection on You, O Spouse of Laksmi, do not, under 
any circumstance, stray in that way from the path (of Devotion). Protected on all sides by 
You and therefore rid of all fear (on the other hand), O Lord, they move about freely, setting 
their foot on the heads of the commanders of gods presiding over obstacles. (33) For the 
continuance of the world You assume (reveal) a form—consisting of pure Sattva and 
dispensing the fruit of actions of embodied beings—through the medium of which people 
(belonging to the four ASramas or stages of life) offer worship to You (severally) through (a 
study of) the Vedas, the practice of rituals, asceticism and concentration of mind. (34) Had 
this (divine) personality of Yours, consisting of Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas) not 
been manifest, O Maker of the universe, saving knowledge, which wipes out ignorance and 
the (resulting) notion of diversity (and which follows from the worship of Your personality) 
would not have been possible (at all). (If it is urged that the existence of Brahma would still 
be concluded from the light shed by the intellect and other faculties which, being material, 
possess only reflected light, our reply is that) You are only inferred (but not directly 
perceived), through the light shed by material organs, as one in relation to whom and 
presided over by whom the material organs shed their light. (Through Your worship however, 
the mind gets attuned with You and Your truth is realized by Your grace). (35) O self-effulgent 
Lord, who are the withess of the mind etc., and the means of whose realization can (only) 
be guessed, Your names and forms, associated with Your excellences, births and deeds, 
can neither be conceived with the mind nor extolled in words. Nevertheless, as is well-known, 
those engaged in the act of Your worship do recite Your names and perceive Your forms. 
(36) Hearing and reciting, contemplating on and helping others remember Your auspicious 
names and forms, he whose mind is fixed on Your lotus-feet (even) when he is engaged in 
activities (of various kinds) no longer deserves to be reborn. (37) Happily, O Hari, the burden 
ne a which represents Your feet, has been removed by Your (very) descent. Luckily 
ugh), we shall perceive the earth and heavenadorned with Your lovely footprints bearing 
auspicious marks and (thus) favoured by You, its (supreme) Ruler. (38) O Lord, that 
eas Sleek ee fay (all) lear, Wwe conceive no ground for Your descent other than 
Gp E soulahronr, as YOu are; for birth, life and death are attributed (even) to ue 
ss eee ug Eee about You. (39) O Lord, relieve the burden of the ear 
times), having ee om e Nae Protected us as well as (all) the three worlds (at one 
boar, swan Ksatriya na Sri eee Seale noise (ord mevegiva), LOMLOISe: mane 
divine Dwarf) Hail to you ae Gane eo ee qe) ane aoe id) 
fortunately 5 ae ee | ewel among the Yadus! (40) (Addressing Devaki, they $2! 7 
womb algnenit (all) Hi oi td Lord, the Supreme Person has Himself entered vr |

welfare: Letthaces S (divine) potencies (constituting:so many parts of His being) foro

© De no more fear of Karhsa (the chief of the Bhojas), who is courting his ow

Dis. 3 ] BOOK TEN 109

death (by persecuting you and your husband); (for) your (prospective) son will prove to be 
the Protector of the Yadus." (41)

Saq

sarga Gee 6 ae ait qiera ae: sftaafgetixet 
Set APTA TAT ASN TRA Seca SASHA TTA steMespereU Ay faMaSeATA: 12 | 
Sri Suka went on: Having thus glorified the Supreme Person, whose essence is, really

speaking, other than (different from) this visible universe, and placing Brahma and Siva at 
their heads, the gods returned to heaven. (42)

Thus ends the second discourse entitled "Eulogy of Lord Visnu in Devaki's womb addressed 
by Brahma and others", in Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BY Taeaseara:

Discourse Ill

Advent of Lord Sri Krsna

yh Sara 
IM Aaya: sles: AAR: | Aganseraal ardetedehy | 2 | 
feat: waaitt frdergroitea At AgFeyeseaaaiha | 2 | 
7d: wenafeer gal woes: | fenieqedtertsct anna: | 3 | 
aal ag: qaenl: quer: Ufa: isaas fendat weed are! x | 
Tara. «TAS PETAR Sess afer AgeeHat fafa & | 
sy: ffercreatgpa: fageron: | farereciy Tyger: «a aay! & | 
qaqa tat: Gaaifa diad:iad Aa TGA WRAP | 9 | 
feta at sed wea wWadt caqat caeftvat fae: actyerera: | 
stferrdte aa sre fexitreha ysne: 1 ¢ | 
srs i ht with all blessings, when 
Sri Suka resumed : Nowcame the most delightful hour, fraug : | 
Precisely the asterisk Rohini (presided over by Brahma, son of the birthless Lord Visnu) was 
at the ascendant and when (the rest of) the asterisks, planets and (other) stars bore a gentle 
aspect. (1) The quarters became clear (of clouds as though It were autumn, although the 
rainy season had not yet ended); while the firmament was marked with the presence of 
multitudes of stars shining unobscured. The earth was seen with Its towns, villages, SEU 
of cowherds and mines full of festivities. (2) The rivers flowed in a limpid stream; ponds 
bloomed with lotuses; rows of forest-trees laden with bunches of flowers rang with the sweet 
Noise of birds and swarms of bees. (3) A hallowed breeze (coming as it did from the direction

z delightful to the touch; the sacred 
Of the h 4) and wafting a sweet fragrance, blew Attu ; 
fires of a peer (that had been extinguished due to Karnsa's persecution) burst into

RELA AKASLALK LNA HK KK LAALH ARATE teers 
flames (automatically) on the occasion. (4) The minds of the righteous became chee r

Y

oppressed as they had been by the demons. When that birthless Lord was about to be bom |

kettledrums sounded (of themselves) in heaven. (5) At that time Kinnaras and Gandharva

sang,Siddhas andi€aranas uttered praises and Vidyadhara women danced with Celestia)

nymphs. (6) Full of joy, sages and gods showered flowers and clouds gently rumbled after 
the manner of the (roaring) ocean. (7) When midnight enveloped in (thick) darkness Came 
and when people's prayer (for His descent) began, Lord Visnu, the Indweller of all hearts, 
manifested Himself in His entirety through Devaki—who possessed a form similar to that of 
a goddess (being an incarnation of Aditi, the mother of the gods)—even as the full moon 
would appear in the eastern horizon. (8)

ei Teargaat agdst weeds

fase asa darat arsaaleaterm ¢ |

Hgledea en tleHhusentcaat URGMaeAp ay |

SMH ASeHsuieaaerart aqea Ua 10

a facets et qi factenageireaci t

saaeieaa «ee tg: «= eteit: «= actafos:

Sita ana | ateerye «fatter «So taeit: «= surrafacl_ie2t

Vasudeva beheld that extraordinary boy with lotus-like eyes, endowed with four arms

wielding uplifted weapons (and other emblems) such as a conch, a mace and a discus; 
bearing on his bosom the mark of Srivatsa (a golden curl of hair characteristic of Lord Visnu); 
clad in yellow (silk); possessing the charm of acloud laden with moisture, with the Kaustubha 
gem shining at His neck and His profuse locks bathed in the splendour of His diadem and 
ear-rings studded with precious cat's-eyes, and highly resplendent with an exquisite girdle, 
armlets and bangles etc. (9-10) Plunged in joy to behold Sri Hari as his (own) son and with 
his eyes wide open through wonder (at the appearance of the all-pervading Lord through the 
womb of his wife, Devaki, even though he was bound inwardly with the shackles of ignorance 
and outwardly by the fetters of Karnsa), Vasudeva mentally gave away on that (auspicious) 
occasion ten thousand cows to Brahmanas in his hurry to celebrate the descent of Sri Krsna 
(Lord Visnu). (11) Concluding the boy, (who was) illuminating the lying-in-chamber with His 
(Own) splendour, to be (no other than) Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), O scion of Bharata, 
Vasudeva, who was aware of the Lord's greatness and whose fear was (completely) goné: 
now proceeded to glorify Him with a guileless mind and joined palms, his body bent low (wit

humility). (12) 
AGeT SATE 
ferfettsfe Mery Bra Tee: Sepa: | SaeMarre: «| weghagR 1e2 
AW Bape GE Erpeeniae a aslas: sie ga wera iv! 
agastagnat Wada a fagd: We lamiatat: gers faust aaafa fe gu! 
aeat HAE IST «ga sre «faerie aE: 126! 
WM Aa qeatacatiatenht: waft qeqTONEAE: | 
sriqta Set 3 & ade wale aneaqa: i201 
7 smertt Gerysty ata ore wonfttaniisgar: |

STAT ea fee STAT Prefer AA: 1221 
at Se TT At ye aaatetraeiia, Gta 
a oo dsaet gpa: aif TATITAATATAASTAT: 1221 
Vasudeva prayed : You have been directly known (by me) to be (the same as) the 
Supreme Person, existing beyond Prakrti (the material plane), nay, consisting of absolute 
and conscious bliss, the witness of all minds. (13) Having evolved even as such (consisting 
of truth, consciousness and bliss) at the beginning (of creation) this (universe), consisting of 
the three Gunas, by Your (own), creative energy, You are conceived as having enteredit after 
that, even though as a matter of fact You have not entered it. (14) (Just) as these elementary 
principles, (viz., the Mahat-tattva, Ahankara and the five Tanmatras) appear to have entered 
their evolutes (even though they do not really enter it), so is the case with You (who appear 
to have entered the womb of Devaki even though You have not actually entered it). 
Combining (under the direction of the Spirit) with their (sixteen) evolutes (viz., the five gross 
elements and the ten Indriyas and the mind), the former actually bring forth the cosmic egg, 
though possessing diverse properties and existing apart (from one another); and, having 
duly evolved it, they appear as having entered it (even though they do not really do so). Their 
entry into it is not possible due to their being already present in it (as its causes). (15-16) In 
this way You are imagined as having entered Devaki's womb, though not having actually 
entered it. Though existing (as their cause) with the objects perceptible by the senses (whose 
true nature can only be inferred through the perception of sense-objects), You are not 
apprehended alongwith those sense-objects; (for) the distinction of inside and outside does 
not exist in You, that comprise and indwell all, are all-pervading and real—because of Your 
being unlimited. (How, then, can it be possible for You to enter anything?) (17) He who 
concludes with regard to material objects perceptible by him that they are real as distinct trom 
their (own) self is ignorant. And since, when investigated into, such an object does not prove 
to be anything but a (mere) display of words, a man acknowledging what has been disproved 
IS (certainly) a fool. (18) The wise declare the appearance, the continuance and the 
destruction of this (universe), O Lord, (as proceeding) from You, who are desireless, beyond 
the (th ree) Gunas and changeless. This is notincompatible in You, who are (atonce) Brahma 
(the Absolu fey d the (almighty) Lord. (As a matter of fact,) whatever is done by the Gunas 
is ascribed to You because of Your being their ultimate ground. (19) As such (consisting of 
truth, consciousness and bliss), of course, You assume (reveal) by Your creative will Your 
Pure (white) complexion (Visnu form consisting of Sattva) for the continuance of the three 
worlds, Your red complexion (Brahma form), endowed with the principle of Rajas, for their 
Creation, and a dark complexion (Rudra form), evolved by (the principle of) Tamas for their 
destruction. (20) Intending to protect this universe, O Lord, the Ruler of all, You have 
descended in my house. You will (in course of time) extirpate (for the protection of the 
lighteous) armies led by numberless Asura chiefs passing ‘eins ede of Ksatriya 
Princes. (21) Hearing of (anticipating) Your birth in our house, this villain (of a Karmsa) actually

killed Your elder brothers, O Ruler of the gods ! Learning of Your advent as soon as jt is 
intimated by his men, he will rush in this very moment with uplifted weapons. (22)

Hye SAA 
aT «Ae ARTONHHATOTL| Stent AAMTET ee HATS, ATA FTAA 1 RR | 
$17 Suka went on : Perceiving her aforesaid son endowed with the characteristics of 
Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), Devaki, who was (hitherto) afraid of Kamsa, nowboreg | 
bright smile (on her countenance) and glorified Him. (23) |

CaeyaTa

SG a a Meena sa sifatdor fier

aaa faa file a aA arene fama: iri

72 om feiaat aeryagfeq@ awdg

Snsehn aieatd aa Ware: fread aweda: 1241

asad em wera asrnesed a fag

Wat qaenedld: wea sed Palade Areas! |

adit Wa desde we: Wa Farenedfa irl

a a Weeaeseme aa yelaoaela |

ea de ued emf om saat areas apts: 121 
wa a weet uret ar frernyget | ayfest 9 vee: «| sheTaenefieeht: 129 
smde 4 fameraet «Ss wonelfeediagemnemie ws aaysriizol

faa ata watt feared amanmt ges: at war

fant dist wa minsyset yotwer fase fe aqi3el

Devaki prayed : You are Lord Visnu Himself, the Illuminator of (all) psycho-physical 
organisms, the indefinable Reality, which the Vedas declare as the unmanifest cause 
consisting of (mere) consciousness, transcending the three Gunas, absolute existence, 
unqualified and devoid of activity. (24) When at the end of two Parardhas (constituting the 
lifetime of Brahma) the universe (consisting of seven higher and seven lower worlds) 's 
dissolved (into its constituent elements), by force of Time the (five) gross elements are 
ultimately merged ( alongwith the ten Indriyas and the mind including the deities presiding 
over them) in Ahankara (their cause), (Ahankara is merged in the Mahat-tattva), the Mahat- 
tattva in the Unmanifest (and the Unmanifest in Yourself), You alone are left and (therefore) 
called by the name of Sesa (lit., the residue). (25) The wise declare as a potency of Yours 
the aforesaid Time, which extends (in point of duration) from the twinkling of an eye toa yeal 
and is infinite in extent, and under whose impulse the universe proceeds on in its cycli¢ 
course, O Director of the Unmanifest! | fly (for protection) to You as such, the Ruler (of Tim? 
as well as of Prakrti), the Abode of security. (26) Afraid of the serpent of death and running [ 
about all the worlds (in quest of a quarter free from the fear of death), a mortal is not able!0 | 
attain a place void of fear. Having by an indescribable stroke of good luck (however) reache? | 
Your lotus-feet, he rests in peace, O Primeval Being; for (even) death turns away from 
him.(27) As such (kindly) protect You us (Your devotees), afraid of the terrible Karnsa (the 
son of Ugrasena); (for) You are the dispeller of the grave fears of Your servants. And (pray/: 
do not reveal to the ignorant (whose eyes are directed to the flesh) this divine form, the objet

| 
|

of meditation (for the seekers of liberation 
through me, O slayer of the demon Madhu 
(feel) much agitated at heart. (29) With 
transcendent form adorned with the splend 
It is a truism that You, the Supreme Per 
dissolution) in Your Body this (vast) univer 
should have entered my womb, Oh that i

). (28) Let not that wicked one know of Your birth 
!l am terribly afraid, for Your sake, of Kamsa and 
draw,O Soul of the universe, this four-armed 
our of aconch, a discus, a mace anda lotus. (30) 
son, hold at the end of the cosmic night (final 
Se with enough space about it. That You as such 
S Surely an imitation of human ways. (31)

adarardatenedcnrenqunray | Went ARAN 13x | 
efroteront reer rere Sta 1AM: saved AeRtedted: 1341 
Wa at Wades aa: omer feratacentr gestae: 1361 
vat at ORGBIsENAT «| agua | aaa stan fret wae a ae ofa: 1301 
Migtat Rete Yaa: cHMfea fradt ax sae Wea al qa: Ua: 1321 
spprataraaeat «=89t | oat aatisunt @ difedl aA Aaa ise 
Ta ala gal otal at AME AAI ara ANTAYSNA Fat sTAAAIAt Ivo 
Sepa wih stele: amis gat ana yer sia aa: xe 
qaat 48 GRaeafamre aeaadists sf faendt amaare am: 1x21 
dds wasd a dda aQTIA amis yaaa ad A aed afa ix3! 
We at aad ea sme Alaa Asa FA Adiiesa sad Ixx 
gat at aaa weal aed! feat Hae aes vat aT Is4!

The Lord replied : In a previous life (the third incarnation preceding the present one), 
in course of the Swayambhuva Manvantara you alone, O good lady, were Prsni. In that life 
he (your husband) was a sinless Prajapati, Sutapa by name. (32) When indeed you two were 
commanded by Brahma to beget progeny, thereupon you both practised most rigid 
austerities, fully controlling your Senses. (33) Enduring one after another the peculiarities of 
the (various) seasons in the form of rain, storm, sunshine, snow and heat, nay, subsisting 
(now) on withered leaves and (now) on air alone and with the impurities of your mind wiped 
out through breath-control, you performed My worship with a calm mind, seeking the objects 
of your desire from Me. (34-35) While you with your mind fixed on Me, were both thus 
Practising severe austerities, most difficult to practise, O good lady, twelve thousand celestial 
years rolled by. (36) Constantly contemplated upon in the heart with reverence and devotion 
coupled with asceticism, and highly pleased with you both, O sinless one, I, the foremost of 
(all) bestowers of boons, appeared on that occasion in this (very) form with the desire of 
Conferring (on you) the blessings sought by you both. When the words, "Ask any boon of your 
Choice" were uttered (by Me), a son like Me was asked for by you. (37-38) Having not (yet)

lasted the pleasures of sense and not blessed with any issue, you, husband and wife, did

; by My Maya. (89) Having

Not ask (t f) final beatitude of Me, infatuated as you were “ 
ascarid the Nesnsatean of (getting) a son like Me and having (thus) realized your ambition, 
uous pleasures. (40) Not finding anyone else

ou enioy the sens iy 
yot' proceeded when | had|eft, to ene nimity and other qualities, | (Myself) was born

inthe ikei iable disposition, magnanimmty 3, 1 
Bs ieee aes rene by the name of Prsnigarbha (son of Prsni). (41) Once more

——o =s —_ =e our ee

| 
|

as a son of you both as aforesaid, | was born of Aditi (an incarnation of Prsni) through the sage 
Kasyapa (an incarnation of Sutapa) and came to be known as Upendra (Indra's younger 
brother) and (also) as Vamana because of My dwart-like form. (42) Indeed in this thirg 
incarnation of you both as such, | am again born at this moment in the same (four-armed) form 
(as was revealed to you before); (for) My word is (always) true, O good lady ! (43) This 
(four-armed) form has been revealed to you (again) for reminding you of My previous 
descents; (for) knowledge of My identity is not had otherwise through a mortal sem-blance. 
(Now of course | will assume the form of a human babe as desired by you). (44) Constantly 
thinking of Me as ason and (also) as Brahma (the all-pervading Lord), and having bestowed 
(your) love on Me, you both will attain the highest state of union with Me (in the form of co- 
residence with Me in My divine Abode). (45)

Sp SAI 
SHSISSHIGRE «9 ATaATeTATaaT | feat: Gea: GEN AIYet Mapa: TA: ise 
wags aaeinaceaied: Ut Be A Paawryjerd 
aq oSfetaitae «6c OT aT aaa Ix 
OEE DCCC ME) Ce UC De 
axa «| aal: «fife ees GeHTTIETMnteEge:: Isc! 
wT: Mae aged aNd wa Sada at aa Ta: | 
aad wig sania: aesame aft franaq wut: xe 
Tat 8 86aitee 860 IIATaesTal ftir | 
Witahladadipet Act ari eat faefta fa: a: 1401

Tot whet wa aM Wo saaIesa fsa

Gt ate Pee ae | eT G8 | 
qqem: Bat Aa agqeaisa aki sage uadleleard ddaelad: 1421 
wie Adel A wd wMAgeadia dees after fanaa: 1431

sft Sead FEM wRAee Seat caren Gale Hosa glasses: 131

Sri Suka continued : Having thus spoken, Lord Sri Hari, became silent and instantly 
assumed the form of an ordinary child by His own free will, His parents gazing (with 
wonder).(46) Thereupon as the aforesaid Vasudeva (the son of Sara, who suddenly found 
his fetters loosened) felf inclined to step out of the lying-in-chamber, taking his son securely 
(in a winnowing basket covered with soft linen), as urged by the Lord, that (very) moment 
Yogamaya, who is nick-named Aja (birthless), was born through the wife of Nanda (at 
Gokula). (47) Now the gate-keepers having been deprived (for the time being) of all their 
cognitive faculties and the citizens too having been sent to sleep by Her (Yogamaya), all the 
gates (of the palace), even though they had been closed by means of huge doors as well aS 
with steel bolts and chains, and were (thus) hard to penetrate, flew open by themselves the 
moment Vasudeva arrived (near) carrying Lord Sr#Krsna (on his head), (even) as darkness 
would disperse with the appearance of the sun. (At that time) clouds rained witha gentle 
rumbling; while Sesa followed (at the heels of Vasudeva), warding off the rain by means of 
his (thousand) hoods (spread as an umbrella over His head). (48-49) While Indra (the rain- 
god) was pouring showers frequently (in order to avert the popular gaze and allowing @

Thus ends the third discourse, bearing on the Advent of Sri Krsna, in the first 
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ot Pct fF cet fs 
lo a pais “et Pate, —ta——

BIA Ata Sear:

Discourse IV

Slipping from the grip of Kamsa, Yogamaya ascends 
to the heavens and utters a prophecy 
Hy FAA

Slated: Wg: Wal: Yddelgd: | deat Aeteatt scar Feuten: AAfcerat: 1 gt

qq q“iquaa daar mind aqiarmeMisuna adem: ude

a dead quiqena aretsafta fage: | adiyeamg «qui weaery qwmyeisi:1 31

We wat edt Ha Hew Ud i ea aa mea feat a aquelaixi

seat féfear wea: firsra: Wramlaa: icaar caltgea Ufa Weleda

Tae A gawn dma eda Wl aqdela Wart Baga AAT WAIe!

Sri Suka resumed : (Vasudeva having returned to the palace,) all the outer 
(main) gates as well as those of the gynaeceum were closed as before. Then, 
On hearing the cry of a babe, the guards of the palace got wide awake. (1) Hastily 
approaching Karnsa, they now reported to the ruler of the Bhojas of that (particular) 
childbirth (the birth of the eighth child) of Devaki, which he anxiously awaited. (2) 
Rising hurriedly from his bed and distressed to think that the baby was his 
death, he went in all haste to the lying-in-chamber with tottering steps and dishevelled 
Nair. (3) Wretched as she was, the shining and virtuous lady pathetically 
ee SE — — — eee

“ Vasudeva can be accused here of callousness by the unwary reader in removing his own son and deliberately 
“slivering the child of his friend, Nanda, to the hands of Death. But thoughtful readers would acquit him of this charge, knowing 
= they do that Vasudeva did all this under the express command of the Lord Himself, as is clear from verse 47 above.

r 
.

addressed her aforesaid cousin (as follows):—“She is (deserving of protection like) 
daughter-in-law to you, O blessed one; you ought not to kill a female child. (4) Many a 
babe, brilliant as fire, has been killed by you, impelled as you were by Providence, 9 
brother! This solitary and helpless girl may (kindly) be gifted to me. (5) Since | am 
undoubtedly your younger cousin, whose sons have been killed and who is therefore 
miserable, O lord, you ought to bestow on me, hapless as | am, this last Progeny

(of mine), O dear brother!” (6) 
Rye SAI

sagem «= ware | Anata | atacand faint gemtaihateag Ger: |e |

at What MUistaaat wag: Gar sMilwatescrgss «= FaTeMfayferereitea: 1c |

MW Wee FAI Hel Cerat wat | agvadrs fant: Asn! < |

PaeeaINUN Tea ea: fee: | SUledle atterts: WAAMAAAAT | 22 1

fe Wal Eda We Vid: Wel daldtehe | aA aa at Yara feat: HAV Far! 221

sft mama ct eet ae aTadt aa agaahady agar SYA IRR

Sri Suka went on: Thus entreated by Devaki—who wept like a most helpless 
woman, hugging her daughter—and, roughly rebuking her with vehemence, the wicked 
one snatched the baby from her hand. (7) Seizing by the feet his cousin’s daughter, 
who had just been born, Kamsa—whose affection (for his cousin) had been uprooted 
by self-interest—dashed her against the (hard) surface of a slab. (8) Flying off his 
hand, the younger sister of Sri Krsna instantly rose to the heavens and was seen 
in the form of a goddess with eight mighty arms equipped with weapons. (9) Adorned 
with ethereal wreaths, raiment, sandal-paste, and bejewelled ornaments, She wielded 
(severally) a bow, a pike, an arrow, a shield, a sword, a conch and a mace (in Her 
eight hands). (10) While being hymned by Siddhas, Caranas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, 
Kinnaras and Nagas, who offered various articles of worship (to Her), She uttered 
the following words:—(11) “What would you gain by My being slain, O foolish one; 
for your destroyer, (who is) your erstwhile adversary (too), has been born at some 
place or other. (Therefore) do not kill (other) helpless children in vain.” (12) Having

warned him thus, lo! the almighty Maya (disappeared and) stayed on earth as a deity 
under diverse appellations in shrines of different names. (13)*

carfifemrenvd ode: wnfaftad: | gaat aged a ferqer ufritsaciq! ev 
Het Ural WA Aa at ad Wert i yeu samet agat fee: Gat: 1 Y&l 
W ce Awmaevaamaitded Get: | aleve a Went aaa Ya: FATAL! 26 | 
cad ake 7 wat va Hac | afgsrsnee ur: Ca tedaosyrL! 9! 
WT Mile FEMME, WHS: | wdt A aaa Sareftarerarssaal v< | 
ala dnt yor aan aeceht ai area adtag faci ala 129! 
aarataet et wa snefeada:i eam a daft fradadi 0! 
Teg UX Waa, wer sarnfsarafe i aayita aa: wd: yard Reqasagr: 128! 
AAS Sa AAASaeh | Madea — Areererenarfaret 22!

* Vide II. 11-12 above.

|

De eestznseresvestsentessnasiea eee eee ane 
qed wm eee are Serato: | BRATS: Ure ares: ANTENA 12 | 
rear Piste faster: aaa itaat ag a astra ivi 
Wd: WI area We a tastier aay yee aarRT Z1241 
Tanataart = aat Caaf | afar aigaardet: wauthr fer aa: 1261 
Message waa ata: | fet wat 4 agatha arauta gereat: 1201

Highly amazed to hear the words uttered by Her and having completely liberated Devaki 
and Vasudeva, Kamsa spoke with humility (as follows):—(14) "Oh ! cousin ! Oh ! brother-in- 
law, alas, many a son of yours has been killed by me, a sinner (as | am), (even) as an ogre 
may kill his (own) progeny. (15) Having forsworn compassion and disowned my kinsmen and 
(other) relatives indeed, and (virtually) dead, though breathing, to what (infernal) regions 
shall | actually descend like a slayer of Brahmanas, a notorious wretch as | am ? (16) Not 
only mortals but gods as well utter falsehood, putting faith in whom I, a sinner, killed my 
cousin's babes ! (17) (Pray,) do not lament your sons, who only reaped what they had sown 
(in their previous existence), O highly blessed souls ! Living beings do not, as a rule, live for 
ever, or at one place (even) so long as they live, being under the control of destiny. (18) As 
earthen pots come and go (appear and disappear) on the earth, so do bodies (of living 
beings) in the Self. And even as the earth undergoes no change consequent on the earthly 
beings undergoing transformation, so the Self (too) does not changé consequent on the 
bodies undergoing changes (in the form of birth, death and so on). (19) Inhim whois not really 
cognizant of this fact arises misapprehension regarding the self (in the form of self- 
identification with the body, which Is other than the self), from which proceeds the notion of 
difference (between the self and the not-self). Thence come about the union with and 
separation from other bodies (viz., those of his sons and other near and dear ones) and (the 
result is that) transmigration (and the resultant harvest of joys and sorrows) does not cease 
(in his case so long as his aforesaid misapprehension does not disappear. (20) Therefore 
(although in truth neither they were your sons nor did | kill them), O blessed lady, do not 
sorrow for your sons, though slain by me; for everyone helplessly reaps the fruit of one’s own 
(past) actions. (21) The fool who does not cognize his (true) self and identifies himself with 
a (material) body assumes the role of a victim or agent of persecution (only) so long as he 
feels that 'l am slain or | am the slayer.’ (22) (Pray), forgive you both my wickedness; for pious 
souls (like you) are (as a rule) fond of the afflicted." Saying so, and with his face wet with tears, 
Kamsa (the brother-in-law of Vasudeva) forthwith clasped the feet of his cousin and her 
husband. (23) Reassured by the utterance of the (divine) girl, he rid Devaki and Vasudeva 
of (their) chains, exhibiting his affection (for them). (24) Having vouchsafed her forgiveness 
fo the cousin, who was fully repentant, Devaki gave up her anger as well; while Vasudeva 
laughingly spoke to him as follows:—(25) "It is precisely as you say, O highly blessed one!

he feeling in embodied beings that ‘I am this body etc., from which proceeds the distinction 
that 'this is mine’ and ‘that is not mine’, has its origin in ignorance. (26) Full of grief, delight, 
fear, hatred, greed, infatuation and pride, those possessed of a differentiating eye, do not 
Perceive God (manifested as the Time-Spirit) destroying beings through the agency of 
(ther) beings by recourse to mutual strife." (27) 
STP Sara

Se wd veanat faye sfreniia: | canterqeararrgetsiate = YEARS 
Tea Wat adie Ha sea AhAu: | ea 3aS ad Aa Ae Arise 1281 
Siepuet adutad aqgtaaaa: | 2am, aft qaraat seer aAtferentierer: 130]

x

&+7 Suka continued : Thus addressed in a guileless manner by Devaki and Vasudeva 
who felt (quite) appeased, and permitted by them, Kamsa withdrew to his palace. (28) That 
night having passed, Kamsa summoned his counsellors and told them all that which Was 
intimated by Yogamaya (representing the trance-sleep of Lord Visnu). (29) Hearing the 
words of their master, the demons (lit., the progeny of Diti), the (sworn) enemies of the gods 
who were resentful towards the gods and were not very clever—said:—(30)

w aa dee Geena) ata dais ehremiisa 4 fra 13g

feqaa: aftefa 2a: wavika: | Peaferaret TATANAATTAT 132 |

eae 40 SRAMSSIM: «= «sd: I sitfasa Se TAT A: 133 |

Shar Seat SAT =etgnat featena: | yrnenesferen: chia ste: Sr ght aries: 13% 1

a @ faaeereran fexar, sada! CaaS AAA: 1341

fi angitaiananen: | tater fee efton wayat at adler |

| fafrsuneaataur Ago Al ATSTAT 136 1

ami eal: auacwame sa Ateiddedeat ffasearMyqad i301 
aussmitss wqifit gfiei waat -wauelsfahery 
airs «= Safad «| Re get ST 131

qe fe fawdant aa ad: aaa: | del a wal Masel Gal: Galan: 13°!

AA, AAA US, ATRIUM, AelaTer: | AURA Ueto, TM TA Bladen: 1xot

fat mas aay aa: wel aa: aH: 1 seat an fafaan a maa Bterq: 1X21

a fe adqueaat gates Gera: | agen tad: wal: Aaa: Gadde: |

ora & agelara aasiiont fateaaa 1s? |

‘fthatis so, O ruler of the Bhojas, then we shall presently kill without doubt (all) the babes 
of above and below ten days (dwelling) in towns, villages, cowherd-stations and other 
places.(31) What will the gods do (to us) with al heirendeavours, cowards as they are in battle 
and ever perturbed in mind at the twangs of your bowstring? (32) Being assailed on all sides 
pe the volleys of your arrows (even) as you discharged them, they took to their heels (in 
: past), anxious to escape with life, and made good their retreat, deserting the battle- 
ie d.(33) Having laid down their arms, some gods (lit., denizens of heaven) stood with their 
palms joined over their heads, reduced as they were to a miserable plight. Others, who 
appeared with the tufts of hair on their crown untied and with the back end of their loin-cloth 
remaining untucked to their loin (as a token of humility), exclaimed, "We are frightened (an 
ri mercy!)" (34) You, however, never strike those (of your enemies) who havé 
We en to take their missiles and (other) weapons, have lost their chariots, are overtaken 
wis ee intent on something else, have turned their back on the battle-field, or wn0S¢ 
rie ee broken or who are disinclined to fight. (35) What (harm) could be wrought by 
ne o ore a (only) ina Safe retreat and boastful in places other than the battle-field’ 
eee € done by Hari, living in seclusion (in the heart of all) or by Siva, dwelling !" 
oods‘ (And) what could be achieved by Indra of poor strength or by Brahma (engaged iC 
practising austerities ? (36) Yet we think that the gods do not deserve tobe ignored becaus? 
of their hostile attitude (towards us). Therefore, command us, your obedient servants, ' 
destroy Visnu (disguised as an infant and forming their very mainstay). (37) (Even) a§ g

ee ee es ee ee Oe

|

i

nd

ws

pis. 4] | BOOK TEN’ | 
oe 8 SRR ASRS RCSA AEE R TRC ORR REO EER EESESESSSSAS EES 
malady appearing in the body and completely ignored (in its initia} stages) by men cannc: 
»e remedied once it has struck deep roots, or as the senses cannot be controlled # 
neglected (and allowed to have their own way), so the enemy cannot be dislodged once 
his strength gets consolidated and he grows mighty. (38) Indeed Visnu is the root (chief 
support) of the gods and he stays where the eternal (Vedic) Religion prevails. Again, 
Veda, the cow, the Brahmana, asceticism and the (institution of) sacrifices accompanied 
by (liberal) sacrificial fees constitute the roots of the latter. (39) Therefore, O king, we 
shall by all means kill Brahmanas who are expositors of the Vedas, ascetics and those 
given to sacrificial performances as well as cows that yield materials (such as milk and 
clarified butter) worthy of being offered as oblation into the sacrificial fire (inasmuch as 
they are all instrumental in manifesting Visnu). (40) Brahmanas, cows and the Vedas, 
asceticism, truthfulness, control of the senses and the mind, reverence, compassion 
and endurance as well as sacrificial performances constitute (so many) embodiments of 
Si Hari. (41) He is unquestionably the ruler of all the gods, a (sworn) enemy of the 
demons and indeed the indweller of (all) hearts. All the gods including Siva and Brahma 
(the four-faced creator) have their origin in Him. Hence to extirpate the Rsis—this 
constitutes the (most effective) means of killing Visnu. (42) 
: MYyh FAA

wa gdfaf: ha: de aaa aia: 1 aalfeat fed AA aAreargiadisat: 1x3

arava Ueto hat cHadiwar | waaay feat aaar Jeatlasrd vv

a a WW: Whaat yeaa: | dar fagunreemntertagera: | ¥4 |

amg: fer agit at cari va ai era safe waiter Gat AeaidHa: ie 1

sft Stead Ag URAeS Ged qwAeHe Yates agaiseara: i x il

Sri Suka proceeded further: Having thus fully deliberated with his wicked 
advisers, the evil-minded demon, Kamsa, thought the massacre of Brahmanas as 
conducive to his good, enmeshed as he was by the snare of Death. (43) Commanding 
the demons—who were fond of persecuting others and could assume any form they 
liked—to oppress the righteous in all quarters, Karnsa retired into the palace. (44) The 
demons, whose disposition was predominantly Rajasika (turbulent) and whose understanding 
Was clouded with Tamoguna (obtuseness), and whose death was near, acted inimically 
towards the virtuous. (45) An outrage done to an exalted soul brings to an end a man’s 
life, fortune, glory, religious merit, his title to the higher worlds as well as his desired

objects, nay, all blessings. (46)

Thus ends the fourth discourse in the first half of Book Ten of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 
SSISRSROR ASS

J Re Pe We Re Ke Ke Ke He [ IS

SIT USyaseaa:

Discourse V

Festivities connected with the Birth of Lord Sri Krsna at Gokula 
Rye SATA

TEI «SCHR Feta: | ates fast, Aag SMa: rete: |e

aah Si wiaeniesre alana faftad fqdeardt aes 2 |

SIA SASS «| ATT | Beat A: Gas ReTTVarassefaerat | x

aimeraha fast: 9 aaameafer: imei sigtal geval Gel 4 |

Sri Suka resumed : Calling in Brahmanas, well-versed in the art of fortune-telling and 
having made them repeat benedictory hymns, the high-souled Nanda, on the other hand, 
who was rejoiced at the thought of a son having been born to him (in his ripe old age), and 
who had just bathed and attained purity (thereby) and was (duly) adorned, had the 
Jatakarma* ceremony actually performed with respect to the Babe according to precept and 
(also) caused the manes and gods (in the form of Nandi-Sraddha and so on) to be 
worshipped. (1-2) He gave away to the Brahmanas two lakhs of newly calved and richly 
adorned cows as well as seven mountain-like piles of sesamum seedsf studded with a vast 
number of precious stones and covered with a piece of gold cloth.(3) Material substances 
get purified through passage of time, bath and washing, sacraments, asceticism, sacrificial 
performances, charitable gifts and contentment; while the soul is purified through Self- 
knowledge (alone). (4) Brahmanas as well as Sttas,} Magadhas and Vandis uttered 
benedictory words; songsters sang songs, while kettledrums and larger drums sounded 
again and again. (5)

Tai: Baysafamsnisierd: | fareastdinracaeaesadnat: =| & |

Trait aa «= @htaideratadt: | fafarendeateraacnresration: lot

LTT: AA Ue, AAareqarora: | ¢ | 
_ Vraja had its doorways, courtyards and interiors of houses well swept and duly sprinkled 
with water, and was decorated with flags and buntings of various colours as well as with 
arches made of wreaths, textiles and leaves. (6) Cows, bulls and grown up calves were 
daubed with oil mixed with termeric, painted with minerals of various colours and decked with 
peacock plumes, wreaths, cloth and gold necklaces. (7) Cowherds dressed in costly loin-

cloths, coats and turbans and adorned with valuable jewels flocked (in the house of Nanda); 
carrying presents of various kinds in their hands, O Pariksit ! (8)

ae 
z Thee ceremony consists in touching the tongue of a new-born male child thrice with ghee after appropriate pr ayers. 
t It is customary among the Hindus to give away heaps of sesamum seeds on the auspicious occasion of the birth of 2 
son. 
+These terms have been defined in the following couplet:— 
Ae: Ware: WrebI APT Aerie: | AeA: WeNaaeyra: II 
* Sutas are those who recite stories from the Puranas; Magadhas are no other than bards reciting the glories of ancestor 
of kings; while Vandis are those who make observations suited to particular occasions."

Dis. 2 sananeeunnnnntexesenesssnsssaensevamsuatskeeetthewaperseseecssnneuaeecetnecie 
Tage Yet Aen: Yale! Set Waspaalncasaara: |e | 
qapgrinach Taga ya: laeticakd sry: yusivasiecen: 1201

Tira: qyeattiqnsstenueatarea: uly Rrareaqaieaaan: | 
raed 8 AaeM saidticltaeaistepussualeneranar: 1221 
aT oT: SET uetit steal ehsreuidens: fase BAAS: 1221

Rejoiced to hear of the birth of a son to YaSoda, cowherd women too beautified their 
erson with clothes, ornaments, collyrium and so on. (9) The charm of their lotus face 
heightened by (decorations of ) fresh saffron paste, corresponding to the filaments of a lotus, 
they despite their bulky buttocks walked hurriedly with presents (in the shape of gold-rings, 
necklaces of Jewels, raiments, fruits and blades of panic grass etc.,) their breasts shaking

(on account of their rapid movement). (10) Adorned with well-polished bejewelled ear-rings

and a string of gold coins worn about their neck as well as with bangles, and clad in raiments

of various colours, the cowherd women shone brightly while proceeding to the palace of

Nanda, flowers fallen from their braids being strewn in a shower on the way, and looked

graceful with the ear-rings and the necklaces, hanging on their breasts, swinging about

rapidly. (11) Invoking (divine) blessings on the boy in the words "May You protect the babe 
for long (O Lord !)" and sprinkling the multitude with water mixed with turmeric powder and

oil, they sang in a high pitch. (12)

sata fafa afenftt veaadinet fatetsrd weet aad 1231

mo: Ut est efaeitqarafy: | snfaerd fafesodt aacider fafa: ext

Tel | WMA aeisesreMaa| Eaaarasat aset faenusitfaa: 1e41

qe: aldara aaitfaangsadi fasienala waureleaa ies

Viet aw aes wenafarenioarre fear: aavamuryied 120!

dd sma weal aa: adagsar! Rare Wimisayayy 1221

Now thatthe immortal Lord Sri Krsna, the Ruler of the universe, had come down to Vraja, 
musical instruments of various kinds were played upon on that occasion of great rejoicing.(13) 
Spraying with curds, milk, clarified butter and water and besmearing (the face of) one another 
with handfuls of fresh butter, the merry cowherds threw one another of the feet (in mirth). (14) ! 
For the purpose of propitiating Lord Visnu as well as for the welfare of his son, the high-souled i 
and liberal-minded Nanda conferred on them as well as on the Sutas, the Magadhas and the 4 
Vandis and others who lived by their art or science (such as musicians, physicians, 
astrologers, dancers and interpreters of omens) raiment, ornaments and cattle-wealth, and 
Suitably honoured them with gifts desired by them. (15-16) Felicitated by Nanda, the cowherd 
chief, the highly blessed Rohini too (who excelled all the other wives of Vasudeva in that she

ad the rare good fortune of witnessing the childlike pastimes of Sri Krsna) moved about as 
the virtual mistress of Nanda's household (receiving female guests and ordering servants), 
decked with supernal clothes, garlands and necklaces (forgetting the distress of her captive 
husband). (1 7) Thenceforward Nanda's Vraja became the seat of all prosperity turning into 
ihe (very) playground of Goddess Rama by virtue of its native excellences peculiar to an 
abode of Lord Sri Hari, O protector of men! (18) a ee 
Wor aera Freer Amt Wd laa: Hae aided AL ad Hage 12e! 
RA sa we ARTA eM Gee Te Waa 120 
am wedrera 2s: softer sa: frat cheat Get Safage: 121

S65] B.M. Part II—33

—_<—

uRit: GeaRia: YBMTAaed: | Taw: westerns «fara 1221

Having charged the cowherds with the protection of Gokula, Nanda went to Mathura in 
order to pay his annual tribute to Kamsa, O jewel of the Kurus! (19) Reliably hearing of his 
friend, Nanda, having come (to Mathura) and coming to know that he had paid his tribute 
Vasudeva repaired to his camp (to see him and enquire about his own sons, Balarama ang 
Sri Krsna). (20) Rejoiced to.see him come and at once rising to his feet even as a body (lying 
unconscious) would do on consciousness returning to it, Nanda folded his most beloveg 
friend in the arms, overwhelmed as he was with affection. (21) Welcomed (by Nanda) ang 
honoured with an enquiry after his health, and comfortably seated, Vasudeva, whose ming 
was deeply attached to his sons, sopke as follows, O protector of the people:—(22)

fe Wd: sada senate aise Mads WT Ad AAEM 1231 
fiom dares adam: gata: isaeet ware ged fraegaiex 
sea fradare: weet faaadomi sie SQM yar alae ser 124) 
aed wet Presi yaqudieerm geet aca SA A Mead: 1261 
WMA Ud: aM Ae Ada dd Ad Wal Aaqrarqdentiod: 121 
Gakaant fafea: aeal aauifad: 1a a5 farang franisata cead 12¢!

"It is a matter for congratulation, O brother, that an issue has now been vouchsafed to 
you, aged and issueless as you were, and had been shut out from all hopes of getting a 
progeny. (23) Through good luck you have been perceived today like one reborn (revolving 
all along) on this whirligig of mundane existence; for the sight of a loved one is (so) difficult 
to obtain. (24) The living together at one and the same place of friends engaged in diverse 
occupations, which is so agreeable, is not (always) possible any more than that of wooden 
planks etc., swept along by the current of a river. (25) Is that Vrhadvana (Gokula) where you 
are residing at present surrounded (accompanied) by your kith and kin, favourable to cattle, 
free from diseases and provided with abundant water, grass and plants? (26) Cherished by 
you both (your wife and yourself) and recognizing you as his father, is my son (Balarama), 
O brother, doing well with his mother (Rohin1) in your Vraja? (27) Indeed the threefold object 
of human pursuit (viz., religious merit, wealth and sensuous pleasure) is recommended only 
in so far as it is shared with one's near and dear ones. When the latter are in distress, sucn 
threefold pursuit does not make for happiness (the goal of all sentient beings). (28)

Te SAA 
He ot cael Yat: et seat eat: | Urals eM atl fet TAT IRs! 
SG Das MBIsamesaal SH: | SeBuIeAerd at ac A A Yella izol

Nanda replied : Born of Devaki, (O friend,) many a son of yours has been killed alas! 
by Kamsa. (Only) one daughter, subsequently born, was left (having escaped death at his 
cruel hands). But she too ascended to heaven. (29) Indeed a created being depends on its 
destiny and is controlled by destiny. He who knows destiny to be his (very) essence (the 
unfailing cause of his happiness and misery) does not get infatuated. (30)

qed sara 
ail & anton ant Ua get at a a: 1 ae Wet agit ears WMHS 12k!

Vasudeva said : The annual tribute has actually been paid to the king and we (too) have

been seen by you. You should not (therefore) stay here long; (for) there are startling

Oe PTE wt

occurrences at Gokula too. (31)

Hh Sara 
sft Taree Te: sikoret Bion aq: | sires «= ene 1321 
ga aT Tad FER Tee fect <a yale aeageaaga A Teiseae: 1G | 
éri Suka continued : Thus exhorted by Vasudeva (the son of Sidra) and taking leave of

him, the said cowherds, headed by Nanda, returned to Gokula riding on their carts drawn by 
pullocks. (32)

Thus ends the fifth discourse entitled "The meeting of Nanda and Vasudeva" in the first half of 
Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PDS mya

SIM WEISeaAa:

Discourse VI 
Deliverance of Putana

MI FAA 
we: Ufa aa: ahd gafa fafaraqiekt sama aomgqerarmerfea: | 2 | 
eet seat at Gat aeaiti agar fat osrassnier! 2 | 
I aa gaurd rate wadgqi gated aad adelqeras aq fei 3! 
OM Gadde yaa Aeierl! Alfren aeaissa wise rerio | x | 
at SaereertreanAaleecht Geary | 
qaraa phadenuiyeUkateraepdonusdary | & | 
seer ere eet afta | atten | 
Saat | SOT: «rat aBiAarTat «afar & I 
aeaeea fafaatt fat aewat 9 Aayedadet | 
a wfiheaftedsta cael dcustuivenfad afa ivol 
far at steamer amemenssa 9 ftfesctarn: | 
STA aaS Ach aaa Carga: 1c 
at 406s dteurfeenafiaraiedt «= lear «= alarafteseriead | 
aft asa ai aia fiaant wet aided < | 
eH 06 icdtdyrast Sager) area 
ae war wis ad. WUT: aa Weanfadisttad 120 1 
a ws usefa sone fetemmtaesitardin t 
fig ad awit yet ye: Shaan feat ede © 1k2!

di

qa: «eateries «Cait «See ST I 
Tar | festa «oo Sfadtfet. «ST: Sg: fara AAAS 1221 
froete aft age catia ysraft 
sa om ferecaieea aged at samag7ie3i

Sri Suka resumed : Pondering on his way that the words of Vasudeva (the son of Sira

TIT Mr NTE ee

could not be untrue, Nanda sought Sri Hari as his refuge, apprehensive as he was of the _ 
coming of startling events. (1) Despatched by Kamsa, the terrible demoness Patana, Who | 
was given to (the practice of) killing infants, moved about in towns, villages, cowherdstations 
etc., killing infants (wherever she went). (2) Ogresses and others find their way only there | 
where people, though devoted to their duties, do not practise the hearing etc., of the names _ 
and stories of Lord Visnu (the Protector of devotees), capable of exterminating the ogres. (3) | 
Reaching Gokula, ruled over by Nanda, on one occasion, and disguising herselfasawoman |

through her witchcraft, the said Pitana, who was capable of coursing through the air and

could go anywhere she pleased, entered the village. (4) Seeing that lovely woman, cladin |

fine clothes, with jasmine flowers tucked to her braid, her slender waist pressed as it were 
between her bulky hips (below) and her full breasts (above), and with her face set off with 
curly locks radiant with the lustre of her swinging ear-rings, the Gopis thought her to be the

most beautiful Laksmi (Herself), come to see Her Spouse, distinguished as she was by her |

hand bearing a lotus (the emblem of Laksmi) and captivating the mind of the inhabitants of 
Vraja by her side-long looks accompanied with sweet smiles. (5-6) Hunting for infants and 
propelled by Providence, PUutana (lit., an evil spirit seizing infants and causing their death) 
saw lyingin a bedin that palace of Nanda, the Babe (Sri Krsna), the Destroyer of the wicked, 
with His immeasurable glory veiled, like fire buried under ashes. (7) Recognizing her to be 
an evil spirit given to the destruction of infants, Sri Krsna (the Soul of the mobile andimmobile

creation) lay with His eyes utterly closed. She placed the infinite Lord, her very death, inher — 
lap (even) as an ignorant man would a sleeping serpent, mistaking it for a rope. (8) Seeing |

inside the house that excellent woman—whose (outward) behaviour was most affectionate 
(like that of a mother), though she was possessed of a cruel heart and thus resembled a 
sword encased in a charming scabbard—and overwhelmed with her splendour, the two

mothers (Rohini and Yasoda) stood merely gazing. (9) Taking Sri Krsna in her lap there, thal | 
cruel woman put into the Baby's mouth her dreadful breast besmeared with deadly poison. |

Squeezing Ithard with both his hands, the Lord full of indignation forthwith sucked the 
poison alongwith her (very) life. (10) Being wrung in all her vital parts, she cried out say!ng- 
Leave me, O leave me, enough of it!" Distending her eyes and tossing about her feet and

arms again and again, she actually screamed, her limbs drenched with prespiration. (1 1 As | 
a result of her very deep and violent roar the earth with its mountains and heaven with Is _

planets shook, the subterranean worlds as well as the (four) quarters echoed and people 
toppled down on the ground under the apprehension of a thunderbolt. (12) Thus tormenle 
at her breasts and reverting (inher helpless state) to her own (demoniac) form, she (SP! ang 
and) fell dead in (the outskirts of) Vraja, opening her mouth and flinging about her hair an

Stretching her legs and arms too (even) like the demon Vrtra knocked’ down by ile |

thunderbolt (of Indra), O protector of men 1(13) 
Utes TERMS | Pua «| SR Hae |e! 
Puneet fiReraritend | msi we sastorisorgefory eu! 
STIR Yoantertrory | ages tete Bradasalawr, 125 |

j

Even while falling down, her (colossal) body crushed, O ruler of kings, trees within 
(an area of) twelve miles. That was a great wonder. (14) Its mouth was ranged with 
fearful teeth as long as a plough-tree; its nostrils resembled a pair of mountain caves; 
its breasts looked like a couple of huge rocks: its coppery hair hung loose; its eyes 
were deep like a well overgrown with plants etc.: it looked terrible with its hips 
resembling sand-banks; its arms, thighs and feet resembled dams; while its belly looked 
like a waterless pond. The cowherds and cowherdesses were really much frightened to 
see that fearful body, their heart, ears and head having already been split by her yell. (15—17) 
And finding the boy fearlessly playing on her bosom, the cowherd women quickly went 
up to Him and picked Him up, alarmed as they were. (18) Along with Yasoda and Rohini 
they fully ensured the safety of the boy (against evil spirits) on all sides by waving round 
him the tail of a cow (which has been declared in the scriptures to be the seat of 
Goddess Laksmi) and other occult rites. (19) Having bathed the boy with the urine of 
a cow (which is held to be as sacred as the water of the holy Ganga) and again 
sprinkling him with the dust under the hoofs of cows (which is considered to be as good 
as sprinkling with the totality of all sacred waters), they (further) ensured his security by 
daubing him with cowdung (which is recognized as another seat of Goddess Laksmi) 
at twelve points while uttering (twelve different) names* (of the Lord). (20) Having sipped 
water and assigned (a number of ) seed-letters (representing the first letters of the 
following eleven names of the Lord, followed by a nasal sound—Anuswara) separately 
to the (diverse) limbs of their (own) body as well as to (the parts of) their hands, the 
cowherd women next assigned the same seed-letters to the limbs and (parts of) the 
hands of the baby. (21)

aaa SS AAAs VaMe UMS: Hlede Vist Tare:

Gl HMaKagr FT sR Hud fay Tayonr Gea: HAIR!

Wad: Petal she wed aemedateyaat Aeesriya|

ay ME soma saaeded: fact Ee: Fes: AAA! 23 | 
Shaafit gatas: WI ANUNsaq! yadgiaufaiyadt AA aAliyatisad! Vv 
Uemikq A afer war wl wlsat wg Where: Wart Wg Area: 1 24 |

* The twelve names to be uttered on such occasion and the twelve limbs to be touched while doing so are 
Specified in the following verses of the Padmapurana :— 
mere | ae | AAA eN | ae eere AU Ff Me VSR Il 
fart a efartt ett aret a AYAeT eT | fafaser wear FT at ards it 
she amarel gq wine I PAR LoS 7 WM 4 Heal Sriak AAT Il 
“One should visualize Kegava on one’s forehead, Narayana on the belly, Madhava on the breast and Govinda 
°n the back of one’s neck, Visnu in the right side of the abdomen and Madhusidana on the night arm, Trivikrama 
on the neck, Vamana on the left side (of the abdomen), Sridhara on the left arm and HrsikeSa again on the neck, 
‘dmanabha on the back and Damodara on the waist.” 
This shows that the Gopis of Vraja were all Vaisnavas.

AQAA AAAAAAALA AL AAAAALHAH H Re Be Kr Me Be Ke By Mr Ke Bee He Mr Ke Hr He Ke Me Be Br Kr Hr Kr Kr Ke Hr Br Br Br Br Ke Hr Wr Hr Ke Be Sr He Hr Hr Wey, [ mesa 
hr

saree aque sett wi fra: ofa: tye aA MS Mee AaT 1 2G 
Shea Aqsa HaAvS Assinar: | yAraaarasy AMALAATAHT: 1 2X9} 
ae wadt WS WA Agee: isa A Was eemetlsagE: 12¢1

SIE Aa qetemis Alad weary a fasiataaeusiia: 12¢1 
(They said:—) "May Aja (the birthless Lord) protect your feet; Maniman (the Lorg 
adorned with the Kaustubha gem), your knees and Yajnha (the Deity presiding ove, 
Sacrifices), your thighs; Acyuta (the immortal Lord), your loins; Hayagriva (the Lord endowed 
with the head of a horse), your abdomen; KeSava (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva), your 
heart; ISa (the almighty Lord), your bosom and Ina (the Master), your throat; Visnu (the all- 
pervading Lord), your arms; Urukrama (the Lord with long strides), your mouth and IS$wara 
(the Supreme Lord), your head. (22) May the wielder of a discus stand (as your Protector) 
before you and Sri Hari, endowed with a mace, behind you; the Slayer of Madhu and Ajana 
(the birthless Lord), wielding (severally) abow anda sword, stand on your two sides; Urugaya 
(sung by many), the wielder of a conch, at the (four) points intervening between the quarters; 
Lord Vamana (the younger Brother of Indra), overhead; the Rider of Garuda, on the ground 
and the Supreme Person (Lord Sankarsana) wielding a plough, on all sides. (23) May 
HrsikeSa protect your Indriyas; Narayana, your vital airs; Vasudeva (the Lord of Swetadwipa), 
your intellect; Aniruddha (the Master of Yoga), your mind; Prsnigarbha (Pradyumna), 
understanding and Sankarsana (the all-destroying Lord), your Ahankara (ego). May 
Govinda (who sports in the senses) protect you while you are at play, Madhava, while lying 
down; Vaikuntha, while walking; the Lord of Sri, while seated; and the Enjoyer of sacrifices, 
inspiring terror in all evil spirits, while you are dining (24—26) (Malevolent spirits such as) 
Dakinis, Yatudhanis and Kismandas evilspirits that seize their victims taking the form of 
babes, Bhitas, Pretas and PiSacas, Yaksas, Raksasas and Vinayakas, Kotara, Revati, 
Jyestha, Pditana, (the sixteen) Matrkas and others (such as Caraki and Jwalamukha), 
Unmadas (evil spirits causing insanity) and Apasmaras (those inducing apoplexy), that 
actually torment the body and the Indriyas and interfere with the vital functions, those 
responsible for evil portents of a grave nature seen in dreams and those that seize the aged 
as well as youngsters (alike)—terrified at the mention of the names of Lord Visnu, may all 
these (evil spirits) die out. (27—29) 
Meh Sara

git UT: «= pateTOT urate Et Ala BAARAEATT 130! 
weereea MTT AQT ae TAT feet yee | aNaRferferfeereT: 128 | 
Hi aati: Gad aright at aa 1a wa sl Mena aaemengely: 132! 
wor uefa at asin: | et fieraaest weet anette 133 | 
Sa eM TTA: | afer: «= penrefmaereaaros: 13% | 
Wet wlasient wart efrgri frenaar eat eat crassa ugh 134! 
fe Ot Fe TaN qa UT | eo frat fee | TTA Ge 128! 
Uae nga Sena Glenahad: | SF SAM: AAPA waited BAL 13 
basal a erinar stinker! qonpperaite, flog wat J AAR: 136! 
valet aeTafied, waeeRarae| Ta taaiqa: aacaefiaesa: 12°! 
RTE ae, alia WAAU A UA: Head Usr, VANISH: 1¥o |

Sri Suka went on : Giving Suck to her Son, whose safety had thus been ensured by 
cowherd women, bound (to him) by (ties of) affection, the mother put Him to sleep. (30) 
Meanwhile the (party of) cowherds headed by Nanda came back to (the outskirts of) Vraja 
from Mathura, and wele greatly astonished to see the (colossal) body of Putana. (31) (They 
said to one another,) “Oh, surely a seer has been really born in the person of Vasudeva or 
he must have been a master of Yoga (in his previous incarnation); for that very calamity has 
actually been perceived, of which Anakadundubhi spoke (to us)." (32) Having hacked that 
body with axes and cast it plecemeal at a distance, those inhabitants of Vraja (that had been 
entrusted with the protection of Gokula) burntit to ashes after it had been piled over with logs 
of wood. (33) Out of that body, while it was being cremated, arose (a column of) smoke 
emitting the fragrance of aloe-wood, the sin attaching to it having been completely wiped out 
the moment its life was sucked out (through the breasts) by Sri Krsna. (34) (Lo!) Patana, a 
blood-sucking ogress given to the destruction of infants in the world and giving suck to Sri 
Hari even with the (deprecable) motive of killing Him, attained the destiny of saints! (35) How 
much more, then, should one deserve such a state, who offers one's most beloved 
something with (utmost) reverence and devotion to Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme Spirit, as 
did His affectionate mothers” and cows full of motherly affection. (86) Even the said ogress 
(Putana), whose breast the Lord sucked covering her body with His feet—feet which remain 
enshrined in the heart of His devotees and are worthy of being adored even by Brahma, Siva 
and others (who are adored by the world), ascended to heaven (Vaikuntha), a destiny worthy 
of His mothers (Devaki and Yasoda)! What wonder, then, that the cows and mothers, the milk 
of whose breasts was (lovingly) sucked by Lord Sri Krsna, should attain that destiny? (37-38) 
Rebirth, which results from ignorance, could never be possible, O Pariksit, in the case of 
those (cows and mothers) thatincessantly looked upon Sri Krsna as their as son, nay, whose 
milk, oozing out of parental affection, the (said) divine son of Devaki, the Bestower of 
Liberation and all other blessings, sucked to His heart's content. (39-40)

mera «Samara «= asim: iff ga waft aad soma: 1x2! 
q aa afeld mM: gaaraaiena ger deer aie Rens alate: 121

7: | ea i eet: | qe UT HE 143 
a Ud Gaamlet qerendenag! WeraRga Het Mad SUA Ter Ise

sfa SHEP Tad ASM URSA Seca Sar Yates TSISeATA: 161

Smelling the fragrance of the smoke rising from the crematorium, the inhabitants of Vraja 
anda and others, that had gone out of Vraja before Putana came there), returned to Vraja 
Saying what (a strange phenomenon) it was and whence the odour actually came ! (41) 
Caring (the story) of Putana’s arrival etc., as well as of her (subsequent) death and the 
baby's Safety, as told by the cowherds present there, they stood highly amazed. (42) Taking 
UD (in his arms) his son, who had returned from the jaws of death (as it were,) and smelling

__ “We shall see in Discourse XIII below how Sri Krsna assumed the form of all His boy companions and calves besides 
His own form on their having been stolen away by Brahma, and continued in those forms for a full twelve month, thus conferring 
onthe mothers of all those youngsters and calves the unique-honour and privilege of being His mothers. Itis these numberless 
“OWherdesses and cows of Vraja that are referred to in the above verse as His mothers (ar:) in the plural number.

Him at His crown (as a token of affection), the noble-minded Nanda experienced a Great 
delight, O jewel of the Kurus ! (43) A man who hears (or recites) with reverence (the story)o 
this wonderful childlike sport of Lord Sri Krsna, consisting in the deliverance of Pitang 
comes to develop love for the said Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows).(44)

Thus ends the sixth discourse in the first half of Book Ten of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

et C5 = > 
CIOs SSS aes

JID AYAISeAa:

Discourse VII

Deliverance of the demon Trnavarta

UMA 
a «aaa «am eiedtant: | mai Holcenin wale a A: ST 2 
apuadsenttiaqa wa aA Beata Ge: | 
Ue ddeky wa Wel add wt aq aM ALi?! 
Aare POT ela ATA HATE Teer: | 2 |

The king (Pariksit) said : The exploits which the almighty Lord Sri Hari performs, 
through whatever descents it may be, are (so) charming to our ear and (so) appealing to our 
mind, O master ! (1) If you think fit, (therefore, kindly) narrate in particular that story of Sri Hari 
by listening to which (the feeling of) ennui and the diverse cravings (responsible for such 
ennui) of (any) man (whatsoever) disappear, his mind gets purified before long, devotion to 
(the aforesaid) Sri Hari is generated and friendship established with His servants. (2) (Pray;) 
further recount even other marvellous infantile sports of Lord Sri Krsna, who imitated (the 
ways of) the human race when he came down to the human (mortal) world. (3)

Alicante esta aarealcn Teh Iy Pantera Udit 1 vt 
Tea val pqameriign fast: qreaeret quis: | 
STaeTaTa: STB: Usaaaaashstess: 1 & |

Stemi daft mara ase astra: | 
“aie a wed UA BM wal eMieit awnaefa < | 
wa: wana freieiscamsaeqsatied aad 
ea Aaetamlaa apa | 9 | 
Sel aaerer astkaa sitenfie: aifotr ar: aura: | 
Tastee: a ee at wee «feud ct

| 
' 
| 
| 
| 
:

pis. 7 ] BOOK TEN 129

Sri Suka resumed : Once on the occasion of the ceremonial ablution (of the infant Sri 
Krsna) to commemorate His turning in the bed (which generally takes place at the end of 
three months), when the (same) constellation (Rohini) under which He was born happened 
to be at the ascendant, Yasoda (the good old mother of Sri Krsna) performed in the midst 
of the ladies assembled (at her residence) the rite of sprinkling her son with water, 
accompanied by the playing of musical instruments, songs and the chanting of sacred texts 
done by the Brahmanas. (4) When the ablution etc., of Sri Krsna had been finished and the 
ceremony Of invoking blessings on Him performed by the Brahmanas that had (already) been 
duly honoured with gifts of cooked food and raw articles of food, raiment, garlands, boons 
sought by them and cows, and when drowsiness was fully manifested in His eyes, Nanda's 
wife gently put Him to sleep (on a cradle or a cot underneath a cart). (5) Busy honouring the 
inhabitants of Vraja assembled (for the occasion) with a mind full of zeal over the festival 
commemorating Sri Krsna's turning in the bed, the noble-minded Yasoda did not at all hear 
the cry of her son, who, while actually crying for a suck, tossed up His feet (in an angry 
mood).(6) Hit by the tiny feet, tender as a leaf, of the Babe, lying beneath, the cart turned* 
upside down with the result that the metal jars (placed on it and) containing various delicious 
substances (such as milk, curds and ghee) were crushed, its wheels and axle-tree inverted 
and its pole shattered. (7) Perceiving it (in that topsyturvy condition), the women of 
Vraja—that had gathered (at Nanda’'s residence) for the festival commemorating the turning 
of Sri Krsna in the bed—headed by Yasoda, as well as Nanda and others, who were 
perplexed at that amazing sight, wondered how the cart had actually turned upside down by 
itself. (8) Boys (who were playing there when the cart turned turtle) told the (wondering) 
cowherds and cowherdesses—whose mind was uncertain (as to who was really responsible 
for upturning the cart)—that the cart had been knocked down with His foot by Sri Krsna while 
crying (for His mother's breast): there was no doubt (aboutit). (9) Those cowherds (however) 
did not believe it, taking it to be the (mere) talk of children and (therefore) doubting it; for they 
did not know the immeasurable strength of that Boy. (10)

ri | UAMeTSsae Heals | cee fas: Gh: HATTA 1281 
Uda wid wddiefs: aaa fam geartererpdeermpamrait: 1221

AsqarTesaleararataatsta: La aal Aenea fates: Sel: 1231 
sf mesma areiaedediae: ufestefefinfaiire fei: iev

aire wed wena: dalled: | gat alia fesnia: sealed AaqUr 124!

Ta: weyorda are-eqenaiort: | srammgaaata | Met ards 121 
fast aafael arraat: Stepretenssfare: | at Frenen terete 4 halferaht Mer, 1 19 | 
Wa a a a eS a 
"The great demon Hiranyaksa, who was slain by the Lord disguised as a boar (vide Discourses XVII to XIX of Book III), 
hada Son, Utkaca by name.He was exceedingly powerful and well-built. In the course of his peregrinations he once crushed 
the trees of the hermitage of the sage Lomasa, who pronounced on himacurse that he would thenceforth remain disembodied. 
He felt that his physical sheath was about to fall offlike slough. He fell prostrate at the feet of the sage and askedhis forgiveness. 
APpeased by his penitent behaviour, the sage blessed him that in the course of the Vaivaswata Manvantara he would be 
Hberated by the touch of the feet of Lord Sri Krsna. It was Utkaca that had entered the cartin Nanda’s residence in his 
“isembodieg state and was forthwith liberated by the tough of the Lord's feet.

eas aa nae snpeeebsersnabkenaterNnenhannnenbeenneensenenbennnaNKeeedy ele 7 
*

Taking up her crying son, Yasoda, who was afraid of the presence of some eyjj Spirit 
gave Him suck (only) when the ceremony of invoking blessings on Him had been performeg 
by Brahmanas with the help of Vedic hymns (destroying evil spirits). (11) Having Poureg 
oblations into the sacred fire (in order to propitiate the deities presiding over the planets ang 
so on), the Brahmanas worshipped the cart (which was the seat of their wealth in the shane 
of dairy products, and the abode of Laksmi) with curds, unbroken grains of rice, blades of tha 
(sacred) KuSa grass and water, when it had been placed as before by mighty cowherds ang 
provided (once more) with (all) its goods (whatever was kept on it). (12) Taking up the Bo 
and sprinkling Him with water consecrated through (the recitation of) sacred texts from the 
Samaveda and Yajurveda and hallowed with sanctifying herbs, (nay,) causing benedictions 
to be pronounced by the foremost of Brahmanas and propitiating the (sacred) fire (by pouring 
oblations into it), Nanda, the cowherd chief—who felt convinced that the benedictions uttereq 
by those truthful ones who are completely free from a carping spirit, mendacity, hypocrisy, 
jealousy, violence and pride never go in vain—gave to the Brahmanas very wholesome food 
to eat. (13—15) For (the purpose of ensuring) his son's all-round prosperity Nanda (further) 
gave away (to the Brahmanas) cows endowed with all good qualities and adorned with cloth, 
garlands and gold necklaces and they uttered their (choicest) blessings in return. (16) 
Obviously benedictions that are uttered by Brahmanas well versed in sacred prayers and 
united with God shall never prove fruitless and (invariably) come out true. (17)

UndsNeteas Tiedt ad addline Rrenaig a ae Mipead ec

qt fren a amt fafa andifsari wegescieett «= TaTATEAs ss HZ 1 RR 
One day (when Sri Krsna had just attained the age of one year), YaSoda (the good old 
lady), while she was busy fonding her son, seated in her lap, could not bear the weight of the 
Babe, who had (all of a sudden) grown heavy as a mountain-peak. (18) Placing Him on the 
ground, Yasoda (the cowherd lady), who felt astonished (at this wonderful phenomenon) 
and, oppressed with burden, contemplated on the Supreme Person (out of fear of some

unexpected calamity) and set about her worldly duties (such as summoning Brahmanas for 
the ceremony of invoking blessings on her babe). (19)

eat A Wad: aye: sonfed: | AepareaRn WERT ata 120 | 
Ties ddarque Higa Wyte: 1 dea Guerdaeda feat fee: 1221 
Wawa MS Get AAaIssqat Gd Baal Aasaafe wetadt aa: 122! 
Wea, HAA Ut aie fantfed: | quads: WehUlsySdgad: 123 | 
Sit «=, @Weenoigadt «= Yauedinaenfaeed = Aa 
Bie fa usa dant wer wt: 121 
eemiera = aA TAN Ga feretserguiqe: | 
q Uo SAUNAATAaATAT 124 | .

A demon, Trnavarta by name and a servant of Karnsa, particularly directed (by him), 
appeared in the form of a whirlwind, enveloping the entire Gokula in particles of dust an 
blinding the eyes (of all), and shaking the quarters as well as the intermediate points with nis 
most terrible roar, and carried away the squatting Babe. (20-21) For an hour or sO Vraja 
remained enveloped in dust and darkness. Yagoda did not find her son on the spot where 
she had set him. (22) Oppressed with particles of sands wafted by Trnavarta and utter ly 
confused, one could not see one’s own self, much less another. (23) Not finding any trace 
of her son in the shower of dust occasioned by that violent whirlwind, and repeatedly thinking

of Him in a most pathetic manner, the helpless mother (YaSoda) lamented and dropped at 
the ground like a cow whose calf had died. (24) Having heard the cry (of Yasoda) later on,

| 
| 
| 
| 
|

a

when the wind had the vehemence of its shower of dust abated, and with their mind sore

fflicted at not perceiving there the Darling of Nanda, the cowherd women (too) wept, their 
$c6 flooded with tears. (25) : Spee

Ra SATE BL Got aa AR] Aree ARTEL 12 | 
TRA ATA Se TERT Weld seas ATeRegeieieny 1201 
Tes = eet facta: | atermaal =a AEST STG RCI

wrdRatt ofad ferat = fasiuiaafaad = =© ameren 
Ge Fat eset fer feet eee a: GAT: 1281 
mat Ht site fate: get a aki oe 
¢ afer gemeiht fee ARE TAL 
mirasy ot: fas Aeqea weal Ua: SIGMA Ale 301 
We Adega we aet faki «wafsdswema wa: | 
fea: words fafefaa: we: are: aaeaa ware faqerd 132! 
Tama: Ga sect fee wee worequie: 1221 
Sead sett aenttt getiageaaet yet amare fafa: 1331

Carrying away Lord SriKrsna, Trnavarta, who had assumed the form of a whirlwind, went 
up to the skies (to a certain height) but could not proceed (further), his impetuosity having 
ceased now that he (felt he) was carrying a huge burden (since the Lord had grown heavy 
again). (26) Taking that wonderful Boy to be a rock (of sapphire) because of His being heavier 
than himself (and having given up the form of a whirlwind), he could not cast Him away, 
caught as he was by the throat. (27) Rendered motionless by the (extraordinary) pressure 
at the throat and giving forth an indistinct groan, the demon fell down dead in (the outskirts 
of) Vraja, Babe andall, his eyes having been shot out (of the sockets). (28) The crying women 
assembled there saw the terrible demon fallen from the skies on a slab, with all his limbs 
shattered, like the city* (built by the demon Maya and) cleft by the arrow of Lord Rudra. (29) 
Nay, astonished to find Sri Krsna dangling on his breast, they picked up and restored Him 
to His mother. The cowherdesses and cowherds headed by Nanda, so the tradition goes, 
experienced excessive joy to get back the Babe, sound of body, though taken away by the 
Ogre through the air, and extricated from the jaws of Death (as it were). (80) Oh, what a joy! 
It is extremely wonderful that, though brought to an end by the ogre, this boy has returned 
Safe! The bloody and wicked fellow has been destroyed by his own sin and a pious soul is 
Completely rid of fear by virtue of his even-mindedness. (31) Whatausterities, worship ofLord 
Visnu (who is above sense-perception), act of pious liberalityt (PUrta) and sacrificial 
cnc SEE IESESSEE ESE SUSESSSSSSSIE SUNSETS NESSES TE

* Vide VII. x.54—59. 
+ The word 'Parta' has been defined by Manu in the following couplet:—

SaaS | STASI: Getta 
(Manusmrti, IV. 226)

“Digging wells, big and small, tanks etc., construction of temples, giving away foodgrains, laying out garden—these are

. “alled by the name of Parta.” 
The word ‘Ista’ again, has been defined by Atri as below:— 
| fred aa: wei Bert Sa TTT Suited Satara gefteafitaa 
"Pouring oblations into the sacred fire, practising austerities, truthfulness and also preserving the Vedas by committing 
$M to memory, hospitality, performing the rite called Vaiswadeva—this is called by the name of Ista.”

a

performance etc. (Ista), act of charity or act of benevolence to living beings has been 
performed by us due to which the boy, though (virtually) dead, has luckily enough appeareg 
(in our midst) again, reviving (us,) his kinsfolk? (32) Amazed to see many (more) wonders 
(of this kind) at Brhadvana (Gokula), Nanda, the cowherd chief, esteemed the Prophecy of 
Vasudeva again and again. (33)

wien aise witisad wear et Meaty lax 
Wa wal Bl ql seri qa lead Ways al saiz4 
a wea SAtfatatlteHAaM: qacateuaargeis | 
aun oAiegedte wih ar Fersigait 1361 
at diex fast eal Us Badagg: | aes PeNaall Aa sti Afaksar 1319 | 
sf SETad ASIN URES Sedat SAHA Yate TOaAraH A ARANETA: 1191 
One day; taking up the Babe and placing Him in her lap, the blessed Yasoda, 
overwhelmed with affection, made Him suck her breast overflowing with milk. (34) 
Caressing the mouth (lips), lit up with acharming smile, of the Babe, who had almostfinished 
sucking, O king, the aforesaid mother saw in His mouth while He was yawning the following, 
viz., the sky, the horizon, the host of luminaries, the (four) quarters, the sun, the moon, fire, 
the air and the oceans, the broad divisions of the globe, mountains, the rivers (flowing from 
them), forests and all created beings, stationary as well as moving. (85-36) Seized with a 
tremor to perceive the universe vividly all of a sudden, O Pariksit, (in the mouth of the Babe),

and fully closing her eyes, YaSoda (whose eyes resembled those of a fawn) stood greatly 
amazed. (37)

Thus ends the seventh discourse entitled "The deliverance of Trnavarta" 
in the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SIATSAS2ATe:

Discourse VIII 
The Naming Ceremony of the Lord and His Infantile Sports

Ae Sara 
TH: yifedt Wer, gat EAE ast Ty ae ayaa: 1 8 
Te Wasi: wager amefe: tarratehetiien — wfraragael! 2 | 
ae: wane BRE ama yer refereariie wert gute acara fara| 3 | 
Teeter = Ut afenti eltetrar | Faster sree, saeaa Artem wafer |X |

: 
J

wateat | Mae AAAs sui ad GA GAM aq UAT! & | 
a@ fe wala 9g: teen aad | aetna for ST Se WE: | & | 
Sri Suka began again : Importuned by Vasudeva, Garga, the (family) priest of the 
yadus, who was a very great ascetic, O king, repaired to Nanda's Vraja. (1) Supremely 
delighted to see him and rising (from his seat) with joined palms by way of welcome Nanda 
worshipped him, prostrating himself at the very outset and recognizing him to be Lord Visnu 
who is above sense-perception). (2) Delighting the sage with sweet words when hospitality 
had been offered to him and he was comfortably seated, Nanda said, "O holy one, what can 
we do for you, who are fully gratified (and want nothing)? (3) The stirring out of exalted souls 
(like YOU) is directed towards the supreme good of men (like me) attached to their household 
and distressed in mind, O venerable sage, and is never meant otherwise. (4) A (popular) 
treatise on astrology—from which proceeds the knowledge of supersensuous phenomena 
and through which (any) man can know the cause (of his present happiness and misery in 
the shape of past good and evil deeds) as well as its effect (in the shape of the pleasurable 
and painful experiences of this life)—has been directly composed by you. (5) (Besides being 
a master of astrology) you are the foremost of the knowers of Veda and are (thus) qualified 
to perform the purificatory rites (Such as the naming ceremony) with respect to these two 
boys; fora Brahmana is the preceptor of (all) men by virtue of his (very) birth. (Hence itis not 
essential that such rites should be performed by one's own preceptor)." (6)

7 STA 
qeaenrae: was wa ada: 1 qd Hal ded A Aad caniqay w | 
ea: wont: Wet da Adneet: | tae seat TH A at Yfaqeld | ¢ | 
ga Cartage eae aikenaa: | sft waissiaagetle AalsaAa AA F |

Garga replied : | am the (family) priest of the Yadus and known (as such) all over the 
globe. People would take your son, if consecrated by me through purificatory rites, as 
Devaki's son. (7) Pondering that the eighth progeny of Devaki ought not to be a girl, ever 
since he has heard the remark of Devaki's daughter (that his slayer has been born 
Somewhere) and bearing in mind the friendship (subsisting) between you and 
Anakadundubhi, the evil-minded Karnsa may have his suspicion (easily) aroused (by My 
Performing the purificatory rites with respect to your sons, that Vasudeva’'s eighth child has 
been removed to your house and is being brought up here by you). If (therefore, God 
forbid), he should kill your son (under such suspicion), that would (prove to) be a (Serious)

blunder on our part. (8-9) 
. qe Sara 
= fr uma Wadi ge fanfic wfetarerrqdar igo

Nanda said : Unperceived even by my (own) people, (kindly) perform in this cow-pen in 
Secret the purificatory rite the naming ceremony appropriate to a member of the twice-born

Classes, after uttering the benedictory hymns. (10)

Ayn SATA 
UW aids fa: airaitada al aa ae Yet Wha areal: 1221

| A ATA 
134 SRI OCA le rere nme (Ei, 8

Sri Suka went on: Thus entreated (by Nanda), and (himself) remaining concealeg, the 
sage performed in secret the naming ceremony with respect to the two boys (the song of 
Rohini and Yasoda); (for) that was sought to be done by himself. (11)

1h Sara

aq fe dievigay wea Weel Wr: | sera TH sit sentena ae fag: 1 
AGATA AAT AL FATA T 182 I

Se SUS MA VeEdsTaT a: | Bal UeHeaT Utd gaMih Herat Wa: 1291 
umd aga mldetdeaent: tated sit sitar: waread ies 
ae aha arn wenit a Grer Al qenaigearit are Aq AT SAM: 1Ru 
we a: Fa sree Agere: art | adignifer | qareredfterer 126 
We ASA alaal aRiifedt: | srr wezaron firgqde Tater: 1201 
2 We AIUET: Sit Hafa Aa: | aatshAaAM, fasyaantrarqd: 1221 
Aaaceasisa A ARraoraat wr: 1 fren alataqwed aoe aarfed: 1291 
SUM Aaa TE aS TAI ae: Safed Aa ste Guiarerarz_ 1201

Garga observed : Delighting his kinsfolk with his excellences, this son of Rohini, as a 
matter of fact, will be styled as Rama (the delighter of the people); and due to his superiority 
of strength people will remember him as Bala (strength personified). (Nay,) because of his 
observing no distinction (inter se) between the Yadus” (viz., between yourselves, on the one 
hand, and Vasudeva etc., on the other) people will also recognize him as Sankarsana (the 
unifier). (12) Taking (diverse) forms indeedin each Yuga, YaSoda's son has manifested three 
(different) colours, viz., white, red and yellow; this time he has assumeda dark complexion(13) 
Some time in the past this son of yours was born in the house of Vasudeva; (hence) the wise 
(who know this truth) will duly designate him as the glorious Vasudeva (son of Vasudeva).(14) 
There are numerous names and forms of your son, conforming to his excellences and 
actions. | (alone) know them, not the commonality. (15) The delight of the cowherds, nay, of 
the entire Gokula, this boy will bring you happiness. By his help you will easily surmount all 
difficulties. (16) Protected and strengthened by him during a period of anarchy in former 
times, O lord of Vraja, pious souls, tormented by robbers, (eventually) conquered them. (17) 
Enemies cannot overpower those highly blessed souls who offer love to this boy, any more 
than demons can overpower those whose cause has been espoused by Lord Visnu. (18) 
Therefore, this son of yours, O Nanda, is acompeer of Lord Narayana in point of excellences, 
splendour, fame and glory. (Please) look after him intently. (19) And, when Garga, having 
duly instructed Nanda, had returned to his abode (at Mathura), Nanda felt much delighte¢ 
and deemed himself full of (all) blessings. (20)

et AsIedt ee 9 Wrehgal | Sq aE unlreat fem fase: 122! 
washes tga desaeeft asada | 
Tea 8 Ch Wesiaacdaaa arl: 1221 
Tim Foadt ya qawl weet Asai 
Sal Se Sad: wi aa filer maar Faq: Wale 123 |

“In the HarivarhnSa (The Supplement of the Mahabharata) Sri Balarama says to Nanda:— 
aeseary way Wail AA AEM: |

“Even among the Yadavas you are (particularly) beloved of me."

oa gf

:

= a eee as

\ 
}

: 
| 
| 
! 
: 
: 
: 
: 
: 
:

4

is. 8 | BOOK TEN 135

aesreRbtagpancterrTs «= aa: TTS 
SSIS SMaGHTATT erat sheet wear: 12%! 
Tacgueotevey: semntataet wad Precast 
Tener aGaht at a deat geet Sma TARSAL 1241

Not long afterwards, Balarama and Kegava (Sri Krsna) began to sport in Gokula going 
about on hands and knees. (21) Moving briskly on the muddy grounds of Vraja dragging both 
their feet behind in a (most) charming way—the tiny bells of Their anklets and girdle making 
a tinkling noise and Their mind delighted to hear their sound—and following any passer-by 
(to some distance), the two Boys would (soon) return to Their mothers like innocent and 
terrified babes (when the passer-by would turn round and look at Them and They discovered 
him to be a stranger). (22) Folding in their arms their Sons—who looked charming with mud, 
that served to beautify Their person as a paint—and giving Them suck, Their two mothers, 
whose breasts were overflowing with milk due to their (motherly) affection, experienced 
ecstatic joy indeed to behold Their countenance bright with a winning smile and small teeth 
(even) as They sucked their breasts with relish. (23) When the two Boys were old enough 
to be engaged in boyish sports, (so) captivating to the eyes of young women, the latter would 
then feel delighted to gaze on Them both being dragged behind hither and thither in the 
interior of Vraja by calves whose tails were tightly seized by Them, and stood laughing 
leaving their homestead. (24) When Their mothers did not succeed in restraining their most 
restless Sons—absorbed as They were in play—from horned animals and those having 
sharp teeth, fire, sword, water, birds and thorns, nor could they attend to their domestic 
duties, they would experience a great distraction of mind. (25)

Tee WA: HVS Aes | Aysstaly: Usftamadaral 126 | 
a Sa HO aaeidsiatech: | Aaa aseton fawls WI Wer 1201 
PUTA Way shel ater alae Yuan: fas adie ea: SATA: 1221 
aa. GS HaeaAa Aesidera: Wa Clea fe aa: cafead: waar: | 
Tenis ales fasta @ Sale AUS aha RTCA A Yeqplect ATER ce 12S | 
emia wrt fai deaioaozes tdtfedaaa: reas ddfad_| 
ara yaafert wIguendd ares Wel ae Yerety Yerwfed: 1201 
Ud enpataafa ged ea aret waloratdthadaia: qacitent aesset | 
Su Sife: araesiqeelatitetermal sefaaet + Caleta 132 | 
__ Aftera short time, O royal sage, Balarama and Sri Krsna began to move about with ease 
in Gokula on Their feet without rubbing Their knees (against the ground). (26) Then, incourse 
Of time, Lord Sri Krsna, accompanied by Balarama, began to sport with the boys of Vraja of 
IS Own age, bringing delight to the women of Vraja (thereby). (27) Gazing on the charming 
boyish pranks of Sri Krsna, the cowherd women (of Vraja) called (at His residence) in a body 
and actually spoke as follows to His mother, who was all ears:—(28) Occasionally 
Untethering the calves before time (when we are unwary, and thus allowing them to suck the 
Whole milk of their mothers) and with his risibility excited by scolding, your darling swallows 
Our tasteful curds and milk stolen through thieving devices contrived by Him. He (not only 
quaffs them himself, but) deals them out in order to feed monkeys; and, if a monkey drinks

NO more, he smashes the (very) jar (containing curds and milk). (Nay,) enraged with the 
People of the house on getting no material (to eat), he departs setting the infants (of the

Re We We We Ve Ke We We We We We We Be Be Me We We Ms He We Ve We He We We wy ermal is. 8 
Lot Be He y,

Re Be Re Ke Re Re Be Ae Ke Ge We Br HE Ae Ar Br HT BH Re Br Re BORE Re ROR BEB Re Ke Vey Ke Be Me Be Me Re ee He He He Fe

house) a crying (by pinching them). (29) Where the milk etc., is kept (in swings etc.)hangin 
beyond the reach of his hands, he contrives plans (to get at it) with the help of wooden Seat 
and mortars etc., (placed one upon another). Possessed of insight into the contents (of the 
pots) and expert in (the art of) making holes, he strikes holes into the pots placed in Swings 
(where the aforesaid expedients fail). Ina dark room he uses his own person, wearing hosts 
of gems, as a lamp to reveal things and he does all this at a time when the cowherd women 
have their mind fully engrossed in their household duties. (30) He commits nuisance in Our 
tidy houses and does other such mischievous acts. And having accomplished his work 
through pilfering devices, he sits (by your side) as a very innocent boy." Yasoda, to whom 
the matter was thus reported at length by the (cowherd) women—who watched the charming 
countenance (of Sri Krsna) gazing with terrified eyes—did not feel inclined (even) to rebuke 
her son and stood with a laughing face. (31)

Uae! SISHARA Wa Wek: | pet qa vfadaht at Ades 1321

Ql Wet at Heroes featsoit | ane TAA MATAM AAAI 133 |

SMMCHAIG WAM, Uda, Ee: | Aah Aaa Pea HARASS 13% 1 
One day, while at play, the cowherd boys headed by Balarama complained to Yasoda 
(the mother of Sri Krsna), that Krsna had eaten earth. (82) Taking Sri Krsna by the hand and 
chiding him, the said YaSoda, who sought his welfare and found that His eyes cast a 
bewildered look, spoke to Him (as follows):—(33) "Why did you eat earth surreptitiously, O

asa el ? Indeed these boys, your playmates, as well as this elder brother of yours say 
so." (34

Spo] FATA

Te adara wd freaftiefea: 1 af aafreaé amet aaa A We I34! 
ada de edi: A War et: | aledenedyd: wlsMtystaten: 136! 
a da caer fad sd re a G few: | asdf «8 aaradieanHs 1301 
wifisch sie ast AHaM faaea ai derhenittsarior wat Aer WoT: 132!

Ue = fafert a 86 Slameatanatqafagsen |

Gert det facta ast agenmam ST 13¢!

f wa wed amen fe at udtt aa afte: |

amt saqea une a: matahie amen: ixol

am aMaa fadehttrert Ad: HATA ASTAT

aq ata: «ela Yelet «sO | ae 1x? |

ae ara ukite 2 ad adacenfacfaro «dtl 
3 Tas TT: wens A aad Haft: a A aM: 1x21 
ga fate Meera a gat: aed sada uaendt fay: 12! 
FEE «© UISEMEATAST | NeReenieeeeaISSIe AMT WAT IMs! 
7a auras area aaa: | saitemamercdt eft ame Is!

Sri Krsna replied : | never ate earth, O mother ! They are all liars. If (itis urged) they 4°

truthful, then examine my mouth with your own eyes (in order to verify their veracity). (35) 
"if so, then Open your mouth !" Thus urged, the aforesaid Lord Sri Hari, whose lordship is 
(ever) unobstructed and who had in sport assumed the form of a human child, opened His 
mouth. (36) There (inside the Lord's mouth) she beheld the (whole) universe consisting of 
the moving and the Stationary, the atmosphere, the (four) quarters, the terrestrial globe with 
its mountains, principal divisions and oceans, and including the wind (causing the motion of 
the planets), the fire of lightning, the moon as well as the stars, heaven, water, fire, the air 
as well as the sky, the deities presiding over the Indriyas (who are modifications of the 
Sattvika Ahankara), the mind, the Indriyas (modifications of the Rajasika Ego), the objects 
of senses (modifications of the Tamasika Ego), and the three Gunas. (37-38) Synchronously 
observing In the (infantile) body of her Son, (nay,) in His wide open mouth, this wonderful 
universe—consisting of a variety of organisms (moving as well as immobile) owing their 
diversity to the Jiva, Kala (the factor disturbing the equilibrium of the Gunas), Nature (the 
cause of the modification of the three Gunas), Karma (the cause of birth), the tendency to 
action (the seed of Karma)—as well as Vraja including herself (and her Son), YaSoda was 
seized with dismay.(39) (She thought within herself,) "Is this a dream or illusion set up by the 
Lord, or alas ! is it delusion of my mind or some inborn characteristic divine glory of this very 
infant of mine?(40) Therefore, | bow down to that (ultimate) Goal (viz., Brahma), which is 
most difficult to comprehend, (nay,) which cannot be easily and correctly guessed through 
the intellect, mind, actions and words, which is the ground of this universe, and by means 
of which (as presiding over the senses) and because of which it is perceived. (41) He (that 
Lord alone) is my refuge, by whose Maya has been generated (in me) this perverse (egotistic) 
notion that | am (Yasoda,) the chaste wife of Nanda (the lord of Vraja), the (sole) mistress 
of his entire fortune, and he, my husband, that this child (Sri Krsna) is my son and that the 
cowherds and cowherdesses (of Vraja) as well as the cattle-wealth (and so on) are 
mine."(42) On the cowherdess (Yasoda) who had thus realized the truth, that almighty Lord 
(Sri Krsna) cast His divine charm in the form of maternal affection (for Him). (43) Placing Sri 
Krsna (her Son) in her lap, the aforesaid cowherd lady, whose revelation had instantly 
disappeared, stood with her heart full of intense affection (even) as before. (44) (Once again) 
she regarded Sri Hari—whose glory is being celebrated by the three Vedas (treating of the 
rituals) as well as by the Upanisads, nay, (even) by the Sankhya and Yoga systems (of 
philosophy) and (even so) by the Vaisnava scriptures (such as the Pancaratra of Devarsi

Narada)—as her own son. (45) 
UsHara 
we: faaila ae 8a Wa HaleaH | Saal A ASIALT Vat AAT: EM St: ise! 
fiat arciasat punenddfer meen pat arse weed Ise!

The king (Pariksit) said : What meritorious act did Nanda perform soas to deserve such 
great fortune and what did the highly blessed Yasoda do, whose breast Sri Hari (Himself) 
Sucked, while His parents (Vasudeva and Devaki) did not (even) get to behold the charming 
Infantile sports of Lord Sri Krsna, which sages glorify even to this day and which (when sung) 
are capable of wiping out the sins of the (whole) world ? (46-47)

MYA SAA 
dot agai wad aa ae aan) Be ane AORTA |e 1s! 
saat weed yf fadet ati afte: eraen oh amet Sie ata Ise

ay afetna wuiyt sai quethiawedie Monty ART 14g)

SM AT snes Tel He at fay: | aeTAt ads at Wit Weiter 142 |

sft sirerrad FERN URAeeH Hledat carer Yale freTeRseaiseae: 12

$r7 Suka continued : Intent upon carrying out the behests of Brahma (for being 
incarnated in Vraja as a cowherd and a cowherdess), Drona the foremost of the Vasus, 
alongwith his wife, Dhara, spoke to him as follows:—(48) "When we are born on earth, let 
the highest (type of) devotion appear in us towards Sri Hari, the supreme Deity, the Ruler of 
the universe, through which one is sure to escape from evil destiny in this world." (49) Replieg 
to in the words "Let it be so !" he was reborn in Vraja and became known as the worshipful 
and illustrious Nanda; while the aforesaid Dhara became Yasoda. (50) As a result of that 
boon, devotion to Lord Visnu (sought for by all men)—who became their Son—appeared in 
the couple in a special degree among the cowherds and cowherdesses (of Vraja), O scion

of Bharata ! (51) Dwelling in Vraja alongwith Balarama in order to fulfil the boon of Brahma, 
Sri Krsna (the almighty Lord) brought delight to them (all) by His (infantile) pastimes. (52)

Thus ends the eighth discourse, bearing on a Vision of the Cosmic form (of the Lord), 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

IIS SI OD

ZI AAS:

Discourse IX

Grace (showered) on Yasoda 
Aye Sara 
Weal qeaetg 4 oaatet atetfedtiaaietame friar qa afi 2 
am arte was dagqeaint aicatiaa ae eet aeenadi 2 | 
ene ara: yyentede fart Garg 
Graeadpagt Stoney a qu: | 
Wales ysaeast Huse a 
_ , ea aca Hattarteraiendt Fras 1 3 1 
Sri Suka resumed : One day, when the maid-servants of the house were engaged In 
other work (connected with the annual worship of Indra), YaSoda, Nanda's wife, personally 
churned the curds (and boiled the milk for her Son). (1) Nay, recalling at the time of churning 
the curds whatever infantile sports of her Son were sung there (in Vraja), she celebrated them 
in song. (2) Wearing round her wide loins a silk garment (similar to a petticoat) fastened with 
a String, and bearing (on her bosom) a pair of shaking breasts overflowing (with milk) from 
affection for her son, a face covered with sweat, a pair of ear-rings (hangirig from the lobes

of her ears) and a pair of bangles moving about her fore-arms fatigued with pulling the string;

the handsome lady churned the curds with full strenath, jasmi “aq from het 
braid (all the time). (3) : gth, jasmine blossoms dropping

a MST Sa Heit Sadi eft: 1 agar afm zee wife! ¥ |

| 
i

aa tal Bailie (engaged in) churning the curds, and holding the churning- 
stl a Eire) (4) Bee ora suck, stopped her, bringing joy to her (by His loving and 
lovable g Stihl - (4) one suckled Sri Krsna—who had (now) climbed up to her lap—at her 
breast overflowing (with milk) from affection, looking into His smiling countenance. When, 
however, eel kept on the oven (for boiling) began to overflow, she went out in haste (to 
remove the boiling milk from the hearth in order to save it from being spilt), leaving Him 
unsated. (5) Biting hard His quivering ruddy lip—His indignation having been aroused (by the 
mothers wilful neglect)—and having broken the pot for churning the curds by means of a 
(flat) piece of stone (used for grinding condiments etc., with) on a slab, with counterfeit tears 
MS i see He went to the interior of the house and clandestinely ate fresh butter (stored 
there). 
Tmt gy wa: Wt: sfaea dea a ce 
wa faster wade ad ase ad ala a aq usadtiv | 
saMolenean aad wala am cad fafa fern 
fuga 40 aldfaafsaermt «= dea asa «| Tea: 1 CI 
wana waded awatedisaemaan wAldad! 
Weanat am ah at sas aaah aa 1 8 | 
Sasa 40s St MCT: «= NAAT | 
waa faded: WUAAI 120 | 
para «Oot AT erase = afore | 
sfemmt «46 Mafageet «Oca Jee PTTL 128 I 
Waa Us gai wld fameninaceti sae feo ad sag arceldatfadr ez 
q aed ae a wd ata ami gaat afesrasinval at we a: 1231 
qd uaeaissasmerh udlostalesrli Mitte ca AGM Wepd Aa 1k¥! 
qT an aaa adaw PANT: | AGATA TT WeNssa Miter 124! 
asset wa dare addi dela gage I Ad Adied AeA 1ke! 
ws witeaf aaiter Sata | Weal Gea Set fakeatAvad 18191 | 
wang: faarmara ERTHATAS: | FET URI PET: PIAISsaL MAA 1261 | 
Having taken down the milk, which was fully boiled (now), the cowherd lady entered again . 
to find the pot of curds broken; and knowing that to be the work of her Son, whom she did : 
| Not behold even there, she laughed (heartily). (7) (Then) observing her Son firmly standing fF 
On the (overturned) base of a wooden mortar and freely giving fresh butter kept on a swing 
tO a monkey with eyes full of fear due to His thett (having been detected), she gently went 
UD to Him from behind. (8) Clearly perceiving her with a rod held in her hand (in order to

threaten her son), Sri Krsna got down in haste from the mortar and ran away like one afraid. 
YaSoda (too) ran after Him whom (even) the mind of Yogis, attuned through concentration

ie

Wd dakinn wg wun yaasadiwasaiiy pea ade Bat ast ieee 
74 fast 4 wat a skegedeeni sare oft a aad oro faahrerd 1201 
TH Gat war deat wWMiterga: i ahat aera ae ufpadte 1221

Thus indeed was demonstrated by Sri Krsna His amenability to the control of His 
devotees even though He is (absolute) Master of Himself and although this universe 
alongwith its rulers (Brahma and others) is subject to His control, O dear Pariksit! (19) Neither 
Brahma (the creator) nor Lord Siva (the Source of the universe) nor Goddess Sri, who has 
Her abode on His (very) person (bosom), received such aforesaid grace from Him, the 
Bestower of release, as YaSoda did. (20) The said Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Yasoda) is not 
So easily accessible in this world to those identified with their body (viz., ascetics and others)

or even to men of wisdom (who are not so identified) and have become one with Him, as for 
those possessed of devotion (to Him). (21)

PORT Terpay Saat wat wy: i amet ud weal ascent 122! 
WT ANeMT gaat sift mer aemeraforienatt wart Breafadt 122 | 
oo AEP Tad HE USE fecal <a yale ahdirarel art aacseae: 12 
While His mother was engrossed in (her) household duties, Lord Sri Krsna now noticed 
a pair of Arjuna trees, that had been in their previous life two Yaksas, sons of Kubera (lit.

the bestower of riches) and full of splendour, (severally) known as Nalakubara and Manigriva 
and reduced to the state of trees due to the curse uttered by Narada on account of thei

en ee en es ee ce ere

| 
| 
| 
|

pis. 10 ] BOOK TEN 141

arrogance. (22-23)

Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled "Grace (showered) on the cowherd lady (Yasoda), " 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BID SRASLATA:

Discourse X 
The imprecation pronounced (on Kubera's sons) by Narada

(and their consequent redemption)

seat | ameaa: Wo ANOM ade fanfet ad aa at datiea: 1 2 1

The king said : That highly reproachful act which was the cause of the imprecation 
pronounced on them (by Narada) and due to which anger was aroused in the divine sage 
may (kindly) be pointed out (to me), O holy one ! (1)

Sle Java 
SU Ya eal swaeiti dence wa wefeat veleel | 2 | 
aut wf Uhal vafliastadt | atinaessd: uf atria 
amd: wfaga | TgTarasisradates | fatsddatatrisntaa aopfay: 1s | 
qs ai satire aka saga eat aftamt anger & | 
a apt difsar Aen faaen: aaa: | araife ole: sitet facrat Aa agret € | 
at apr afrnit sineed questi aakazeeta wed qefe wits © |

Sri Suka replied : The two sons of Kubera, who were highly vainglorious despite their 
being attendants of Lord Rudra, (nay,) whose passion was uncontrollable, and who had 
drunk the wine called Varuni, were strolling with women singing after them in a woodland 
full of blossoms in the vicinity of the Mandakini* flowing through the delightful garden of 
Kailasa, their eyes rolling on all sides from intoxication. (2-3) Entering the middle of the 
Ganga, studded with a series of lotus-beds, they sported with damsels (even) as a pair of 
elephants would with she-elephants. (4) By the will of Providence, O scion of Kuru, the 
Glorious Narada (the celestial sage) saw the two demigods there and perceived them 
intoxicated. (5) Abashed to see him, uncovered as they were and afraid of a curse, the 
Celestial nymphs hurriedly put on their clothes, but not so the two Yaksas, who remained 
Naked. (6) Seeing the two sons of Kubera inebriate with wine and blind with the pride of 
Wealth, Narada, who felt inclined to pronounce an imprecation for the sake of showering

his grace on them, spoke as follows:—(7) 
: ARG Sard

7 SRN GEA Ser aha Wig: | sitacesteeta Gt ELTATEG: | < |

* The holy Ganga, while flowing in the heavenly regions; goes by the name of Mandakini.

eR wet ww Reka sR ee TEMS 
Saar pines! Wate deh ret fee aq Fat aa: 1g 01 
Ss. fieqacda: wt Rapalgta ai arg: Maal afea: Hae: Bis aT ee 
ATE See! Sl fer HET Ela A TTASTA: 122 
saa: stimeera dfs wei anata yet afta: aeeitert 1231 
a SUR sola at Ta sierra Tet fet aenfegenves: 1ex | 
aiat frees um: wdaneltel pap aqwarssstia dig ae at aU: 1eu) | 
Aa ame ditsersenigu: igrsaaqgeara feet fairacict 19 | 
aiada gerd aaa: aneieta: | af: faonia a ad aa ore fagneata ie | 
at daft 9 dgraaifeori sted: fe aaemafarmasr: 1ec | 
qek uMaaieen aval sierra: ada = efenfy §«= eaurattefstaerat: 1291 | 
ae Cae wl yet wegdtia faarsame facia: aglat 1R01 | 
BASE: WTA Wat Ad AM Gi Slt: Urtseed aa AaqwN 12k 1 | 
aaa Ciel meet feed gd aotedt yt wert Afeerat: 1221 |

Narada said : Indeed in the case of a man indulging in enjoyable objects no pride other | 
than the pride of wealth, such as that of pedigree (or learning), which is a product of | 
Rajoguna, conduces to loss of reason (as the said pride of wealth does); (for) with pride of 
wealth woman, gambling and liquor are invariably associated. (8) (Nay,) where there is pride | 
of wealth, animals are killed by merciless men of uncontrolled mind, who regard this | 
perishable body as proof against old age and death. (9) Though styled (while living) asa 
goa’, the (human) body is ultimately designated (after death) as a worm (when buried) or as | 
ordure (when devoured by carnivorous animals or birds) or as ashes (when cremated). Is a 
man perpetrating violence—from which follows perdition—against living beings for the sake 
of (pampering) such a body alive to his (own) interest ? (10) Does this body belong to the giver 
of food (one’s employer or the maintainer of one's body) or (both) to one's father (lit. 
_ procreator) and mother (who conceived it and nourished it in the womb as well as outside 
during its infancy and boyhood) or to one's mother's father (who may claim itas his daughters 
son or as his adopted son in the event of his stipulating before her marriage that a son born 
to her would be adopted by him as his own legal heir) or to a powerful man (such as a king 
who is entitled to take forced service from any able-bodied labourer) or to one who has 
purchased it or for that matter to a dog (whichis going to devour it after death) ? (11) Knowing 
the body to be a common property as aforesaid andas having its source in and disappearing 
into the Unmanifest (primordial Matter), nay, identifying himself with it, who else than a foo! 
would kill animals ? (12) Poverty is the best eye-salve for a wicked soul blinded with the pride 
of wealth. A poor man alone looks upon living beings as similar to his own self. (18) He whe 
has his foot (ever) pricked with a thorn would never have a fellow-being suffer such agony: 
having realized the similarity of (all) living beings (so far as the experience of pleasure an 
pain is concerned) by means of external signs (such as facial expression etc.). Such Is 
(however) not the case with him whose foot has never (similarly) been pricked with 4

a

" A king is honorifically referred to as a 'god among men’ (=a) and a Brahmana as a ‘god on earth’ (42a).

pis. 10 ] BOOK TEN 143

thorn.(14) Rid of all forms of pride, a poor manis divested of (all) stiffness induced by egotism. 
The hardship he experiences by the will of Providence actually proves to be his highest 
austerity in this life. (15) The Indriyas of a poor man, whose body is ever emaciated from 
hunger and who is longing for food soon grow feeble and his violence too ceases. (16) Pious 
souls looking upon all with the same eye come into contact only with a poor man (and not 
with the rich blinded with the pride of wealth). Consorting with saints, a poor man gives up 
the thirst for money etc., even for noble pursuits and then gets absolutely purified (qualified 
for final beatitude) soon.(17) What purpose of pious souls, possessed of equanimity and 
hankering (only) for the feet of Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), can be served 
through the wicked, who are proud of their wealth and bank (only) on the objects of senses 
(that have no reality), and (therefore) deserve to be ignored ? (18) Hence | shall take away 
the pride, resulting from ignorance, of the two slaves of women, of uncontrolled mind, drunk 
with the wine called Varuni and blinded with the pride of wealth. (19) Since, in spite of their 
being the sons of Kubera (a guardian of the world), the two youths are too immersed in 
ignorance to recognize themselves as uncovered, highly vainglorious as they are, hence 
they deserve (to be reduced to) the state of a tree (that stands rooted to one spot, is 
unbending by nature and remains uncovered), so that by my grace they may not behave like 
that again; and let self-consciousness persist in them (alongwith the consciousness of their 
guilt) by my favour even in that state. (20-21) Attaining to the presence of Lord Vasudeva at 
the end of a hundred celestial years, and recovering their abode in heaven, they will have 
acquired Devotion (too). (22) 
Sh Sara

Wage A aafetial anraonsM aopernforiaranradaaenstal 1231 
PAUSE A Hi al sGisaMa wahea Aart aAensfat evi 
cafief =offaqat afent eee | cam arent aa wid astetert 1241 
SUI: «= FRG |= aaah 1 otenfaeigrarao feral 125 |

Sea freedaaraqe aq adalat dwicefecnetrerwt |

frada: umlaniiaidresarettedt chedeveeiedt 1291

aa frat Ue aU: Booed feeder Heithta aaa: |

par sored arahaoctenta agiatet fasta: F122!

Sri Suka continued : Saying so, the said Narada (the celestial sage) went away to the 
hermitage of the (divine sage) Narayana; while NalakUbara and Manigriva were transformed 
into two Arjuna trees sprung together. (23) In order to substantiate the prediction of Narada, 
the foremost of the devotees of the Lord, Sri Hari (who stood tied to the mortar) proceeded 
Slowly to the spot where the two Arjuna trees stood as twins. (24) (He said to Himself), “Since 
Narada (the celestial sage) is most beloved of Me, therefore, | shall redeem the two sons of 
Kubera in the same way as has been prophesied by that exalted soul.” (25) With this end in 
View Sri Krsna actually crawled between the two Arjuna trees. With the very'interposition of 
His person the mortar fell crosswise. (26) Uprooted by the infant sri Krsna, who had a cord 
tied round His belly and was dragging the said mortar behind Him with (great) vehemence, 
the two trees fell down with a terrific crash, their trunk, leaves and boughs violently shaken 
by the force exerted by the Supreme Lord. (27) lIluminating the quarters with their great 
Splendour there rose on that spot, like fire hidden in the two trees (and appearing in embodied 
forms) two celestial figures shorn of (all) pride. Approaching Sri Krsna, the Lord of all the 
Worlds, and bowing down to Him with joined palms, they prayed as follows:—(28)

RSA RAS AA AAA ALA AST SR a Aw tere 
FN HPO Aaa: TA: Ut: | arnremiae fay wa a seo fag: 1291 
aie: dayami seh: | aaa sel War faye Fat: 1301 
UE Nah: yen Geeaniati ata yeutseaa: eatafcrnrfad 1391

7 ; ic $. 2 fol: 1ant ef fastd siepfag Tura : 1321 
aa qa wad area adi sneelaReatet AAT AA: 1331 
SAAR «= AA MAST RUT: 1 Aeteqreirareteieidfager: 131 
4 Waa Wiese va fava aisiadiuisraria arad often i341 
7a: WAM FR: Uae areas Ws ae ast AA: 131 
sais 4 at etargenfestiaad at aad | aadlequend 1301 
ait WORM sau HAA wel A Hag Area oneet: | 
wa freaa arson fs: wat ato Wadqar 136!

"O Krsna, the Enchanter of all, O great YogI (the Master of Yoga), You are the primordial 
supreme Person. The Brahmanas (who have realized the true import of the Vedas) know this 
universe, manifest as well as unmanifest, as a form of Yours. (29) You are the one 
(undisputed) Controller of the body, the vital airs, the ego and the Indriyas of all created 
beings. You alone are the Time-Spirit and the imperishable Lord, the almighty Visnu. (30) 
You are the subtle (unmanifest) Prakrti (the divine Energy), consisting of Sattva, Rajas, and 
Tamas, and You are the Mahat-tattva (the evolute of Prakrti). You alone are the Purusa 
(Spirit, the propeller of Prakrti), the Witness (of all), the Knower of the diseases and 
morbidities of all psycho-physical organisms. (31) You (the perceiving subject) cannot be 
grasped through the modes of Prakrti, much less through their modifications (in the shape 
of the intellect, the ego, the senses etc.), which are (all) open to perception. And shut up in 
a psycho-physical organism (a product of the three Gunas), who (what Jiva) in this world is 
competent to perceive You, who already existed (even before its birth, as a self-evident 
truth)? (32) Hail to You as such, Lord Vasudeva (the Deity presiding over the intellect), the 
Creator (etc., of the universe), the Infinite, whose glory stands veiled by the (three) Gunas, 
that owe their light to You (alone) ! (33) Disembodied as you are, Your descents in 
corporeal frames are known through the various feats of. valour, unsurpassed, nay, 
unequalled (by those of anyone) and not found in those identified with a body. (34) As such 
You, the Dispenser of (all) blessings, have come down (to the mortal plane) this time in 
Your integral form (the Source of all part manifestations) for (ensuring) the prosperity and 
liberation (lit., freedom from rebirth) of the entire creation. (35) Hail, O most blessed One! 
Hail, O most propitious Lord ! Hail to the gentle Son of Vasudeva, the Lord of the Yadus.(36) 
(Pray,) allow us, servants of Your servant (Lord Siva), to depart, O perfect One! Your 
(auspicious) sight has been possible for us (only) through the grace of the divine sage 
(Narada). (37) Let our speech be employed (hereafter) in recounting Your excellences, out 
ears in hearing Your stories, our hands in doing Your work, our mind in the thought of YOu!

feet, our head in bowing to the world, Your (own) abode and our sight in beholding saints. 
Your (very) embodiments. (38)

AYA SATA 
sa Cenikiteeat aTaT Weert: | gat ales ag: wETaTE Weal 12°!

Sri Suka went on : Thus glorified by them both, and (yet remaining) tethered to the

aS ee NS

SSS...

s ‘ c 
DIS. hh Tere BOOK TEN 145

mortar with a string, Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler of Gokula) spoke laughingly to the Yaksas

piesa geragtiron PRON | TeagAereaaalfafsssisqye: qe: Xo!

areeAT : feraat Ot APA | SRAtal wale Get: Tatsean: afaqdant 1x21

qq Wed Tar AMRAT AeA | Vat Als sat aritftad: aissa: 1¥2 1

The Lord said : It was already known to Me how grace was showered on you both

through execration by the kind-hearted sage (Narada) in the form of your utter degradation 
(to the state of trees), blinded as you were with the pride of fortune. (40) From the sight of 
pious souls (treading the path of virtue and) possessed of equanimity (Self-Realization), who 
have thoroughly applied their mind to Me there follows no bondage (but emancipation) for 
men, any more than the obstruction of eyes from the sight of the (rays of the) sun. (On the 
other hand) their bondage ceases even as darkness disappears with sunshine). (41) 
Therefore, O Nalakubara (and Manigriva), return you to your abode, now that you both have 
realized Me as the highest object of your adoration. Supreme devotion to Me, leading to 
cessation of rebirth and sought by you, has (already) been kindled (in you). (42)

Mh Sara 
set a aes sora aw: Glaeleene fear xa 
ef Scad Heel URAee Sleds <aEHAY Yate AREA A |AMISeATA: 1201 
Sri Suka continued : Thus spoken to (by the Lord), the two went round the Lord, who

was tied to the mortar (yet), bowed low to Him again and again and, taking leave of Him, 
proceeded in a northerly direction. (43)

Thus ends the tenth discourse, "Imprecation pronounced (on Nalakubara and Manigriva) by 
Narada", in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

IEE SIS

A eoplean Sere:

Discourse XI

Destruction of Vatsasura and Bakasura

AIP SAA 
TMU Aiea: Hal FA: Uda TAI MATYy: Heys Frafastaeifset: 1 2 1 
wet | fofdt al aqdvenitiangeeama wat UROL! 2 | 
see faadt ae ag A Tenti aele ga oradgad git prea: | 2 | 
Tes sqaa femaqeeeni faa seta yemecranie i x | 
TX aqn syet aeafa aa ad! ateeleted cal: fad araeraa: | 4 |

sous frat al ae aM! faster ve: Setee fags gi «|

$17 Suka began again : Hearing the noise of the two falling trees, and disturbed with the 
fear of a thunderbolt, the cowherds headed by Nanda came to that spot, O Jewel among the 
Kurus ! (1) They saw there the two Arjuna trees fallen to the ground. Failing (however) to 
perceive the cause of their fall, (though) obvious in the shape of the infant (Sri Krsna) 
dragging the mortar tied (to Him) with a cord, they wondered whose work It was and from what 
source that strange phenomenon could be. They were alarmed to think that it was an eyjj 
portent and felt (utterly) bewildered. (2-3) The infants (who happened to be playing there) 
said, "The trees were uprooted by (none else than) this chap, who had taken his position 
between the trees while dragging the mortar, that had fallen aslant. We also saw two men 
(rising from their midst)." (4) The cowherds (however) did not credit their report because (they 
thought that) it was not possible for that child to uproot the two (huge) trees in that way. Others 
(who recollected that it was the child Sri Krsna that had taken the life of Putana and throttled 
the demon Tmavarta the other day) stood with their mind full of doubt. (5) Finding his son 
dragging the mortar, though (himself) tied with a cord, Nanda with a laughing countenance 
set him completely free, so the tradition goes. (6)

TM: MAA TEMA! Seat wl «eI! © 1 
fauid afdaaig: doanraraent aaa a ped Mt a sinrae | ¢ | 
aalieteel Gin Biel Yaa atelae A wt WAM aleafEd: 1 e |

Encouraged by the cowherdesses (by means of coaxing words and assurances), the 
Lord now danced like an (ordinary) infant and now sang guilelessly at the top of His voice, 
behaving like a puppet (wholly) subject to their will. (7) Ordered (by them) He would now bear 
a wooden seat, a measure or a pair of wooden sandals and strike on His arms (like a veteran 
wrestler), causing delight to His kinsmen (thereby). (8) Demonstrating in the world to those 
who knew Him (His divinity) His own subjection to the will of His servants, the Lord indeed 
brought joy to (the land of) Vraja through His infantile sports. (9)

wlviie Wt: Heri Aa Aaa: | wHowt aame wat wduese: 1201

wetanat TH WT aE we Ww: wong aieel 
Hearing the words " O buy fruits !" and taking foodgrains (in the hollow of His palms) Si 
Krsna (the immortal Lord), the Dispenser of fruit to all, went forth in haste desirous of 
fruits.(10) The fruiteress filled with fruits both His palms even though the foodgrains

(contained in them) had slipped (through the gap between His finger); and the fruit basket 
(of the fruiteress in its turn) got filled with precious stones. (11)

aid = ML MATENga | Wd a Dien Sat wet aredhefars 122! 
aad aeissemt slstaga Gael iaailet Awareara wieuh AAT 123 | 
mist OM Oa aenictes Te Agate, HO Wreeaderit ex! 
Pa Polar ad Ue wet frat arcs faen: arena: mlstsirdisha Gas 124! 
@ WARS AMY A: Hera | wate Gdlekee Wa ApAeid 12s! 
Sctat al eee Aero aera: | wget: Bret Ae MTEM aa Steet: 12 
qoqiiged Wo wemag) wetter vadt faieat dfs mm: ahr: ie! 
ea Wea STR AEM, SORIA SM AMA: SEN fever wg: 128 |

Skies, the resort of birds, by a dernon in

va Faiiet omttet met gt | ahaha 
Bet Tere wemeegt vet ward qaaraitaeny*) 201

Ona certain (subsequent) day the venerable Rohini called Sri Krsna, who had felled the 
Arjuna trees, and Balarama, both fondly playing with (other) children on the river bank. (12) 
when in Their fondness for play the two Boys did not return (even) though called, Rohini sent 
Yasoda, who was (deeply) affectionate towards her son. (13) Yasoda repeatedly shouted for 
Sri Krsna, who had been playing with His elder brother (Balarama) and (other) children 
beyond the limit of time, her breasts overflowing from affection for her son:—(14) "Krsna, 
Krsna, O darling with lotus-like eyes, come suck my breasts ! Have done with (your) 
pastimes. You are emaciated from hunger and fatigued with sport, O dear son! (15) ORama 
dear, come at once with your younger brother (Krsna), O delight of your race ! You had your 
breakfast early In the morning. Hence you ought to dine (now). (16) The lord of Vraja (your 
father) is waiting for you, O scion of Dasarha, in order to take his meals. (Therefore,) come, 
bring delight to us both (your father as well as myself). Return to your home, O boys ! (17) 
Take your bath, my boy—you whose person is soiled with dust. The star presiding over your 
birth is in the ascendant today. Getting purified (through bath), give away cows to (holy) 
Brahmanas. (18) Lo! look at your playmates, who have been washed and well-adorned by 
their mothers. Resume you your play after you have bathed and finished your meals and are 
well-adorned." (19) Saying so and thinking Sri Krsna, the Crown of all, tobe herson, Yasoda, 
whose mind was bound with (ties of affection) for Him, O protector of men, clasped Him 
alongwith Balarama by the hand and taking Them to her house, presently performed rites 
calculated to bring good luck to Them. (20)

mMNIqgI WM «REA AIRS: «AT ae IRI

AAUACATAISSE TG = AMaalsfelen: | eaemleneeas: Haea Waeepwret: 1221

seMeaasanitiged fede: 1 start ela Aer ARleda: 1231

drama wvdsa aaa face faanifirerat ufaaea afta: tat: 1241

aa fda geet wa alee: | eet | arf AT ETATOT, 1261

Taras! oa | AAAfeA: | Alaa AON ATATAISAA ATM: 129!

at gaat am wget Aaa totdina eer yoarisquretteert 12¢!

aT URI: SRC Geaw A fa Mea ar Hadi afe wed ze! 
Observing evil portents of a grave nature at Brhadvana (Gokula), elderly cowherds 
headed by Nanda came together and deliberated as to what should be done in the interests 
of Vraja. (21) Of them, a cowherd, Upananda by name—who was advanced in wisdom and 
age, possessed insight into the true nature of things as well as into the peculiarities of time 
and place and did what was pleasing to Balarama and Sri Krsna—spoke as follows:—(22) 
‘We, who wish well of Gokula, ought to shift from this place. (For) here appear evil portents 
Of a grave nature, foreboding destruction of infants. (23) Indeed this boy (Sri Krsna) was 
Somehow rescued from (the clutches of) the ogress (Putana) who took the life of infants. It

Was sure| of Sri Hari that the cart did not fall on him. (24) Carried away to the 
yee vile Slas the form of a whirlwind, he dropped on a rock and

aS saved (even) in that predicament by the rulers of gods (our tutelary deities). (25) That 
“Verses 10 to 20 above have not been commented upon by Sridhara Swami and Acarya Vallabha too and are evidently

NOt recognized by them.

we

SRI AGAVATA 
148 —. SIHIMINDN Salo) Lalla Una eeeneeeernrreereere (((01k5 11

this boy or any other boy too should not die on getting between the two (Arjuna) trees (even 
while they fell) was also an act of deliverance by the immortal Lord (Visnu). (26) Before 5 
calamity foreboded by evil portents should overtake Vraja we shall shift from here to some 
other place alongwith our followers, taking our infants with us. (27) There is a forest 
Vrndavana by name, suitable for cattle, full of evergreen woodlands, fit to be resorted to by 
cowherds and cowherdesses and the bovine race and consisting of sacred hills, Pasturage 
and plants. (28) Therefore,we shall go there this very day. Get the carts ready; do not tarry. 
Let the cattle wealth proceed ahead if it pleases you (all)." (29)

Teese ToT: Arey Matt ater: | ALAM AM AAR ay Beas: 130 | 
SSM Se Raat US AAO ST STAN TMNT ART SATAN: 13.8 
Tea we Agwagd wada:iqdéarur wea aq: 9 aeuifed: 1321 
TH «SSM HH _AHMAa: | POTS SI: Sha FrepHvSd: Fanaa: 1331 
aM aaleniigvarac Wendi Wd: HORM aAcHwasavikaeh 13x 
quai «Uae «2S MdanIaae I aa eee STeeteleraa B41 
ade Madd aqaufedt aidiendiqaa 9 sidt 9 wameaara ize 
Hearing this, the cowherds, who were (all) of one mind, said, "Right ! Good !" Bringing 
together their respective herds, they went forthwith their effects loaded (on the carts). (30) 
Putting the aged, infants, womenfolk and all accessories, O king, on the carts and placing 
the cattle-wealth at the head, the cowherds, who were (all) alertand carried bows, blew horns 
on all sides and proceeded with their family priests accompanied by a loud flourish of 
trumpets. (31-32) Mounted on chariots and splendid with saffron freshly painted on their 
breasts, cowherdesses, whose necks were adorned with strings of gold coins and who were 
(all) finely dressed, delightfully sang the pastimes of Sri Krsna. (33) Similarly mounted on one 
and the same chariot, YaSoda and Rohini, who were anxious to hear the stories of their 
Darlings, shone with Balarama and Sri Krsna (by their side). (84) Duly entering Vrndavana, 
which was delightful at all times (during all seasons), they set up (on the first day) by means 
of their carts a crescent-shaped habitation for their cattle. (35) At the sight of Vrndavana, the

Govardhana hill and the sandy banks of the (holy) Yamuna supreme joy filled the mind of 
Balarama and Sri Krsna, O protector of men ! (36)

Wt asta sift aat aeaiea: | wooed: warea aaael ayaa: 130!

sagt aya: «Ae een: | oad «Ss AITestSTofeaset 1301

wag area aul atact: faa: epfer| afercore: fenfsuitte: wferpirariad: 13%!

i bale bed Acai Tat WEN spel Eis: «Sat ae ivol

Affording delight in this way to the inhabitants of Vraja by means of Their infantile

gestures and sweet expressions the two Brothers in due time grew to be the keepers © 
Calves. (37) Equipped with various playthings They pastured the calves not far from the areé 
of cow-pens in the company of (other) cowherd boys. (38) Now they played on the flute and 
now hurled Stones etc., by means of slings. Sometimes They threw them with Their feel 
making a tinkling noise with the tiny bells fastened to their girdle; while at other times They 
contended with each other playing the part of bulls and bellowing (like them) in the company 
of (other) boys disguised as bulls. (Nay,) mimicking animals (of various kinds), by crying like 
them, They moved about (in the woods) like ordinary (human) infants. (39-40)

ealtag Git aMiaaM: Ge: lar: enaeaarier sma se

| 
| 
| 
|

aq aceralaat fg aay tie asta whiner sargeix2t 
Memlaoreaya: | waren cairns orienta washers | 
: a aaftrenigran: Uleaarst: WOT e IM31 
a atta Taree Se: WRAY: AY Maa lees ue ayG: qaafior: xv 
Once, while They were grazing the calves on the bank of the Yamuna alongwith Their 
companions, a demon appeared (there) with intent to slay Sri Krsna and Balarama. (41) 
Observing him disguised as a calf in the herd of calves and pointing him out to Baladeva, Sri 
Hari slowly approached him like an ignorant chap. (42) Seizing him by his hind legs, tail and 
all, and revolving him, the immortal Lord (Sri Krsna) threw him lifeless against the top of a 
Kapittha tree. Alongwith the Kapittha fruits that were being made to drop (by the dead weight 
of his body), the demon too (who had while dying involuntarily given up his disguise and 
appeared in his own demoniac form) fell down. (43) Surprised to behold him, the boys raised 
a shout of applause, saying "Well done ! Bravo !" The gods were highly gratified (at this) and 
showered flowers. (44)

a aceUrect Yet Adele a aise ea: su 
a ange wd wafiera wae vet semana waft agsiert xe | 
q ow aysiet cemenae cea FR: sagt ivel 
aoa wat wa vege AHOUYH | ATA ACA HO AMaviqueisada Act 1X1 
PO Agar gsr wareasden: |ayahfeanuita faa smi faaaa: ie!

aq meq seedafsaq moe fiat = omeg: |

ase disitemad amet ed GRA ito!

add a faye qediehat ah chaad aa afa: |

TI AeSY cak Siem Yalaet ahora feateartiae!

aa ae «6 ateteatfes: 9 aor |= aarafeoenrfefe: |

wet dnewgeeaee diet aoegm fafafet 142

Th sarees «sent Wale: §sTufadsat «AUT: |

werd a ukRea fda: sole aa AAA Ae: 1431 
sper de faferan tor arersnfiered: | SeaTaaeaea || AAA ATUTT: 1S | 
al Aa Alea agal Featsua stendie fara ast ad Ga act Aa 144! 
aoa ja a ake: | feradanee aaa Gaga ual 
ata Helfaet aA araeM: Sha eer we ae wTaawia ala Adie 
sft wert mn: Herma deri pet wanes aera Aaa GC! 
We faa: . alan: mAran sedeist | Frese: Adereichelgeanahsr: 14S t

oft SRITaa FETGTe TTSRH Sera SHAT TONE Tete ATTA AS ATA: 122] 
Assuming the role of keepers of calves, the two sole Protectors of all the worlds roamed

about (in the woods) grazing calves with Their breakfast in the wallet. (45) Reaching the

Vicinity of a pond with:intent to give a drink each to his own herd, one day, all made their calves 
drink waterena drank of it themselves. (46) The boys saw standing there a monstrous 
Creature resembling a mountain-peak struck off with (Indra's) thunderbolt, and got

frightened. (47) He was indeed a great demon, Baka by name, and disguised as a heron. 
Approaching all of a sudden, the powerful monster with a sharp beak swallowed §; 
Krsna.(48) Perceiving Sri Krsna swallowed by a huge heron, the (cowherd) boys led b 
Balarama got stupefied like the senses devoid of life. (49) Baka forthwith disgorged Srikrsna 
(the son of a cowherd), the father (even) of Brahma (the father of the universe)—who wag 
burning the root of its palate—and rushed once more in a great rage with intent to kill Him 
with its bill. (60) Seeing Baka, a friend of Karnsa, rushing (towards Him) and seizing it by the 
two halves of its bill, Sri Krsna, the Protector of the righteous, tore up the demon like a blade 
of straw in (mere) sport, bringing delight to the denizens of heaven, while the (cowherd) boys 
stood looking on. (51) Then the denizens of the celestial region showered the Slayer of Baka 
with jasmine and other blossoms of Nandana (Indra's garden) and cheered Him with the 
beating of drums, blowing of conchs and the singing of praises. The cowherd boys were filled 
with wonder to behold this. (52) Relieved to find Him released from the mouth of Baka and 
returned to the sporting ground, the boys headed by Balarama embraced Him even as the 
senses would welcome life. Collecting the calves, they returned to Vraja and narrated the 
incident. (53) Astonished to hear of it and greeted by Sri Krsna (who was most beloved of 
them), the cowherds and cowherdesses looked on Him with thirsty eyes out of eagerness 
as though he had returned from the land of the dead. (54) (They said to one another,) "Oh, 
dear me! there has been many a mortal enemy of this chap! Evil has (however) befallen them 
alone inasmuch as terror was brought by them to others in a previous existence. (55) Though 
terrible to look at, they are certainly not able to overpower Him all.the same. Approaching him 
with intent to slay him they (on the other hand), perish like moths in fire. (56) Ah, the words 
of the knowers of Brahma can never be untrue ! Whatever the worshipful Garga uttered has 
been fully verified." (57) Thus recounting with joy the story of Sri Krsna and Balarama and 
rejoicing (over it), the cowherds headed by Nanda did not experience the agony of 
mundane life. (58) In this way Balarama and Sri Krsna passed Their childhood in Vraja in

childlike games, such as hide-and-seek, constructing toydams, and jumping over like 
monkeys. (59)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse entitled "The destruction of Vatsasura and Bakasura," 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Sk Pact Pat H 
PICS SEE yy

BY FS seare:

aidg GMT Fal See ASM Mt: AAMT aA | 
Taras an 86 areo fait «= eet aft 1 2

—_— = -«- So ET aif

ee ee eens « Se eee

a ee eee

Jar OM Seeniierntam, aa, yee fafredaeet 1 2 1 
PTR SMa Sater! aaisictonsget da gs! 3 | 
PA OA ACTH PIA ESTE: larenimatrauiyia saya X | 
Oras SAAT Farha: | ATT queers 9 Gee 1G 
ae Goa: FON santas mia que ude weer Wet eg 
chfag aU area SAT: STHUUT Chea | hfe yes: WA: Sard: Hllews: GI 1 9 
faeoreaha: SeTeit Teo: Mea: | ccheafeea Fe | mena: 1c 
frets: ARCANE Agari feeds &: ae yaa uenrr 1 e | 
ach Refelorgra: anereaergam: | fered: Sires: Words WAT 1Q0!

qureaiystest aaa gare: 
a Wa aeghawa: wa fra: fe avda fesudt asitmarcie?

Sri Suka resumed : Intending to have His midday meal in the forest, and arising early 
inthe morning, on acertain day, Sri Hari issued forth from Vraja with calves going before Him, 
waking up His companions, the cowherd boys, with the charming sound of His horn. (1) With 
Him, again, affectionate boys equipped with lovely slings, canes, horns and flutes sallied 
forth with joy in thousands, driving before them each his own herd of calves consisting of 
more than a thousand each. (2) Herding their own calves with the numberless calves of Sri 
Krsna and grazing them, they diverted themselves here and there with infantile sports, so 
the tradition goes. (3) Already adorned with glass beads, Gunja seeds, gems and gold, they 
(further) decked themselves with fruits, tender leaves, bunches of flowers as well as single 
flowers, peacock feathers and minerals. (4) Hiding one another's slings and other articles, 
they flung them away to a distance when the things were discovered. Those seated there 
threw them farther away and returned them laughing (only when the robbed ones got 
overannoyed). (5) If Sri Krsna went away to a distance in order to witness the sylvan beauty, 
they vied with one another in touching Him first and felt delighted to embrace Him. (6) Some 
Played on flutes, others blew horns; still others hummed in tune with bees, while some more 
uttered sweet notes with cuckoos. (7) Others took delight in running fast with the shadows 
Of birds and walking gracefully in the company of swans, sitting in a line with herons and 
dancing with peacocks. (8) Some more rejoiced in pulling the tails of monkeys and climbing 
up the trees alongwith them (holding their tails all the while). Nay, others made a wry face 
after the monkeys and leapt with them (from one bough to another) on trees. (9) Still others, 
Who dived in rivers and in cascades, hopped with frogs; while some made fun of their own 
'eflections and cursed their echoes. (10) Possessed ofa (rich) store of merit, earned by them

Inthe Past), they sported thus with SriiKrsna—who combines in Himself absolute existence,

Unmixed bliss and pure consciousness in the eyes of the wise—the Supreme Deity in the

“YS of those who have accepted His service and a (mere) human infant in the eyes of those 
| Who have hugged the Maya. (1 1) Beyond the following how can it be possible to describe 
: © good luck of the inhabitants of Vraja, within the range of whose vision stood in person 
| the Selfsame Lord the dust of whose feet cannot be had even by adepts in Yoga who have 
“ontrolled their mind by rigid austerities continued through many lives. (12)

oe

~<a

Pe Re Rr Re RE RT RR RR ET TH RT BEE eRe Ree Re Re Wr eRe Re Be Sr See Br Se 8 We We Be We We We We We We We Be Ve Be ee er eeaeg iS 2 
ee

STMTTATAN ATA ASTI Gamlstataonaa: | 
fret Gerd asisittadcga: Utara: Weiteaa 1231

ear wer: sroryet fe A Aiea

sa mam eq ay: A asmrammedisdta |

gad ARMY dat uf Saat ARAIRTaT Ac: 1261

ead fadaeaiste: USS ASAACARTNT: 1191 
a ad ae wa Ne Gas and Teed A clea 121 
aa fienitt eq Grane wr: fed HEMeIMeNeqverad A AT 1Ret 
Aachen TATE TAG, PALI SETAE, MeTeT Ae DTETETEU, 1201 
yfreatia «Beat «Peel AMet | CAS T@alseladtewias Wea 1221 
SGA || EAT esti | WaT SAAN | 22 | 
TAOS MTG Me UAT | Teer Sea Ta, 1231

amet senldeda alate: aprstlg: 12¥1

= fasten 86st «= faferererger «= qTaa |

vat fatgeniaoreteend: wat fg Ta Fat ae Rk

ta, TABTAUaRT AL a a Mot: fatara: Wacai: |

wea aac edad 
a, det FM: Aneta BARAT eRe a

aaa qaNicutearan, yoniédt fest fafera: 1201 
Pa lente aoe set A ot ariiat a ant fafgar| 
eet eile ceretfererquenataeratt: 1261 
aia! Walgett APA: | MEG A care: slOTeAaSIIaT: 128 
POTKATA: . 
si ada | Pilate ATaT il 1 1301 
quiere wah fred yia fafenea fafa aff: 
ate: 1321 
a wig osfeitg omy aem we aR 
oe erat: Ursaarggrat ara fafrdat 1321 
fie ee ee De: 
faaat 
ceishtesl: Wepdlsqrévt «yt: au Pa, Gate ee

Tit: MT areernsy carers: was fa safiactton: 13x

Ga THIS STTdseTe FET Agere arma fren 1341 
Taare dd yeh FeaSSAH | Asieat Seda aAyarHlsiTeEa 3c! 
Ud, AST | ae Ree OT | Get: UbTsss ater eBrafifiaar A 1301

a ow Raeqeqyeiegeemmaisntt fe fe wa: 13e1

Presently there came (to that spot) a mighty demon, Agha by name, who (evidently) did

not brook the sight of their happy sport and whose vulnerable point was ever sought by the 
gods, that were anxious to preserve their life (against his fierce onslaughts) even though they 
had partaken of nectar (that had rendered them comparatively immune from death). (13) 
Perceiving the (cowherd) boys with Sri Krsna at their head, the said Aghasura, the younger 
brother of Baki (Putana) and (the demon) Baka, and who had been sent by Karhsa, thought 
thus:—'Indeed this chap is the slayer of my co-uterine brother and sister; (hence) in order 
to avenge the wrong done to both those kinsmen of mine | shall despatch him alongwith his 
followers. (14) When these are killed (lit., made to serve as an offering for the propitiation of 
my aforesaid relations in place of sesame seeds and water), all the inhabitants of Vraja will 
then be as good as dead. When life has departed, what cause of worry can there be about 
the bodies; for indeed the progeny are the life of those that live." (15) Having thus resolved 
and assuming the monstrous and wonderful form of a boa constrictor, one Yojana (eight 
miles) long and stout as a big mountain, the wicked fellow then lay down across the road with 
his cave-like mouth wide open with the hope of devouring them (all). (16) His lower lip rested 
on the earth, while the upper lip touched the clouds; the corners of his mouth looked like 
caverns, his fangs resembled mountain-peaks, the interior of his mouth was full of darkness; 
his tongue was like a broad road, his breath was like a tempestuous blast and he was burning 
hot (with rage), his eyes resembling a wild fire. (17) Perceiving him as such and taking him 
to be a beautiful landscape of Vrndavana, all in a sportive mood fancied it to be like the wide 
Open mouth of a boa constrictor. (18) (They said to one another,) “O friends! tell us whether 
the semblance of a living being standing before us resembles or not the mouth of a serpent 
distended for devouring us." (19) (Another said,) “True, the cloud turned reddish through the 
rays of the sun appears as though it were its upper jaw; while the earth below, ruddy through 
its reflection, looks like its lower lip." (20) (A third one said,) “Lo ! the mountain caverns on 
its right and left vie with the corners of its mouth; (while) these rows of lofty peaks too compete 
with its fangs." (21) “This broad and long road vies with its tongue; while the darkness pent 
Up in the midst of these mountain-peaks emulates the interior of its mouth.” (22) “Look here, 
this fierce wind heated by a wild fire appears like its breath; while the foul smell of animals 
Uurnt by it stinks like the flesh (of animals) in its belly." (23) (If it is really the mouth ofa 
Serpent,) will it gulp us down when we have found our way into it ? If so, it will perish like the 
€ron in a moment at the hands of Sri Krsna." Saying so and staring at the bewitching face 
Of StikKrsna (the Slayer of Baka), they wenton, loudly laughing and clapping their hands. (24) 
€aring thus the talk—which was far from the truth—of those children, who were ignorant 
Of the real fact, and thinking that the serpent, though real, appeared fictitious to them, and 
Perceiving the python to be an ogre, the Lord, installed in the heart of all living beings, made

(865) B.M. Part I-34

; 
|

=

up His mind to restrain His companions. (25) Meanwhile the children alongwith the calveg 
made their way into the bowels of the demon, but they were not (immediately) devoured p 
the ogre, who awaited the entry of Sri Krsna (the Slayer of Baka), remembering (as he dig) 
the death of his relations (his brother Baka and sister Baki), that had been slain by Him. (26) 
Perceiving the children—who, infact, accounted Him their sole Protector—as having slippeg 
out of His control and having turned into fodder for the gastric fire of Agha (who was terrible 
as Death) and as (thus) reduced to a miserable plight, Sri Krsna, who vouchsafes protection 
to all, was moved with pity and at the same time astonished at the work of destiny. (27) Deeply 
pondering as to what should be done under such circumstances so that the life of this wicked 
one might not be prolonged and the death of these good fellows be averted—as to how both 
these purposes be achieved, the all-perceiving Sri Hari hit upon a plan and entered the mouth 
of the python. (28) At that moment the gods; who were esconced behind a curtain of clouds, 
shrieked in terror, "Welladay, welladay’, while the ogres who were friends of Agha, Karnsa 
being the foremost of them, felt rejoiced. (29) Hearing this, however, the immortal Lord Sr 
Krsna speedily grew (to huge dimensions) in the throat of the monster, who was eager to 
pulverize Him alongwith the other children and calves (too). (30) Pent up and spread through 
the internal organs of the monster—whose throat was completely choked, whose eyes had 
(consequently) shot out and who was indeed rocking from side to side—his vital air 
thereupon forced its way out splitting open all of a sudden (the aperture in) his crown. (31) 
All his senses (too) having departed through that very passage, Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower 
of Liberation) revived the dead calves and friends by His (life-giving) look and, accompanied 
by them, then issued forth from the mouth (of the monster). (82) Setting ablaze with its lustre 
(all) the ten directions, a weird and powerful (column of) light rose from the robust body of 
the serpent, paused awhile in the air awaiting the Lord's exit and (presently) entered Him 
while the denizens of heaven looked on (with wonder). (33) Immensely rejoiced, the latter 
then offered (their) worship to the Lord, who had accomplished their purpose—the gods by 
(showering) flowers and Apsaras through dances, the Gandharvas and others (noted for 
their charming songs) through their songs and Vidyadharas and others (well-versed in 
instrumental music), by (playing on) their instruments, the Brahmanas through (their) hymns 
of praise and his own attendants and devotees through shouts of victory. (34) Hearing the 
auspicious sounds of those wonderful panegyrics, melodious instruments and songs and 
shouts of victory etc., connected with a number of festivities, close to his own abode 
(Satyaloka, the higest heaven). Brahma- (the birthless one) came (to the spot) at once and 
felt astonished to witness the Lord's glory. (35) O Pariksit, the weird skin at Vrndavana of 
that python, when dry, served foralongtimeasa great hollow for the sports of the inhabitants 
of Vraja. (36) Observing (that very moment) this exploit of Sri Hari—in the shape of delivering 
themselves as well as the serpent from Death (in the guise of Aghasura in their own case 
and in the guise of rebirth in the case of the serpent)—done in the fifth year, the (cowherd) 
boys recounted it, full of astonishment, in Vraja in His sixth year (that is, a year later) ! (37) 
It is no wonder on the part of the Supreme—who had assumed the semblance of a human 
child—the Creator of the high (Brahma and others) and the low (the sub-human creation), 
that even Aghasura, (all) whose sins had been washed away by His very touch, attained 
oneness with Him, which is as a matter of fact most difficult to attain on the part of the 
unrighteous. (38) Having actually entered the body of Aghasura, what indeed would He not 
give to that demon—the Lord who has kept Maya at a respectable distance (from Himself) 
by virtue of His eternal realization of the blissful nature of His Self, nay, (even) a conceptual

image of whose personality once installed in the mind has conferred the divine state (0 
devotees like Khatwanga) ! (39)

--- _ a

o . 4 4 : phewa ' - 
2 : 2 dé «! | . 2 3 i fh {Tew te - 
pis. 21, oo. . ” e BOOK TEN ae . . _ o e> * e 155. ‘ 
gy te REIT SSRGRAEAERANH RATAN hhhhhhhrheehnhth hhh

wit oaeea: 6 get maaftd «| fae 
Basse ist wa wa aa aferadiaaa: ixol 
Sita continued : Having thus heard, O Brahmanas, the wonderful story of his Protector,

Emperor Pariksit (who had been gifted to his grandfather by Sri Krsna, the Lord of the

yadavas); questioned the sage Suka (the son of Vyasa) once more about the same sacred 
story, that had captivated his mind. (40)

Te Alora Tenet Het wa aa alt eft a: UbTosdiseent: 12 | 
ag afe A neti ot ages qiqataeta oe waft ari ixet 
qd ATA we TUS aera: | ae frat eRe: os Hea ss | 
The king said : How could an act done ata distant time be conceived as having taken 
place at the present time, O holy one ? ( For you have just said that) the cowherd boys related 
in His sixth year what had been done by Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) in His fifth year. (41) (Pray,) tell 
me that, O great Yogj; (for) greatis our curiosity (in this matter), O preceptor ! Surely this must 
be Sri Haris Maya alone; it could not be otherwise. (42) Though Ksatriyas in name alone, 
O preceptor, we are most blessed in the world in that we are repeatedly drinking through you 
the holy nectar in the shape of Sri Krsna's stories. (43)

Yd Sard 
sa WM YW: A gq awMerafrecenhasraeahacotsa: | 
Ped Geese: wt: see A aad xx 
sft sitertad ASM URES Seda aa Fares sleanSeara: Il 22 I 
Sita went on : Questioned thus (by Pariksit), the sage Suka (the son of Badarayana)— 
who was indeed robbed of all his senses by Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), of whom he was

reminded by that question, answered him (as follows), O crown-jewel among the foremost 
votaries of the Lord, having slowly recovered his consciousness of the outer world with

(great) difficulty. (44) 
Thus ends the twelfth Discourse in the first half of Book Ten of the great 
and glorious Bhaga vata-Purana, otherwise known 4 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. :

FITNESS

AKAMA AAAAAAARAKAKVHAK LLANE KHALAK UAHA Be Re Br Kr Wr Re We Ke By Wr Be We Wr Be He We He Se Be Ke We We Be He We Be We Wr Hr He Br We Br Br Be 8 Fr Hr ory, 
Wr tre, 
re

Discourse XIll 
Brahma is seized with and ultimately rid of infatuation 
Me SAA 
MY Ys AIM aN ATaddN lags yaar Har qE 1 e | 
aaa anya Frerit aetaronsiracara | 
Sfaat «Aedes Ss feria areqarrat | 2 
sugidtedt waa Wd acai aigqg: farmer Rrere weal yeaa 3 1 
amMddetgan Waal ation! akafeqarta Walesa |S 
aise «fed te: «9 chf@eerqgersareeny | 
PHS TTA eo AeA AAT AOAC L&I 
sa Mimertenfafdar we aeMfedt: | aca: AAlsa: Chat ae Wego! & | 
aaa craters acareeat Sige | WaT frees Qa: AA WaT YET | © | 
por faye UR fSAUS aA: Teel Tae: | 
aeatast fata fartseer quran: 1c | 
chfad Wee: ated umes: wo: | ffwatudatas qq: HAMM: | | 
ad faa ated: manasa ga) gant CeaaAsIMaAasS: ACA: 10! 
faug ay wowed: yaa a wg aA UNO AqUHad deHeTIgeTy | 
ee met enitgeat era ae: @: wait oe fafa qyst aga alehio: 122 | 
_ SriSuka began again : A good enquiry has been made by you, O highly blessed one, 
since though listening to the narrative of the Lord again and again, you lend it a new charm

(every time by your pertinent and intelligent queries), O jewel among the devotees of God!(1) 
It is something natural with the righteous—who choose (only) what is best—that, like the

topic of a (young) woman to an assembly of gallants, the story of SriKrsna (the immortal Lord)

appears quite new to them every moment even though their speech, ears and mind (too) are 
devoted to Him alone. (2) Listen, O king, with (rapt) attention. | (proceed to) tell you even that 
which is most secret; for to a loving pupil preceptors impart even hidden things. (3) Having 
rescued in the aforesaid manner His companions (the keepers of calves) from death in the 
shape of Aghasura’s mouth and brought them to the sandy river-bank, the Lord spoke as

follows:—{4) “Oh! so very delightful, O friends, is this bank consisting of soft and stainless ©

sand, full of facilities for our play and surrounded by trees charming with the echo of the 
humming of bees and warbling of birds drawn by the fragrance of budding lotuses (which 
makes the lake itself containing lotus-beds appear full-blown). (5) Let us have our (midday

meal here; the day is (already) advanced and we are oppressed with hunger. Let the calves 
drink water and leisurely graze the grass near at hand.” (6) Saying "Amen!," the (cowherd

boys made the calves drink water, set them to feed on the green grass, opened their bag> 
and lunched with the Lord in (great) delight.(7) Seated together round Sri Krsnaina numbe!

] ~*’ “BOOK TEN: > 2 157.

DIS. tet SPS BRR RA RAAT Ih reer h eRe Hho Hen 
DI Be Br Re Be he We Ree Be Re He Ree Re He Me Re RR RR Re Re a Re ee Re RH

of circular rows, (all) facing’ Him with blooming eyes, the (cowherd) boys of Vraja shone 
brightly 'n the woodland like petals set round the pericarp of a lotus. (8) Some dined on (the

etals Of) flowers and leaves, and others on young leaves, sprouts, fruits, bags, barks and 
slabs, having converted them into (so many) plates. (9) Severally describing to one another 
the (exquisite) taste each of his own dish, all took their (midday) meal in the company of the 
Lord, laughing (themselves) and making others laugh. (10) Bearing the flute between His 
pelly and loin-cloth (on the right Side) and His horn and cane under the left armpit and holding 
‘a buttered morsel (of cooked rice and curds) in His left hand and (preserved) fruits (fit for 
being taken with rice etc.), Stuck in between the fingers, (nay,) seated in the middle and 
inducing laughter In the friends Surrounding Him by His jokes, Lord Sri Krsna (the Enjoyer 
of sacrifices), (Now) engaged in childlike sports, dined (with them) while the denizens of 
heaven looked on (with wonder). (11)

WAM | aaneeadda at fafeaequretfira: 1221

qe el WS qtse dha faa fatene acteae 23

POC UECR MICE ICSC Oe | faferaq tar HM: Barforenact Tat 1 ev

Tee ASRS Ta Aferraatt aad aI |

AArAA HRSeraLaeNeL VISA A: GA SHEA AAV Wala: WTA: Ut fase 1 Aut 
While the cowherd boys (the keepers of calves), O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata), were thus 
having their repast with their mind absorbed in Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), the calves 
allured by (luxuriant) pasture strayed far away into the woods. (12) Seeing them obsessed 
with fear, Sri Krsna, the terror (even) of Death (the cause of fright to the world), said to them, 
‘Friends, do not desist from eating; | shall (presently) fetch the calves here." (13) Saying so, 
Lord SriKrsna wenta hunting for His calves in mountain-caves, arbours and forests, with the 
morsel (still) in His hand. (14) Appearing in the meantime Brahma (the lotus-born), who while 
stationed in the sky had ere long felt highly astonished to witness the deliverance (even) of 
Aghasura at the hands of the almighty Lord—carried away from this place His calves (and

later on) the cowherd boys (too) to another place, O jewel of the Kurus, and hid himself in 
order to behold further delightful glory of the Lord appearing as a child through His Maya

(enchanting power). (15) 
at ama ues a aaa swat at gem faferenrr aad: 1261 
wIaeprata aa, Weis frat aa fated po: MEMTaTTA Eigel 
Wt: HON ys ad CMIGU a Hel al sHaTaTATA am faacdtar: 1c! 
TS TL ATTA Ae Te ATA BHAT OTA RAT AG LATA, | ; 
arenas terpofirerep ferent area Parente wet fara Preiss: Hehe at IRS! i 
wamenssartaer sfrarateracad: | wisarafaettar Water Stleete ASA 120 | 
AMSA Gare Akar aa MS Paes G: | AeA AAG, Wied «= awa 1228! : 
wart auracifee sere att: aie Prete 
aeareraagererd WT AT IATA INN 
at parC TAT CAM reve ATIT A: 
| Sonia: arated: wear, Bre Tat ATTA ATE: 129 
rsna; it was Sri Krsna who manifested Himself on alt sides so as to

Mak “All the cowherd boys could not evidently face Sri K 
8 it Possible for each and every companion of His to look at His face.

a

Tae wWeqia wat ggrale: aftgraqart

ar War aaa, vel: Sadler Wa ee 
aat AGaer wat Geteaet faa i gaara etetteat Arazat fT ay 
qsimat wadey Pearce (di age sar Hot waqdaq ye) 
SOMICISSHAISSHATA ARTA A | Ua ea a Taras AATSat: | Yo |

Failing to find the calves there and the cowherd boys too on the river bank on returnin 
(to that spot), Sri Krsna looked for both on every side In the forest. (16) Not Perceiving the 
calves or (even) their keepers anywhere within (the limits of) the forest, Sri Krsna, who (as 
a matter of fact) knew everything, at once clearly perceived it all to be the doing of Brahma 
(the creator). (17) Presently, in order to bring delight to their mothers as well as to Brahma, 
Sri Krsna (the almighty Lord), the Maker of the universe, made Himself appear as both (the 
calves as well as their keepers). (18) A concrete illustration, as it were, of the (Vedic) 
dictum that “Everything consists of Visnu,” the all-formed Sri Krsna (the birthless Lorq) 
appeared as many and of the same size as the tender forms of the small calves and their 
keepers, having the same number and size of hands and feet and other limbs, carrying the 
Same number and size of staves, horns, flutes, whistles etc., made of leaves and bags, 
decked with and clad in the same number and size of ornaments and clothes, assuming 
the same disposition and accomplishments, names, appearances and age and exhibiting 
the same sports etc. (19) Causing Himself, in the form of calves, to be driven back (from 
the forest) by His own Self in the form of their keepers, Himself being the Guide, and 
diverting Himself with sports that represented His very Self, Lord Sri Krsna (who 
embraced all) entered Vraja. (20) Driving (in the form of the various cowherd boys) separately 
the calves belonging to the different cowherd boys and placing them in their respective 
stalls, He entered the houses of those cowherd boys and stayed (there) in the form of each 
such boy, O Pariksit! (21) Rising in a hurry at the sound of the flutes, their mothers lifted 
them up in their arms and, closely embracing them, suckled them (even though they had 
long been weaned) with the milk of their breasts flowing through (motherly) affection— 
which was sweet as nectar and inebriating like the sap of the palm fruit—looking upon the 
supreme Divinity as their own sons. (22) (Thus) returning at dusk (from the forest in the 
form of the cowherd boys) according to His scheduled round of pastimes, and affording 
excessive delight by His winsome ways (to His mothers), Sri Krsna (the Spouse of Laksm, 
the goddess of prosperity) was thereupon duly tended (by them), O protector of men, by 
rubbing and cleaning His person with fragrant unguents, bathing Him and painting His body 
(with sandal-paste and pigments of various kinds), decking Him with ornaments, protecting 
Him against the influence of evil spirits (by waving the tail of a cow over Him etc.), applying 
the sacred mark (Tilaka) on His forehead and feeding Him etc. (23) Returning in (greal 
hurry from the forest to their pen, the cows (too) suckled each its grown-up calves with 
the overflowing milk of their udders, licking them (all over) again and again when they 
approached them on being called by their lowing sound. (24) The motherly care of the 
cows and the cowherd women towards Sri Krsna (figuring as their young in the case © 
cows and as their son in the case of cowherd women) was entirely the same as before: 
excluding (of course) the measure of their love (which had now grown to an enormous 
degree). The filial feeling of Sri Hari too (figuring as their calves or sons) towards them 
was just the same as before to the exclusion of attachment of the feeling of mineneS® 
(which was absent in the case of Sri Krsna). (25) Day by day for a (whole) year indeed the 
creeper Of affection of the inhabitants of Vraja for their own sons gradually grew to an 
immense degree as it did for Sri Krsna (in the past) and as it had never done before. (2° 
Tending Himself in the form of calves through His own self in the form of their keepers: t

BOOK TEN. __. 159.

et gat"

gfores 
vraja f

aid Sri Krsna (the Self of the universe) sported i 
or a year as a keeper of EINES a p thus in the woods as well as in

qd: Waeet | Toreienreeteg hen: | regres eoreaneeeeae sa: Lawl

When (say) five or six nights were left to complete one year, Sri Krsna (the birthless 
Lord) entered the forest one day along with Balarama (His elder brother) while pasturing 
the calves. (28) Grazing grass on the top of Mount Govardhana, the cows espied 
the (aforesaid) calves pasturing in the vicinity of Vraja far away from that summit. (29) 
Overpowered with love for the said calves on seeing them, and forgetting themselves, 
that herd of cows rushed headlong with (a series of) bellowing sounds, ignoring their 
keepers aS well as the difficult path, milk flowing (from their udders all along) and 
looked like bipeds (on account of their galloping gait) with their necks slightly contracted 
at the hump and their heads and tails erect. (30) Approaching the calves below (at 
the foot of Mount Govardhana), the cows, even though they had calved once more, 
suckled them with the milk of their udders, licking their limbs as though they would 
swallow them (with intense eagerness). (31) Arriving there in great anger and shame 
over the futility of their attempt to restrain the cows and with a feeling of exertion 
caused by traversing the difficult path, the cowherds perceived their sons along with 
the calves. (32) With their mind steeped in affection excited by their sight they found 
their anger gone. (Nay,) love having sprouted in them, they lifted the boys in their 
arms, embraced them and experienced supreme delight by smelling them on the crown 
(as a token of love). (33) Highly gratified by embracing the young ones, the elderly 
cowherds slowly departed from that place with (great) difficulty, tears gushing forth 
(from the eyes) at their very thought. (34)

ha at pa atrarat eat aT aaa | Wat Arad A agate Ash tearatieat t 39 t 
Sit Gisaat crotret amy Wasa | Malar agus BY AGIA Ai 3c 
3 ae wrt 7 St waa amet Perrasre 
acd ; Rem we aeeT Gi WAT aeitsaq ge! 
Perceiving the lonaing induced by abundance of love every moment on the part of the 
People and the cows oft Vraia even fortheir offspring (long) weaned from the mother's breast, 
alarama, who failed to discover its cause, thought as follows:—(35) “What a wonder it Is 
that the love of (the whole of) Vraja including myself towards the children is growing (in 
Intensity) as it never did before and (even) as it did (in the past) for Sri Krsna (the Son of 
8Sudeva), the Soul of the universe! (36) What is this enchantment and whence has it come? 
‘Sit the work of some god, of a human being or a demon ? In all probability it must be the

YY

deluding potency of my Lord (Sri Krsna) and none other, for it has deluded even me (Whie

no other Maya can)." (37) Pondering thus, Balarama who belonged to the race of the Yah 
(who were also known as the Dasarhas), saw through his intuitional eye all the calves as wal 
as his companions to be (none else than) Lord Visnu. (38) (Turning to Sri Krsna, he ga; dj 
"These cowherd boys are not the rulers of gods nor are these calves Rsis (as | knew then, 
to be); You alone appear, O Lord, even in these different forms. (Pray,) relate You in detaj 
how all this happened." (And) Balarama (thoroughly) understood the (whole) incident relateq | 
in a nutshell by the Lord questioned as above (by Balarama). (39) |

AMaS ATTA Feriea | Witaess ohlsci aget Aaa BM xo)

Tad Wepe Aet: Pat: Va wa fF arena Ward A arenfs Greer: xe,

St WA sae 3 waaifedat! Med Ua dated Msc fame Gag x2

wanay Sey fat eat A Bey Ge: & ade Aft Wd AW Hes x3)

Wa umteaa fany fade fauna aaa areas waka fantied: ix)

Tat ddlaaet Gelkdieharai wediaceed Reema aga: ive

Aa GA AAU: USAMA AVI | AeA GALATI: Uldenislaaraa: ive

Aquat: Ugaentenisitaanra: | fetter: Husieat akon ararort: vot

Macaleaalele Ach suraTvya: qa: cect: alegargeitacn: 1x1

Sera arguileqetaarata: lame: ade wyquaadtid: ive

Utsplagger: areunaigdifadt: | eenetafia Teal ABA: 140 |

MMT A cat AeA: \yeriarerterd: yen gerqarfean: 1421

srforaretdfeatircetrentsrfe stats: l adfaafatterd: uttat agarfefa: 1421 |

lea WiaaehealacHa OM ets: | Maieeaatetasiaal eared: 143 |

TATA TA PEA ATTA: lorgeyiecan sift gabmagane, | 4s!

Wa ape east: oer laa urear adtae fasnfa wera i&u!

Returning, meanwhile, after a year—which passed as a moment according to his own |

measure of time—Brahma (the self-born) saw Sri Hari playing as before (even) at the end 
of a year alongwith His followers. (40) As many cowherd boys, including the calves, there — 
were in Gokula are in fact all evidently reposing in the bed of My enchanting power, andhave | 
not yet risen again. (41) Therefore, whence are these other than those deluded by My | 
enchanting power, though as many in number, playing in the company of the all-pervading | 
Lord for a whole year here (in this woodland) as well as there (in Vraja)? (42) Having thus 
contemplated on these differences for a long time, the self-born Brahma could not by any 
means ascertain as to which were the real ones (who existed even before they were remove 
by him) and which of the two groups were not so. (43) Thus trying to delude Sri Krsna (the 
all-pervading Lord), who is proof against delusion and enchants the (whole) univers® 
Brahma (the birthless) too stood deluded himself by his own deluding potency (employ?™ 
against the Lord). (44) Just as the darkness caused by mist gets merged in (that of) 4 nigh 
and even as the light emitted by a fire-fly is merged in day light, the inferior Maya (deluding 
power) of one employing it against a superior nullifies his own control over that power- 
Meanwhile, before the very eyes of Brahma (the birthless), who kept looking on, al!

cowherd boys (the keepers of the calves) forthwith appeared dark as a cloud, clad in ye!" 
silk, endowed with four arms, carrying a conch, a discus, a mace and a lotus in their han

TINT EW) wn

———

mm re ee tl

a

ee

ae

. _* cy en - :

PIS AVI 
Dis. 13 | cnamnneinnnnithtenenmenmmene OO8 TEN cu wen : 161

dorned (each) with a diadem, €ar-rings, a necklace of pearls and a sylvan wreath, wearing 
onthe (Upper part of) their arms a pair of armlets illumined by the (lustre of) Srivatsa (a curl 
of hair on the right breast) and about their wrists a pair of bracelets made of precious stones 
marked with three lines like a conch, (nay,) decked with anklets and bangles, girdles and 
ings and cover ed all over their body from head to foot with fresh soft wreaths of basil leaves 
offered by devotees possessed of abundant merit. (46—49) By their sidelong glances cast 
from thelr ruddy eyes and accompanied by smiles bright as moonlight they awakened 
desires In the heart of their devotees and fulfilled them as it were with the help of Rajas* and 
Sativa (which are credited with a reddish and white colour respectively and stood symbolized 
by the reddish eyes and bright smiles of these divine forms). (50) They were severally waited 
upon with dances, music and many other courses of worship by (various types of) created 
beings, both animate and inanimate, from himself (Brahma) down to a clump of grass, (all) 
possessed ofa living form. (51) They were surrounded by mystic powers such as Anima (the 
power of assuming an atomic size), potencies like Maya and the twenty-fourt elementary 
principles, the Mahat-tattva and so on (all in living forms). (62) They were (further) waited 
upon by Kala (the Time-Spirit, that is responsible for disturbing the equilibrium of the three 
Gunas or modes of Prakrti), Swabhava (the mutability of Matter), Sarnskara (latent desire), 
Kama (the desire for enjoyment), Karma (worldly and religious activity), the (three) Gunas, 
(all) endowed with a living form with their glory eclipsed by the glory of these divine forms.(53) 
They were embodiments of the one (absolute) essence consisting of truth, consciousness, 
infinitude and bliss alone. Their infinite glory was unapproachable indeed even by those 
whose (only) eye is Self-Knowledge. (54) In this way (but) once Brahma (the birthless) saw 
them all as identical with the transcendent Brahma (Absolute), by whose effulgence is this 
entire creation including animate and inanimate beings stands revealed. (55)

adishiqalcadhatideretesa: = I aa «ater | OfreT 146 | 
siteisaat 460 srafenf «6 fafa) Geendisafaepeeen it | 
oriaistt 38 faftefita at daft aft aeoreet wheat wale aAtssistaenry 149 | 
adisafes witeane: cm: Wage: | qepgticr aA eelrase ele 4c! 
aueanfira: use feasazad oe: Rererl| grata STsilergarentot PATEL 14S | 
aa 0 tartar: «9 Geta qamed: | faarottenfiraragteattatiqha 1601

caateed «« Uadaferetiet eae OU AATIETSHTEN

aa aia GT Ue faferach aaritince aAgIaE ek |

apr waitor fameurdisadtl yeeat ag: catenquetrarhare |

we aqdgeatefratrat wal dequserparittad 162! 
Sue pur fara aWea: Ud Stet Alea NPE Val Beal FA: WA: 1G3 1

" The quality of Rajasis associated with the power of creation and the quality of Sattva wih thatof preservation or fulfilment. 
T The total number of principles of which the cosmos is composed is twenty-five, including Prakrti (Primordial MataD abe 
Purusa (the Spirit). Excluding Prakrti and Purusa the number comes to twenty-three alone, viz., the Mahat-tattva (the eee 
Sf cosmic intelligence), Ahankara (the cosmic ego), the five Tanmatras (subtle elements), the eleven Indriyas Inetuding the 
Mind, &nd the five Manabndtes (gross elements). The entire cosmos (referred to in our scriptures under the name of SLU 
Presideg Over by Brahma (the Sutratma or Hiranyagarbha) will have therefore to be recognized as the twenty-fourth principle

n 
“rder to complete the figure of twenty-four.

a

[ Dis

arate faa art Yyeraqster = faquen: |

adele: sadam aaled: waryiydedeat = axl

Sf SErTad HSMN USS Heda SAHA Yale AAeVMSeAA: 123 1 
Thereupon turning away his gaze in great wonder (and) with all his eleven Indriyas (the 
five senses of perception, the five organs of action and the mind) having been Overpowereg 
by their splendour, Brahma (the birthless one) stood mute like a doll by the side of the Deity 
presiding over the land of Vraja. (56) When Brahma (the spouse of Saraswati, the goddess 
of learning) thus got perplexed—as to what it might be with regard to the Lord—who cannot 
be comprehended through reason, possesses a glory peculiar to Himself, who is of the 
nature of bliss shining by itself, who is beyond (the realm of) Maya (and) who is known 
through the Upanisads (forming the crown of the Vedas) by the process of negating what He 
is not—(nay) when he was unable to perceive even those (divine) forms, Sri Krsna (the 
supreme birthless Lord) who perceived his perplexity immediately drew off the curtain of His 
Maya. (57) Having now regained his vision outside, Brahma rose like a dead man (brought 
to life again) and, opening his eyes with great difficulty, beheld once more this universe 
alongwith his own self. (58) Looking round at once in every direction, he saw stretched before 
him (the woodland of) Vrndavana thick with trees that served as a means of Subsistence to 
the people and having agreeable objects scattered all round, where creatures bearing 
natural and inveterate enmity, such as human beings and carnivorous beasts, lived together 
like friends and from which anger, thirst for enjoyment etc., had disappeared, due to SriKrsna 
(the invincible Lord) having taken up His abode there. (59-60) Brahma (the highest 
functionary of the universe) beheld there the secondless transcendent Infinite (Absolute) 
possessed of fathomless wisdom, playing the role of a child born in the line of a cowherd and 
looking about all alone as before for the calves and Its companions with a morsel (of cooked 
rice) still in Its hand. (61) Perceiving this and hastily alighting from his mount (the swan), he 
stretched his body like a staff of gold on the ground and, touching the Lord's feet with the crest 
of his four crowns (one after another) and bowing down, bathed them with limpid water in the 
form of tears of joy. (62) Recollecting again and again the glory, witnessed ere long, of Sil 
Krsna, he rose again and again and remained lying down at His feet fora long time. (63) Then, 
slowly rising, and rubbing his eyes, he gazed at Sri Krsna and with his head bent low and 
composed in mind he proceeded in great humility with joined palms to extol the Lord ina 
faltering voice and with a trembling body (as follows). (64)

; Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in the first half of Book Ten 
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PII SEE my

Dis. 14 BOOKTEN 163

Discourse XIV

Brahma extols the Lord

FENATA 
anftsr aswagd’ afseaua yeradauifreseeqe |

atest cmasaafasmuausantsa yeue = UCTS | 2 
stag ea aust nae BoM aA a ye ash

wa afe wala ares Manda feeqaereaye: | 2 | 
we sage Aad wa staf apeahat sadtearaiq 
wan Ret: sfertat qari sraatisieta fidiserfa aRaereare 1 3 
saat weqe a fan fasaha a acces | 
ware «68 6a ee wear x |

Brahma prayed : | offer my praises, O praiseworthy Lord, to You, the Son of a cowherd, 
with tender feet, and clad in a costume bright as lightning, endowed with a personality dark 
as a (rainy) cloud, a face resplendent with ear-rings made of Gunja seeds and a crest of 
peacock feathers, and with a garland of sylvan flowers and graced with a morsel of food, a 
cane, a horn, a flute and other emblems (borne in Your hands). (1) Even I, Brahma, cannot 
truly comprehend with a mind turned inward the glory, O Lord, even of this personality (of 
Yours, revealed before us)—the instrument of Your grace on me, shaped according to the 
will of Your devotees and certainly not a product of gross elements—much less directly of 
Yourself, consisting (as You do) of Truth, Bliss and Consciousness. (2) O invincible Lord, 
You stand generally conquered in (all) the three worlds even by them who spend their time 
solely in venerating with their body, speech and mind Your stories spontaneously told by 
Saints (visiting their house) and fallen on their ears (without any effort on their part), remaining 
at their own abode and totally giving up (all) effort at (attaining) spiritual enlightenment. (3) 
Inthe case (however) of those who, neglecting Devotion—the fountainhead of (all) blessings 
(in the shape of worldly prosperity and final beatitude)—to You, O almighty Lord, take pains 
to attain mere spiritual enlightenment, such enlightenment ultimately proves to be no more 
than a source of exertion alone, as is the case with those who are engaged in pounding the 
(mere) coarse husk. (4)

we aq 4 aeaste «86 alfttreaattcdet «= stendseerat | 
fagea vada aelodida swfetssisea a mit WII 4 | 
ant we AeA a |= faalagecdordact: | 
sfathard «486 aNaleead «= Mallee AAS. 1 «I 
Toes wre fad feradia wm Persea 
wea dat fafa: gaetfoa: a fafeer gua: 0 1 
ws gadiaaot Wit wiped feared 
weraufifizesrma sfidad at afore @ aaneict

Of yore, O infinite Lord, many a striver adept in numerous Yogas Or Modes of 
spiritual discipline) in this world, who (having failed to attain their object by any Other 
Yoga) resigned (all) their activity to You, realized their true nature through Devotion 
acquired by their own (dedicated) actions and developed by (hearing) Your stories. and 
forthwith attained Your supreme state, O immortal Lord! (5) The glory, O Perfect One 
of Your Being devoid of attributes can all the same be realized by the pure-hearteg_ 
who have turned their senses inward—through the direct perception of their ming, Cast 
into the mould of the Self to the exclusion of (all other) specific moulds and free from 
objectivity; as a self-effulgent entity (incapable of being objectively perceived) and not 
otherwise. (6) Who have (ever) succeeded in reckoning the attributes of the Lord in You 
the Controller of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), come down (to the material plane) 
for the good of this world ? None, not even they by whom, exceptionally clever as they 
are, might have been counted the particles of dust on earth, the dew-drops in the air or 
the rays of luminaries in the heavens. (7) He has his share ensured in the boon of final 
beatitude (although he has no use for it and never claims it), who lives on (in this world) 
eagerly looking forward to Your grace, (nay,) simply enjoying the fruit of his own 
(virtuous) actions (in.-a detached manner) and bowing to You with his heart (mind), 
speech and body. (8)

ua asda sate wie waeta arfenarn 
Trat fadeafarqareara va we feareatararat! = 1 
ad: aad A Witat wWetdeaqeityate: | 
aac Saag = Waisqmrar ary Aarti gol 
aale wages Gai aarsyaatecdvsreuaiadtetcna: | 
adehanaiiidvenuatadeniaaana A a Alea 
saan |ominda wed: fe aeadt aArdreltasma 
feakdadtearaesytad dae pat: faced: 1e2t 
Look at my wickedness, O Lord, in that | sought to witness my own glory, having 
(endeavoured to) cast a spell even on You, the infinite Lord, the Cause of all, the 
supreme Spirit, the Deluder of deluders ! Indeed of what account am | before You any 
more than a flame before a fire (from which it has emanated)? (9) Therefore, O immortal 
Lord, forgive the fault of mine—a product of Rajoguna, who accounted myself the 
almighty Lord independent of You, a fool that | was, with my eyes blinded by crass 
ignorance in the shape of the egotistic notion that | am the birthless creator—thinking 
that this fellow deserves Your pity, having a protector in Yourself. (10) Invested with 2 
body possessing a height of seven spans (according to my own measure) and presiding 
over this cosmic egg, frail as a pitcher and having (an eightfold) sheath of the Prakit 
(primordial Matter), Mahattattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), ego, ether, air, fire, 
water and earth, | stand nowhere when compared to the glory of Your (infinite) Being 
whose pores resemble air-holes for the passage of countless (such cosmic) eggs (tha 
float in them) like (so many) atoms. (11) Does the kicking up of heels on the part of 4 
foetus constitute an offence against the mother, O Lord, who are above sens?

perception? (And) is there anything whatsoever—falling within the range of positive of 
negative terms—outside Your bowels? (12)

ANTAL I 
fatricissieata are A a yer fs cigar cat faPricitsfers 23 | 
aad = tO de eoTeftenacieitarareft t

: 
:

Dis. 14 ‘» BOOK TEN *.*' 165

ARS AWiermamsa wae A ada aAriexi 
aoa dd wustey: fe A a gq «wanda 
fe at Ws de a aa fe A ada welch ieu 
saat iT COC: «= STI 
pee Urdist Wet ata seclpd a12é! 
qa Haag Wa Ae wil ae aa aaeie ad ad fete aren faa iee 
Sela AGASE Fes AA A A HTaTaTATa hae SS Tea al AST RS ACA: AAS ST 
Mansa AqysAahaS: Aes Hadas TRAYRIaa Hellas TTA 12S 
Surely the statement (of the scriptures) that "Brahma (the birthless creator) actually 
sprang from the lotus at the navel of Lord Narayana reposing on the deluge water at the time 
of the dissolution of the three worlds" is certainly not untrue. Have | not, under the 
circumstance, (You being no other than Narayana,) come out of You, O almighty Lord ? (13) 
Are You not actually Narayana, since You are (the life and) soul of all embodied beings (aK 
stands: ai aq) ? (Nay,) You are their Prompter (ani a4 yafa: aaa) as well as the Witness 
of all creatures (aK 314d siafa). (The celebrated) Lord Narayana, so-called because He has 
His abode in things produced out of Nara (God) as well as in the waters evolved out of Him, 
constitutes a form of Yours. Your appearing in a finite form (however) is not true; itis a mere 
sport of Yours. (14) If that form of Yours, constituting the support of the world, (really) stays 
in water (and is thus finite), why was it not perceived by me, O almighty Lord, that very time 
(when | embarked on a quest for it, entering the lotus-stalk, on my failing to trace my origin 
when | emerged out of the lotus) or why was it clearly seen in the heart at that very moment 
(when | concluded my austerities) ? And why was it not beheld by me instantaneously again? 
(This shows that, even though You are all-pervading, Your sight depends entirely on Your 
pleasure; it does not indicate Your finite character). (15) It was in this very descent of Yours 
(as Sri Krsna), O dispeller of (all) delusion, that the undoubtedly illusory character of this 
entire externally visible universe was actually revealed by You within Your abdomen before 
Your mother. (16) (Just) as all this (creation) including Your own Self appears within Your 
abdomen, so does all this appear in this universe (outside Yourself) too. Is this possible in 
You except through Your Maya (deluding potency) ? (17) Was not the illusory character of 
(all) this other than Yourself revealed to me by Yourself this very day? At first (before the 
calves and their keepers were stolen away by me) You alone existed; after that (when the 
calves and the cowherd boys had been stolen away) You appeared in the form of Your 
companions in Vraja as well as of the calves and all other paraphernalia (such as their flutes, 
horns etc.). Then (again) You appeared in as many four-armed forms, waited upon by all 
Categories (in a living form), accompanied by myself. Then again You became as many 
universes and now remain as the infinite Brahma without a second. (18)

saat «Si AealeIaetissaat «= fasi(asdfkD—«Sss TATA 1 
gf wn fam sa aatisd ga fra: 1281 
wey ada qa ofely | eee sorte 
wreadt «6 gHlefrvera iss fete: «= TT AT IROL 
ae af wa we We aMtattdiitadactaa | 
Sa we a aft at aelt fae wise ara ire 
wee 4 wenenaqaed 8 owaeaediaent |= Wee!

unease: TT: A: Weaddtad «- SUT: 1 
Rasetisraga freq: oiseat ge = sorferdisqa: 1231 
Wfat ai waaay 9 aeMAeada faaard | 
dest a at Aria WarFarPaenyz 12% | 
sanded «lta eT (Gs ATI 
aaa wast a at sett wameditsrarat ae iu 
staat «| Maat «gt OTC TO aTTGATCL | 
sweet i(iCCRtiCéfeTO § ss TT fate 1261 
aa Ut ual uwmemaa aisnen welts stelsasrad 21 
sraaSad Wanda Oder Wrahat Gd: | 
Taam «=| CTTCC( (ssf) SPA AA: 12 
In the eyes of those who are ignorant of Your (supreme) nature You are the Spirit 
identified with Prakrti (Matter) and, having spread Maya by your own Self, appear as myself 
(Brahma) for the purpose of creation, as Yourself (Lord Visnu) standing before me for the 
sake of preservation and as Lord Siva (the three-eyed) for the dissolution of the universe.(19) 
In order to curb the foolish pride of the wicked, O Lord, as well as for showering Your 
grace on the righteous, O Maker of the universe, You appear among the gods, the Rsis and 
even so among human beings, as well as among the beasts and birds and even among 
aquatic creatures, although You are birthless (as a matter of fact), O Master ! (20) When You

engage in sports spreading (the curtain of) Your Yogamaya (enchantment), O infinite Lord, | 
who can know of Your activities in (all) the three worlds—as to where or how or when they |

come into play and what is their number, O supreme Spirit, the Master of Yoga ? (21) 
Therefore, appearing and vanishing in Your infinite Self, the embodiment of eternal Bliss and 
Consciousness, by virtue of Your Maya, this entire universe, which is unreal by nature like 
a dream, devoid of intelligence and full of abundant and endless misery, appears as real (as 
well as eternal, full of bliss and consciousness). (22) You are the one Self, the most ancient 
Person, real, self-luminous, infinite, the very first, eternal, imperishable, full of uninterrupted 
Bliss, taintless (untouched by Maya), perfect, secondless, devoid of all adjuncts and 
immortal. (23) They (surely) cross as it were the false ocean of mundane existence, who 
perceive through the penetrating eye of wisdom obtained from the sun-like preceptor You 
as such, the very Self of all living beings, as the Self of their own self. (24) In the eye of those 
who fail to perceive the Self in its true character the whole universe is evolved through that 
very ignorance and again it disappears as a result of spiritual enlightenment, even as thé 
body of a serpent appears and disappears in a rope (through ignorance and knowledge of 
its real character respectively). (25) Bondage in the form of mundane existence and releas? 
from it—both are as a matter of fact (mere) names given through ignorance. In relation to the 
absolute transcendent Self, consisting of eternal consciousness, when investigated, they 
have no existence separate from the Self, which is truth and consciousness.combined, any 
more than day and night have separate existence in relation to the sun. (26) Oh! suchis the 
folly of the ignorant folk that regarding You, their very Self, as other (than themselves), 2"

the body etc., (which is other than the Self) as their self, they look for the Self (the sup eme 
Spirit) outside (their self). (27) In this psycho-physical organism (which comes into being): 
O infinite Lord, the wise indeed seek You alone, rejecting (all) that which is other than You

Dis. 14] BOOK TEN © 167

(viz. the body etc., which iS Ordinarily recognized as one's own self). Could even men of 
correct judgment perceive the rope (which is mistaken for a snake through ignorance) lying 
near at hand without negating the snake though non-existent ? (28)

i MRCS ECR To i a a 
wit wet te afest a ara uals fax faferai2e! 
dq Awa a waft waa ama a a fara 
arenas wast wy fea qa ueuewaq 1301 
aes «| aSTINAa: «ee Stadila is Wer | 
areat « faat «oan «= amasenftl «oa | area: 1321 
Sal ARAM APA weno aeaa was gl wa Ga 1321 
wa q Araneae dacemaresa fe at aq warm: | 
Uddeeyateralatch Wchd, fara: WMaleaseHesteayaraa a 1331 
Nevertheless, O self-effulgent Lord, he alone who is blessed with an iota of grace of Thy 
lotus-feet can in fact realize the essence of Your glory; none other can do so even though 
investigating it for a long time all alone (in uninterrupted seclusion). (29) Therefore, O Lord, 
may that great fortune be mine, whereby in this (the life of Brahma) or any other life even 
among the subhuman creatures | may turn out to be anyone of Your devotees and lovingly | 
tend Your feet, tender as afresh leaf. (30) Oh, highly blessed are the cows and cowherdesses | 
of Vraja, the nectar-like milk of whose udders and breasts was gladly sucked to Your heart's 
content by You in the form of their calves and sons, O almighty Lord, to whose gratification 
sacrifices have not proved equal even to this day !(31) Wonderful and remarkable is the 
fortune and good-luck of the inhabitants of Vraja ruled over by Nanda, the chief of cowherds, 
whose near and dear one is (none other than) Sri Krsna (the all-perfect eternal Brahma), the 
: Embodiment of supreme Bliss ! (32) Let the greatness of fortune of these (cowherds),

however, be left aside for the time being, Oimmortal Lord! Ah, even we eleven* (gods), alone ; 
are highly blessed indeed in that through the cups of the Indriyas (senses of perception and i

* The names of the deities presiding over the ten Indriyas and the mind (which constitutes the eleventh) are given

below:— 
Name of Indriya The deity presiding over it 
1. The auditory sense The deities presiding over the quarters (Digdevatas) 
2. The tactile sense The wind-god 
3. The sense of sight The sun-god 
4. The sense of taste Varuna (the god of water) 
5. The olfactory sense The Aswinikumaras 
6. The organ of speech Agni (the god of fire) 
7. The hands Indra (the ruler of the gods) 
8. The feet Upendra 
8. The organ of defecation Mitra 
10.The organ of generation Prajapati 
11.The mind The moon-god

Brahma (the deity presiding over Buddhi or the intellect) includes himself among the deities presiding over the Indriyas 
and mentions the name of Lord Siva (the deity presiding over Ahankara) as well in the same connection. Hence, the internal 
°rgans of Buddhi and Ahankara (the ego-sense) should also be taken as included in the list of the eleven gods. Evidently, the 
dsities Presiding over the organs of defecation and generation seem to have been left out of consideration by Brahma because 
these two Organs of the cowherds are of no use to the Lord. The number of the presiding deities thus remains eleven only.

_

organs of action) of these (cowherds) we, Lord Siva and others (the deities presiding Over 
those Indriyas) repeatedly drink the nectar-like and inebriating honey of Your lotus-feet | 
(When even we gods, who enjoy only a part of Your beauly in the shape of the fragrance Gic.. 
of Your body through the respective senses and organs of the cowherds of Vraja, deem 
ourselves highly blessed on that account, how much more blessed are the cowherds 
themselves who enjoy the beauty of Your entire being through the different senses and

organs at once !) (33)

ae yftaratie ora fereeaat aq peste paarefresnshrany |

asifaa ¢q Afas war yeaa aaamt: wafrpada ax 
Tal HeMataaad Var fee ta Tala AHA fase Hes AA HATA Fale 
aaa Uae wet aa eared aerndigeiseradaswunaeacha 134 | 
Wa WUE: WARM SAYS WEA! Maaesahhrst Aad HO A ASAT: 13 1 
sus fasusist faeaafa wyaeisoasmacece sf sa 1301 
SH Ud Sy fe aga a A WA aaa age atet aud da we: 13¢1 
Sele Al HO Gd a aha Adem I AAA BTA AM BNeddaritay 1381

senate «= farfttieraepencanihted «= Ta AAT IX!

That will be my greatest fortune whereby my birth is ensured in any (Subhuman) species 
whatsoever on this earth, much more so in Gokula (the land of Vraja) and still more in the 
woodland (of Vrndavana) with the privilege of bathing in the dust of feet of any of the residents 
of Vraja whose life and everything (else) of course is Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of 
Liberation), the dust of whose feet as a matter of fact is only being sought after (and has not 
been attained) by the Srutis (the Vedas) even to this day. (84) Our mind is puzzled to think 
where and what reward other than Yourself, the Embodiment of all rewards, will even You 
(who are able to give everything and do everything) bestow on these inhabitants of Vraja, 
whose house, wealth, near and dear ones, body, sons, life, and mind exist for You (alone), 
when (itis remembered that) even Pitana with her (whole) family was called (by You) to Your 
presence alone, O self-effulgent Lord, by virtue of her merely putting on a loving guise (the 
guise of a mother). (35) Attachment etc., play the role of robbers (rob us of our spiritual 
wealth), the house serves as a prison and infatuation acts as a fetter only so long as we do 
not become Your devotees, O Krsna ! (36) In order to swell the volume of joy of people that 
have sought refuge in You, O Lord, You imitate the ways of the world on the earth, though 
You have no connection with the world. (37) Let those alone who claim to know You know 
You. Whatis to be gained by talking much (about them) ? Your glory (however), O Lord, does 
not lie within the reach of my mind, body (organs of sense) and speech. (38) Give me leave 
(to go), O Krsna ! You know everything, O omniscient Lord ! You alone are the Protector of 
the worlds; (therefore) this world (including this my) body (both of which | have regarded as 
my own), is (hereby) offered to You. (39) O glorious Krsna—who (like the sun) bring joy to 
the lotus of Vrsni's race and (like the moon) swell the ocean in the form of the earth, the gods: 
the Brahmanas and the cows—the Dispeller of the darkness of pseudoreligion, the Enemy 
of the Raksasas on earth (such as Kamsa), O Lord who are worthy of adoration for all 
including the sun-god, let my salutations be to You till the end of the cycle. (40)

MY SAT 
safupa wat fa: uke wet: iaanits wre warm yee 1%?!

| 
|

aS TA, SYS safer ae, Beret wears wa 1x2 | 
wenferare Arise STU aTTISSeH: [POTAeA Us aoe Afartssenr: 13 | 
fe fh 4 rete Tater: | ated Sere Besant ferezareraey YY | 
waa Te: FU SMM Asitigan | Anise Hac Ula: AI YSAAMT su 
ad a wieeiszaga wenth: iakismiert ada ag, ATA IYG |

qa Waypritaraikiittieaqea: sae Weiser 
saat = Helen PUTTS | SASHA et STARA SATE AST FAT: 1S

Sri Suka continued : Having thus glorified Sri Krsna (the infinite Lord), Brahma (the 
creator of the universe) went round Him (as a mark of respect) thrice and, bowing at His feet, 
returned to his realm (Brahmaloka), which is adored by all. (41) Then, granting leave to 
Brahma (the self-born) the Lord brought (back) the calves, that stood (grazing) as before 
(they were stolen by Brahma), to the bank of His choice (which He had selected for His repast 
with the cowherd boys and) where His companions had been waiting for Him as before. (42) 
And even though a whole year had passed without Sri Krsna (the Lord of their life, in whose 
absence even a moment hung heavy as a year at other times), the (cowherd) boys, O 
Pariksit, regarded it as half a moment, infatuated as they were by the Maya (deluding 
potency) of Sri Krsna ! (43) What do they not forget in this world—they whose mind stands 
deluded by Maya, infatuated by which the whole creation remains constantly forgetful of 
itself! (44) And (lo !) the friends (of Sri Krsna) said, “It is well that You have come (back) with 
great expedition. Not a morsel has (yet) been swallowed by us; come this side and dine (with 
us) to your heart's content." (45) Thereupon Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the senses) laughed (a 
hearty laugh), took His meal with the (cowherd) boys and; showing them the skin of the 
python, He returned from the forest to Vraja. (46) His person picturesquely decked with the

plume of a peacock and blossoms and painted with fresh minerals, (nay,) full of joy atthe shrill

notes of flutes, whistles of leaves and horns, and lovingly shouting to His calves, Sri Krsna 
(whose very sight brought delight to the eyes of cowherd women) entered Vraja, His purifying 
glory being sung (all the way) by His followers. (47) "Today a large serpent has been killed 
and ourselves saved from it by this son of YaSoda and Nanda !" So did the (cowherd) boys

Proclaim in Vraja. (48)

WHAT 
| TE Wea Hal sar Ta He WALI Asya erty seas 1s |

The king (Pariksit) said : (Pray) tell me, O holy one, how was such a love possible (in 
the case of the inhabitants of Vraja) for Sri Krsna, born of another, as did not flow before even

lowards children sprung from themselves ?* (49) 
yeh Sara 
waemfr yaat qa ada aeOH: | gatsTefaaTEMtErT TTA ya. 
We Ute aa Be: Gaara eet aA |= ca TAA RATA AT TEES 18 |

Sereranieat Pe ie TRIE | ae Fe: Hae A A I A ALG?! 
"This. has reference to the statement made by the sage Suka in verse 26 of Discourse 13 3 = en Be

Sasi AAAI Srgal aad, Fa: | asidatt cesiey sitfaaran acter 143 | 
aed Hada: arent aaarata afar! dana BS og ATSTERTAT | x | 
PUMNAAate UIA | Skea Ase sears Aaa pun) 
agit Waa Fl wre aay al wagaahac are, afkae fear ius) 
aaa aaa sat vata fea: 1 cena mar per: feats Saar yo 
‘agra a ueuewagd vac yoo qm: 1 
wargame Ui wd ud ue aq faual A AML I4CI 
Sri Suka replied : To all created beings, O protector of men, their own self alone ig 
dear: others such as one's progeny and wealth are dear only because of the latter being 
loved by one's own self. (50) Therefore, O king of kings, the same love as Is seen in the 
heart of embodied beings severally for their own self, they do not have for their son, wealth, 
house etc., which are regarded as their own. (51) (Nay,) even in the eyes of men who speak 
of the body (alone) as their own self, O jewel among the Ksatriyas, those (men and objects) 
that are connected with the body are as a matter of fact not so supremely dear as their (own) 
body.(52) If even the body (which is ordinarily regarded as one's own Self) comes to be 
recognized (as a result of deep thinking) as one’s own (other than one's self), it would not 
then be loved like the self whereas (previously) the desire to survive was very keen even 
when the body was worn out. (53) Therefore, one’s own self is supremely dear to all 
embodied beings; the whole of this creation, mobile as well as immobile, is loved for the 
sake of the self alone. (54) Know this Krsna to be the Self of all living beings; for the good 
of the world (alone) even He appears through His Maya (deluding potency) like one 
invested with a body. (55) In the eyes of those who know Sri Krsna in reality (as the Cause 
of the universe) everything mobile and immobile in this world is a manifestation of the Lord; 
there is nothing other than Him here. (56) The essence of all things lies in their cause and 
Lord Sri Krsna is the (ultimate) cause of the latter. (Hence) what substance other than Him 
may be affirmed ? (57) With them who have sincerely taken refuge in the boat-like feet of 
Lord Sri Krsna of sacred renown—feet which are tender as a fresh leaf and are the goal 
of the great (such as Brahma and Siva)—the ocean of mundane existence is reduced to

the (mere) footprint of a calf. (Nay,) Vaikuntha (the highest realm) becomes their abode 
and the world (the home of miseries) ceases. (58)

UM aaarendt ad ysisete wari aa ala eta ahs uate 14e! 
G0 GR ACCEL TRE wget a | 
crema wide sua yuaft aishaerat iol

wi feet: att: att aegiti fered: daaehidetuaarfs: 162! 
eo AEP ad A UA Alea <A Yalel Aenea aqeaseae: 12%!

What | was asked by you on this subject has all been narrated by me, viz., how that which 
had been done by Sri Hari during His childhood was proclaimed on all sides during HI 
boyhood. (59) A man hearing or reciting this story of what was done by Sri Krsna (the Slaye! 
of Mura) in the company of His playmates, (viz.,) the destruction of the demon Agha; E 
dining on the grass, His assuming forms which were other than phenomenal and the gran 
hymn of praise sung by Brahma (the birthless one), would attain all his desired ends- A 
Thus Balarama and Sri Krsna passed their childhood in Vraja in childlike pastimes such 4

” 
; 
: 
|

-_—_—__-_—_— ——s ee SS ES 
— ee _— — - Le ; )

RAAB ES ESSE SS ihe Br Br Br Be Br Br Hr he He He he hr Hr Be Be Bre Br Be Be Be Be Re Br Be Re BER Be BERR RR BRR RE Re RRR RY BER Be OR Be Boa Be

hide-and-seek, construction of dams and jumping about like monkeys. (61)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled "Brahma extols the Lord," in the 
first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BY Uean sea:

Discourse XV

The demon Dhenuka slain

MN FATT 
wag urueay: fit at ayaqett aque | 
Tana «wae: at added yvandia aed: 12 | 
amet aga ad athfnts: east aettad: | 
Wet Up uefa faedam: Haat aq! 2 | 
Taganey taste ASA: Tea Aaa I 
ant Ws wen filer ch war wat aati 2 | 
Q wa atenuesaire wesgaenter areal: | 
Qusar atet add yet wafaaermsmiicges: |x | :

Sti Suka began again : And then, having attained (their) boyhood in Vraja, the two 
Brothers were approved (by Nanda and others) for (taking up the work of) tending the cows. 
While grazing* them in the company of Their playmates, They rendered (the soil of) 
Vrndavana most sacred by Their footprints. (1) Su rrounded by cowherds—who were singing 
His praises—and accompanied by Balarama, Sri Krsna (the Spouse of Laksmi), who was 
ager to sport, entered the said woodland (of Vrndavana), the store-house of blossoms and 
900d for the cattle, driving the cows before Him and playing on His flute. (2) Observing It full 
Of bees, beasts and birds making delightful sounds (nay,) fanned by a breeze blowing over 
@ pond, whose water was clear as the mind of an exalted soul, and wafting the fragrance of 
lotuses, the Lord made up His mind to sport (there). (3) Perceiving at every step trees whose 
boughs were touching the feet (as it were of Balarama) with the heavy load of their me ae 
flowers as well as with the wealth of their ruddy leaves, and smiling as it were with joy, the =

ri Krsna (the most ancient Person) spoke to His elder brother (Balarama) (as follows). (4)

ae anne

e We a e = = 
read in Padmapurana Eat Sea: wa ay ones : 
“The eighth day of the bright half of Kartikais remembered by the wise as Saat Dee Be ars riKrsna

(the Son of Vasudeva) passed as a cowherd; before this however, He was a (mere) keep i

ATTA TAT 
aatCott SC Raamd | ergata Hee 
wre )«= renfnereriscett ENT HAT GI 
wiseraa aishaeotndist med sifaqearqye std | 
wat anit afro wade We ais A TeeAaTHesy 1g | 
qa frkaa ger yet eftoa: Hata wer ga a Prater | 
Sas HSMN TRARTAA at Sales gard fe Gat Frect: 1 © 
TAA MU idler ed: Hwee: | 
TENSE: WIM: Petal Nasa yA Aeger sit: 1c | 
The glorious Lord said : Oh, for the elimination of their stupidity, by which was brought 
about their birth in the vegetable kingdom, these trees, O chief of the gods, bow with their 
(bending) boughs to Your lotus-feet, adored even by the immortals, bringing (with them) for 
You offerings in the shape of flowers and fruits..(5) These bees, O most ancient Person, 
resort to You at every step, singing Your glory that is capable of purifying all the worlds. In 
all probability they are (no other than) hosts of hermits, the foremost among Your devotees, 
who do not forsake You, their Deity, though concealed in the forest, O sinless One! (6) These 
peacocks, O praiseworthy One, dance in joy; the she-deer like the cowherd women bring 
delight to You with their glances and the flocks of cuckoos extend (their) welcome to You, 
arrived at their home, with their sweet notes. Blessed are these denizens of the forest; for 
such is the nature of the righteous. (7) Blessed today is this earth no less than the blades of 
grass and plants that kiss Your feet, the trees and creepers touched by Your nails (while their 
leaves and flowers are being plucked by You), the rivers and mountains, the birds and beasts

regarded (by You) with kindly looks, and the cowherd-damsels pressed (by You) to Your 
bosom, which is coveted even by Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) ! (8)

Mp SAA 
Wi Fala stad Hen: shat: wy W anata: ahead att: |< | 
wieq Walt mead veenfeqqad: | snitaaaia: edt ugdonbad: 1201 
eta aerate «pis afiqeata seri afeor eraraa wha 122! 
Terrie areal aaPagET, UY wleereatt «ste Aetorenrige 122 
Vases = aie: | arg wt Gat irae STAR: 122 | 
aad misuherd wWakasuadmiwd fast aedarearahy: 12x! 
Jad Mead: aft aed qeadt fae: | Wetaexit TWAS FAat Waratad: 124! 
wad ueoadety maesmenitta: | qarensa: aa maagiaadur: 1°6! 
Wiedaiet dg: dame Hele: 1st gaan ama: anda Vy 
ara degen wien 6 Welerd: I aha wt Hert Aefwafera: we: 126! 
w fragrant: ane ames aftafteaar 
sO enfoarereect «oor: 0S eet aati: 1201 
Sri Suka continued : Delighted thus at heart at the sight of the glorious Vrndavana, Sri

Krsna with His followers (the cowherds) diverted Himself while pasturing His cattle on the 
river banks in the vicinity of the mountain (Govardhana). (9) Adorned with a garland a”

— 
~ 
_— 
-_ 
—_ 
— 
~ 
_ 
— 
= 
- 
an 
— 
— 
— 
re 
= 
'

i

accompanied by Sankarsana (Balarama), He sometimes sang in the midst of humming bees 
blinded with intoxication (caused by the sucking of honey), His exploits being celebrated by 
His followers (the gods or cowherds). (10) Now He uttered a (shrill) cry in imitation of the 
crying of swans while at other times He danced in front of a dancing peacock, delighting it 
(thereby). (11) In a voice sonorous like the rumbling of clouds and fascinating to the cows 
and the cowherds, He would sometimes lovingly call cows, that had strayed far away, by their 
names. (12) He imitated the cries of Cakoras, Krauficas (curlews), Cakravakas (ruddygeese), 
the Bharadwajas (skylarks) and peacocks and now in the midst of animals He would 
behave like one afraid of the tiger and the lion. (13) At times He would Himself refresh 
Balarama (His elder brother)—exhausted with play and lying with his head placed on the 
pillow-like lap of a cowherd—by kneading his feet and other services. (14) With Their hands 
clasped together the two Brothers sometimes laughed and applauded the cowherd boys 
when the latter danced, sang, ran or wrestled with one another. (15) Overcome with fatigue 
in combat, He sometimes lay down in beds of tender leaves (prepared by His playmates) 
at the foot of a tree with His head placed in the pillow-like lap of a cowherd. (16) Some boys 
kneaded the feet of that great soul, while other sinless ones cooled Him with fans (made 
of leaves etc.). (17) With their mind steeped in love, O great king others would gently sing 
songs befitting the occasion and pleasing to the mind of the great soul. (18) With His reality 
thus fully concealed by His own deluding potency and imitating the ways of a cowherd boy 
by His conduct, Sri Krsna—whose tender feet are caressed by Rama (the goddess of 
prosperity) and who would (now and then) behave as the almighty Lord (Himself) sported 
like a rustic in the company of rustics. (19)

sera ATA Wael Waheed: Gall qaealnpwnen Ma: Woledgqa 120!

Ta WA veel Hem eBhadi aisagt Gree at Metioages 1221 
wel at wt adea alata Alara fHaaegi Wha FUT 122! 
Aishratasay WA F HON UMAayR | MeaeaseraMiaAstetdd: 1231 
Tea ode «oo ddaetia Mert aap: ufagidatsiary 12x 
faeisymgain met aeitt waive a give fageitisayed 1241 
Tees a A: HO WererAredtae! avert Aedt WA Wadi ale Wed 1261

A cowherd boy, Sridama by name, a (bosom) friend of Balarama and Sri Krsna (the 
Protector even of Brahma and Siva), and other Gopas, the foremost among them being 
Subala and Stoka-Krsna, lovingly spoke to Them (as follows;—(20) “O mighty-armed 
Balarama, O delighter of all, O Krsna, the Destroyer of the wicked! not very farfrom this place 
there lies a very extensive forest* thick with rows of palmyra trees. (21) Plenty of fruits lie 
fallen there and continue to fall; but they are guarded by the wicked Dhenuka. (22) Heisa 
demon of great prowess, disguised as a donkey, O Rama, O Krsna, and is surrounded by 
Many other donkeys equal in strength to him. (23) The forest Is (therefore) never resorted 
to, O Slayer of foes, by men, afraid of that demon, who has tasted the human flesh; nay, 
itis shunned (even) by herds of cattle and flights of birds. (24) The fruits have never been 
tasted (by us) before and are sweet-smelling (too); their delicious smell, which has spread 
all round, can be directly perceived even here. (25) O Krsna, make them available to us, 
Whose mind has been lured by their odour. Great is our longing (for them), O Rama; let us

99 (there) if it pleases you. (26) 
* The site is now located in the south-west of Mathuya at a distance of eight miles from Govardhana, and is known by

the name of Talsi or Tarphara.

wd deer: Ae Pelofentdar | sez SHAG AS Wz 12X0) 
ae: Sea TS MOM SARS! Ho UTTAR AST SATA 122 
eat Udal wet feragqeres: | seaead fafa art RET 129 
aaa Aa NAEL Ea Uasat ae set | Peas ARIed GSA TAA Ge: 1301 
GRA USI SGRIET WTR fd: | aOTaT UBM aera ifsc Sar 13g) 
a a yaar wadvinfdenitrr i fadta GRETA wrens 132 1 
Saredl Helatet «Aaa «= gefesar: | ore rere a: BT BSH TTT 133 1 
aoe MPA ATG eeeMad: | erste Ua Aglaia ga get 
Saat Oo afa SCAT atasaiee alters AST We: 1341 
ad: FR AWA A Wat Aqna Al MIeNisasad Gd GSM eareaM: 136 
AeA: HOT WA JA oHloral | Wettasracoy, STEUIGURTY 13191 
THesIchwaS it teem: Ist OY: ATTRA | ATL 8 C1 
Tae BAe SH Fama faqs: i qqgq: quasiftr apatentt apa: 13¢1

AQ Aeherde WN Walaa: |G WA wraseede yond vol 
The two almighty Lords heartily laughed to hear the above prayer of Their friends and,

accompanied by cowherds, proceeded to the forest of palmyra trees with intent to oblige —

Their loving companions. (27) Entering the forest and thoroughly shaking the palm trees on 
all sides with both His arms Balarama, like the young of an elephant, caused their fruits by 
(sheer) bodily strength to fall down. (28) Hearing the sound of the falling fruits, the demon 
in the guise of a donkey rushed (towards Balarama,) making the earth's surface quake along- 
with mountains. (29) Coming up with great speed, the powerful demon struck Balarama in 
the chest with both of his hind legs; and, giving forth a harsh cry, the wicked fellow ran hither 
and thither. (30) Coming up again in a rage and standing with its back turned towards 
Balarama, the donkey kicked up its hind heels in violent anger against him, O king! (31) 
Seizing it by the-fore part of its feet with one hand and whirling it, Balarama dashedit, against 
the foot of a palmyra, the demon having given up the ghost in the (very) process of 
whirling.(32) Shaking when struck by that carcass, the huge palm tree with its extensive top 
crashed shaking the adjoining tree. The latter (too) fell down shaking (still) another, and that 
too came down shaking a fourth (and so on). (33) Hit (indirectly in succession) by the tree 
which was struck by the carcase of the donkey dashed in sport by Balarama, all the palm 
trees (of that forest) shook as if swept by a hurricane. (34) This was indeed no miracle on 
the part of the almighty Balarama, (who was no other than Lord Ananta, the serpent-god):; 
the Ruler of the universe, in whom this universe is woven, warp and woof,” as a piece of clot 
in the threads, O dear one! (35) Their relation (Dhenuka) having (thus) been killed, the 
donkeys, the kindred of Dhenuka, all then rushed in fury towards Sri Krsna and Balarama 
too. (36) SriKrsna and Balarama, O protector of men, playfully dashed them against the palm 
trees, seizing them by their hind heels, even as they came rushing towards Them. (37 
Scattered over with heaps of fruits as well as with the carcasses of the demons alongwith 
the tops of the palm trees, the earth shone like the vault of the heavens overcast wit 
clouds.(38) Observing that very great feat of the two ( divine) Brothers, the gods and othe! 
(such as the Vidyadharas and the Caranas, the celestial bards) poured down showers o 
flowers; sounded musical instruments and uttered praises. (89) Henceforth in that forest, 
that had (now) been rid of Dhenuka, men fearlessly ate of the palm fruits and the cattle graZz¢

on the pasture land. (40) 
ages eee eal: | aaa: «AEN ASATASTL 1S 1

u : THAR etre vag T ITAA PRATOTATESTAT | 
a RUM rat tegfarteansenmasy Aa: 1¥21 
“eat eaywaneniaysend 4 oweftest asretfedishe | 
aacpit wanna fader ms wstesrafaad CUTS Ma 13 | 
qareatentgvat =u: Grae laurent genes arerat uefa: 1x 
TATA = aA Tear: | tat afar SRR Reremerafiedt vu 
SS aie ATeaqIetedt | dee areata Waa ve 
Being glorified by His followers, the cowherd boys, and accompanied by Balarama (His 
elder brother), Sri Krsna—whose eyes were large as the petals of a lotus and the hearing 
and recital of whose glory bring religious merit (to the devotee)—returned to Vraja. (41) The 
cowherd women with eager eyes went forth in a body to meet Sri Krsna, who had the plume 
of a peacock and wild flowers fastened to His curly. locks soiled with the dust raised by the 
hoofs of cows, who had charming eyes and wore a winsome smile (on His countenance), 
(nay,) who was playing on His flute and whose glory was being sung by His followers. (42) 
Drinking with their beelike eyes the honey-like beauty of the lotus face of Sri Krsna (the 
Bestower of liberation), the women of Vraja dismissed the agony born of their separation 
(from the Lord) during the daytime; and Sri Krsna entered Vraja duly receiving their homage, 
which took the form of sidelong glances accompanied by bashful smiles and modesty..(43) 
Yasoda and Rohini who were (so) fond of their Sons, provided Them (Sri Krsna and 
Balarama) with excellent food and raiment suited to the occasion and according to the latters’ 
wishes. (44) Relieved of the fatigue caused by Their excursion (to and back from the woods) 
by bath and massage etc., the two Brothers put on a charming loin-cloth, were adorned with 
an exquisite garland and sandal-paste, ate the delicious fare brought by the mothers and, 
fondled by them They lay down to rest in Their excellent bed, and slept comfortably (at Their 
mansion) in Vraja. (45-46) 
Ud G UNE HM gale: Hf! sat Wage wor, ailerdt Ghahida: ive 
Aq masz may ferns: ies We weed fase xc 
faarsraquegza caededa: | fadelaa: wa oord Hage xe! 
aes ar 8 aa YA HON Aaa: leaaryava SAA AAsitaad 140 | 
a wadicaaa: aaa Herder! ster alate: ae atarron: TT 148 | 
Stated de Ue Mferatqaear dha tas RAM GASIARIS: 1421 
: sft sftaserrad Fergal UCASE Slee SAH TAA Aya A Tere RNS ETA: 1841 
Thus rambling in Vrndavana, the aforesaid Lord Sri Krsna once went to (the bank of) 
the Kalindi (Yamuna), accompanied by His playmates, to the exclusion of Balarama, O 
Pariksit | (47) Oppressed with the summer heat, and tormented with thirst, the cows as well as 
the cowherds presently drank of the unhealthy water of that (part of the) river, contaminated 
with poison. (48) Having sipped that poisoned water, their judgment vitiated by (an evil)

destiny, they all fell dead by the side of the water, O jewel of the Kurus ! (49) Finding them 
reduced to that condition, Sri Krsna, the (supreme) Lord (even) of masters of Yoga, fully

_

restored them to life by His (mere) gaze, that showered nectar, since He was their Only 
Protector. (50) Having forthwith regained their consciousness, they rose up from the brink 
of the water and, staring at one another, all stood amazed. (51) They took it to be a regu 
of the gracious look of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows), O Pariksit, that having drunk poison 
and fallen dead they should rise again. (52)

Thus ends the fifteenth discourse entitled "The demon Dhenuka slain," in the first 
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ZIT BrSanseaa:

Discourse XVI

The Deliverance of Kaliya

AIH SAA 
facies efiat Pon par: Fonten fay: iden fayfgnraw, A Aqearaad | & |

Sri Suka began again : Finding the Krsna (Yamuna) poisoned by a black snake and 
seeking its purification, Sri Krsna, the almighty Lord, expelled the said serpent. (1)

Toa 
Ssiosma Jee Weare! aa agar anssete fan Hear | 2 I 
Te Wades Wa: Vedat: Melek Byard As! 2 | 
The king (Pariksit) said : (Pray) tell me, O (holy) Brahmana, how the Lord was able to 
eee the snake—that had taken up its abode there for a number of Yugas—under the 
thee water (of the Yamuna) and how as a matter of fact he continued.to be there (for 
such a long period). (2) O (holy) sage, who would feel sated while drinking the nectar in the

form of the charming narrative of the aforesaid infinite Lord acting according to His own will 
and playing the role of a cowherd boy ? (3)

Aah Savq 
chic chlimareeaee: chiar fare | mera aha UaaheM: Tam: | ¥ | 
gai femtattaredatrateta: | rat dem ae safer: fersigam: 1 4 | 
q wusdnfasctinder tt epi adl a WoRtarara: | 
Po: Hee Adishideaenler Mert =e fawe 1 & 1 
age: Geran rarterratatrareraares aaa: | 
eget Fmenmrateitinttetar agar fir aio |

wa St faert yuquequioniivas axanurferare | 
Aa ad wena Mier aaa AAAMEAAAT: | C |

EEE

My eiekiasanescs BOOK TEN 177 
FR RRRSASSSESENRANSSDA NESE R ENED EREEEEERERREREE EERE REEEERENo RES 
a Sauiiaggarcraad sftantant aageerd 
Fate ae ata: 9 Ug[UT aoe 
alia wae feat s12o]

airet qe aca: segue: Yg-Raa: | HPO Aan wat Bad sa AT! 221

Sri Suka resumed : In (the bed of) the Kalindi there was a certain pool, inhabited 
by the serpent Kaliya, whose water was being constantly boiled by the fire of its poison, 
and into which birds flying over it fell down. (4) Touched by the wind which blew over 
the ripples of that poisoned water and was surcharged with its spray, living beings, 
mobile as well as immobile, standing on its brink, met their death. (5) Observing that the 
strength of the snake lay in its poison possessed of tremendous force, and finding the 
river contaminated by the serpent, Sri Krsna, the very purpose of whose descent (on 
earth) was the subjugation of the wicked, climbed up a very lofty Kadamba tree (which 
had evidently escaped destruction by the will of Providence) and having tightened the 
piece of cloth tied round His waist and slapping His arms (in a challenging mood) jumped 
from that height into the pool of poisoned water. (6) With the volume of its water swelled 
by the poison of the snakes that were agitated by the vehemence of the plunge taken 
by the Supreme Person, the serpent’s pool—whose terrible ripples had been coloured 
by the action of the poison—overflowed in all directions and expanded to the extent of 
a hundred bows (or four hundred cubits). That was (however) no miracle on the part of 
the Lord, who is possessed of infinite strength. (7) Hearing the splash of water stirred 
up by the stout arms of the Lord, who was sporting in the pool like a large elephant, O 
dear Pariksit—and perceiving the voilation of its abode at the latter's hands, and unable 
to brook it, the serpent (whose auditory sense is located in its very eyes) approached 
the Lord. (8) Biting hard in a rage in His vital parts the Lord—who was (most) charming 
to look at, delicate of body and bright as a cloud, who was distinguished with a golden 
streak (on His breast) and was clad in yellow (silk), (nay,) whose countenance was lit 
up with a smile and who was sporting fearlessly with His feet tender as the pericarp of 
a lotus—the snake enclosed Him in its coils. (9) Sore distressed to see Him caught in 
the coils of a cobra with no movement visible (in His body), His loving friends, the 
cowherds—who had dedicated to Sri Krsna their body, kinsfolk, wealth, wife and 
luxuries—and whose judgment had been clouded by sorrow followed in succession by 
grief and fear—dropped down senseless. (10) Lowing in utter distress, cows, bulls and 
heifers stood as if weeping in (great) fear with their eyes riveted on Sri Krsna. (11)

BIT at aAgtartalaenr Giaereum: | saqufa SIA ANAT: 1.221 
aed | eran witot aQR TT: | fear WAT aT: Het Mca Aa ATL! 83 
SeRrahert a WUT: | ATOR SACHA: | 8 
aacagatrar: was Waea: | Pringigeng cht: HereeAcMcAaT: | ku | 
TANT Hr atest TAL Teal Act: | weet faattares WaraaisasHeT A: 1 LE 1 
Asdenror ert qt Pata Ves: | wae: TET AGW Wey! Vol 
Meanwhile most terrible and grave portents of three kinds foreboding imminent danger 
(Severally) appeared on the earth, in heaven and on the body (of individuals) indeed in 
raja.(12) Noticing then and coming to know of Sri Krsna having gone (out) to pasture the 
CoWs unaccompanied by Balarama, the cowherds headed by Nanda felt agitated with fear. 
(13) Concluding from those ill omens Sri Krsna to have met His death, the cowherds—who 
did not know Him (as a matter of fact) and whose life was Sri Krsna and on whom they had

Sete ROR RRR RR RR TE MORE Me He Me PERE ENE Se Be we Be We MN HEE We We Re He wy At my S. 1 6

etre stent teeceet ete detent tot tote atten , Pt He¥ey:

fixed their mind—were overwhelmed with sorrow, grief and fear. (14) Possessing the 
(motherly) affection of a cow and thirsting to behold Sri Krsna, they all, including Children, the 
aged and womenfolk, O dear Pariksit, issued forth from Gokula, distressed IN mind. (15) 
Seeing them So perplexed, Lord Balarama, a scion of Madhu, heartily laughed and said 
nothing, knowing as He did the glory of Sri Krsna (His younger Brother). (16) Searching for 
their beloved Krsna along the track indicated by His footprints bearing the characteristic 
marks of the almighty Lord, they headed towards the bank of the Yamuna. (17)

aq «wa AATSHAAT SMT AAA AT uelft fagad: | 
wt warmer fran aay aca: 1eéI 
sdec USTTMTTERNIAA, eT Patheqaessat Hoard | 
Tas Wels. Ufa: ays Pad: GMAHRAeAUAl: 1291 
MASA «Wad | MlechdfaetHhR: WT: | 
Teste aati yeaa: ya raeted aayfaety 120 | 
MT: POAC Mas TqeqaIa: AA Wa: Aaa: | 
AR AMMAHM: HAA A HOAAsda Yaewadten: 12k! 
PUMA Ale Alet A SAA NAVMLA WIA WA: HONGAAatad 1221 
Carefully observing at every step on the path trodden by the cows footprints of Sri Krsna 
(the Protector of the cowherds), distinguished by the marks of a lotus, barley seed, a goad, 
a thunderbolt and a banner, in the midst of others’ footprints, O dear one, they marched with 
quick steps. (18) Spying from a distance Sri Krsna caught in the coils of a cobra and devoid 
of (all) motion in the middle of the pool, and the cowherds lying senseless on the brink of the 
pool and (even so) the cattle piteously cry all around, they felt (sore) afflicted and fell into a 
swoon. (19) With their mind attached to Sri Krsna (the infinite Lord) and recalling His love, 
smiles, glances and utterances, the cowherd women felt agonized with utmost sorrow when 
their most beloved One was entrapped by a snake, and saw the three worlds desolate without 
their Darling. (20) Holdingin check Yasoda (Sri Krsna's mother)—who had followed her Child 
into the stream—and shedding tears of grief, equally pained as they were, they recounted 
the stories of Sri Krsna (the Beloved of Vraja) and (eventually) stood as though dead, with

their eyes riveted on the countenance of Sri Krsna. (21) Perceiving Nanda and others—

whose very life was Si Krsna— proceeding to enter that pool, the aforesaid Lord Balarama, 
who knew the greatness of Sri Krsna, stopped them. (22)

wi Migewamid fier wellparafie:feaaaed: | 
ata «86aeaedtaaqadam: fern Yeddaltsetearened 123 | 
TAMA AAT AAA GAT: HUT AE: | 
Ta Megara Bleitern: 12x! 
a trea fefraen ofteteert 3 git afemmtanfretar | 
misay UGA aM Gitst aum diseraar TAAAAMT: 1241 
Wa uksmedsegadare «aga: wafinas ara: |

pis. 16] BOOKTEN ....... Pe.

a ARM A amas teeter’ mequeeiisefrare: | 
BOTAN WA STOTT STS ae TI OTRO ATT: 122 
TeMlahrhegend: freq aa aa aqaait Reset ward: | 
TO NATAL raraya yet: yf sae GA WUT: 1221 
arereusarfereroreoTEA wh WES an qa wT: |

cet Heese rept: art frera yf yqaft wore: | 
wees: Paslode: Wea wnidera: Borg Mot WAI: 1321

Thus finding the inhabitants of His Gokula exclusively dependent on Him and perceiving 
them alongwith their womenfolk and children sore distressed for His sake, Sri Krsna (who 
was following the ways of mortals) continued in that state (entrapped in the coils of the snake) 
for about an hour and (then) escaped from the bondage of the serpent (by expanding His 
body. (23) The serpent, whose own body was feeling oppressed by the expanding person 
of Sri Krsna, (now) left Him and, holding up its hoods in a rage, stood hissing and breathing 
out poison through its nostrils and staring at Him with its eyes motionless and burning as a 
frying pan and emitting flames through its mouths. (24) In a sportive mood Sri Krsna, like 
Garuda (the king of the birds), wheeled round the snake, that was licking both the corners 
of its mouths with its forked tongues and was emitting a most terrible fire of poison through 
its glances; and the serpent too went round waiting for an opportunity (to bite Him). (25) 
Bending (with His hands) the serpent, whose energy had been spent through its whirling 
motion, yet whose heads continued to be uplifted, Sri Krsna (the most ancient Person), the 
first Teacher of all arts, leapt on its broad hoods and began to dance, His lotus-feet turning 
crimson due to their contact with the multitudes of jewels on its hoods. (26) Perceiving Him 
intent on dancing on that occasion, Gandharvas, Siddhas, gods, Caranas and Apsaras, who 
were (all) His servants, lovingly approached Him all of a sudden with clay tomtoms, tabors 
and large drums, musical instruments and songs, flowers and other offerings and songs of praise. 
(27) The Lord, who wielded (on this occasion) a severe rod of punishment, crushed under the 
tread of His feet whichever hood of the serpent—that had a hundred prominent heads and 
which kept on wheeling even though its life-energy had almost been spent—would not bend, 
O dear king, ejecting deadly blood (mixed with poison) through its mouth and nostrils, the 
Cobra fell into a deep swoon. (28) Continuing to dance (with untiring zeal) Sri Krsna (the most ‘ 
ancient Person) subdued the cobra, successively bending under His foot whichever of the 
heads of the snake—that was ejecting poison through its eyes and violently hissing in rage— ; 
Would raise itself. (With His feet bespatterd with the drops of blood ejected from the eyes of . 
the serpent) the Lord appeared as though devoutly worshipped with flowers. (29) With its 
umbrella-like hoods crushed by the Lord's weird dance and its limbs shattered (due to the 
€xpansion of Sri Krsna's body), and spouting copious blood through its mouths, the serpent 
(now) thought of Lord Narayana, the most ancient Person, the adored of the mobile as well 
8S of the immobile creation, and mentally sought Him as its protector. (30) Distressed to 
Perceive the snake sinking under the immense weight of Sri Krsna, who holds the 
(numberless) universes in His abdomen, and its umbrella-like hoods crushed under the 
Strokes of His heels, its wives approached the Lord (the most ancient Person), their clothes 
2nd ornaments as well as their hair-bands falling in disorder. (31) Leading their children

before them and stretching their body on the ground’, those chaste wives (of the S€rpent 
presently bowed low to the aforesaid Sri Krsna (the Protector of all created beings) with 
joined palms and, eager to secure the deliverance of their sinful husband, sought the Lord, 
who affords protection to all, as their refuge. (32) 
UTA HF:

aan ff ae: cadfafeansitiaaadar: Gola |

fat: gama aqraedd a weaned 33!

sqaeisad Nad: at fe at qUeisadi ad Ua Hea: |

ae weaqeanqet afea: snletisia dsqe Wt GA: 12%!

aa: aa fea wa feart a aM

qaisa al Udsriqnua ad arqeid advila: 1341

eaquasa a ea fase caareterojeariferenn: |

ageea sideaissrmm fade amr det yaaa 1361

AI Weg A a adda a usd a wate

a a@afagroada at apeht aAaeet:sual: 131

ten Tag SOTA: AAMT: |

Wands wad: aie afd: we fava: aaAat: 1361

The wives of the serpent prayed: Just is the punishment meted out to this offender;

for Your descent (on this earth) is intended for chastising the wicked and You regard Your 
enemy as well as Your sons with an undifferentiating eye. (Nay,) You inflict punishment 
(only) because You anticipate good results (from such punishment). (33) (As a matter 
of fact,) this is aboon conferred on us by You inasmuch as Your punishment to the wicked 
indeed wipes out their sins. Your wrath itself is esteemed (by us) as a boon (in disguise) 
in that it has rid our husband of the sin as a result of which the state of a serpent was 
inflicted on this embodied soul. (34) (1 wonder) what austerities were rightly performed 
In a previous incarnation by this serpent free from pride and bestowing honour on others 
or else what religious act was done by him out of compassion for all created beings, by 
virtue of which You, the Giver of life to all, have been pleased (with him). (35) We are 
unable, O Lord, to discover for what (meritorious) act has flowed to him the privilege of 
touching the dust of Your feet, seeking which (even) Sri (the goddess of beauty and 
prosperity), a Jewel among women, (whose favour is sought even by Brahma and others) 
practised austerities for a pretty long period giving up all luxuries and observing sacred 
vows! (36) Having secured the dust of Your feet people neither covet the uppermos! 
heaven (the realm of Brahma) nor the rulership of the entire globe nor the position of 
Brahma (the highest functionary of this universe) nor dominion over the subterranean 
regions nor the mystic powers of Yoga nor (even) final beatitude (the cessation of

rebirth). (37) (How wonderful it is that even) this Kaliya (a ruler of the serpents), born ©! 
Tamoguna and belonging to the race called the Krodhavagas,+ has secured, O Lord, tha!

nm

* According to a learned and saintly commentator, who is believed to have directly perceivéd the pastimes of the Lord, theré

was an islet in the middle of the pool, where the Lord danced on the hoods of Kaliya. Apparently it was on this islet that the wivé 
of Kaliya stretched themselves.

T Vide Verses 24 & 29 above.

—————7 71TH —rooed

es 
rr

qust, which cannot easily be attained by others. To an embodied soul revolving in the

irliai dane existenc } ) | | 
whirligig of mun € and seeking this du 
neatitude) becomes manifest. (38) 9 st the desired wealth (including final

UTTAR aera Tas TTT 1381 
aMfagrarterea TAUISAHA | STUOTTaT aaa AMMISMpda Also! 
aie AON roraraaat i faa agus det fautad vei 
STATA SAMOA SMTA | Perris PSST A 1S? | 
vista YeATA Hews feof | aerate Aaa Aha 183 | 
7a: SAUTeTe oat eaaingaa fama fem al aa: 1x 
7a: PUTA Wad aygeaqaa wisgarnhea aradt wdd Aq: 1vul 
va Usd Wiese AlyqMue Wwe weladivel 
seated fares adenpataga | eit aT Ga laaitiost vel 
wai Pala a aa: 1 afew a faa abs a ea Ive!

Hail to You, the infinite Lord, enshrined in (all) hearts (as their Inner Controller), the 
Support of (all) the (five) elements, eternally existent as the Cause (of all)! the Supreme Spirit 
(beyond all causes)! (39) Salutation to You, the Absolute, the Storehouse of knowledge and 
consciousness, devoid of (all) attributes, immutable and endowed with infinite energy as the 
Propeller of Prakrti! (40) Hail to You, the Time-Spirit, as well as the Support of Time and (also) 
the Witness of the (various) divisions of Time, appearing in the form of the universe, as well 
as its Seer, the Maker of the universe, as well as its material Cause! (41) Salutation to You 
(manifest) in the form of the (five) gross and the (five) subtle elements, the (ten) Indriyas (the 
senses of perception as well as the organs of action), the vital airs, the mind, the under- 
standing and the intellect ! Salutation to You, in the form of the ego, consisting of the three 
Gunas, that has screened the realization of the (innumerable) Jivas (embodied souls), 
constituting Your rays ! (42) Salutation to You, who are infinite, subtle, immutable and 
omniscient, who (by Your Maya) are the subject of diverse theories and speculations and 
who are manifested in the form of the name, the object named and the power inherent in the 
name to denote a particular object. (43) Hail to You, the Root of (all) the means of cognition, 
Possessed of absolute knowledge, the Source of the scriptures ! Hail, hail to You 
representing both worldly activity and withdrawal from it in the form of (the injunctions of) 
the Vedas ! (44) Hail, hail to Sri Krsna, the Protector of Devotees, in the (four eternal) forms 
(VyGhas) of Rama (Sankarsana), Vasudeva, Pradyumna and Aniruddha ! (45) Salutation 
to the Illuminator of the inner sense’ (in its four phases of mind, reason, the intellect and 
the €g0), appearing in diverse forms after concealing Himself behind the three Gunas and 
Indicated by the functions (such as cogitation, determination etc.) of (the aforesaid four 
phases of) the internal sense, their self-knowing Witness. (46) Let our salutation be to You,

Ruler of the senses, whose glory cannot be comprehended through reasoning, who are 
the Originator and Revealer of all phenomena, who revel in Your own Self and are given 
to Contemplation. (47) Hail to You, who know the condition of the high and the low (alike), 
Who preside over all, who lie beyond the universe and are the universe itself, the Witness 
aS well as the Cause of the universe. (48) 
me

; " This refers again to the four Vyuhas mentioned above, presiding as they do severally over the four phases of the internal 
- 3@nse. .

ee 
a ga witefdary wt Wioietspanrenheyg | 
queauar «owas, «=e: «= ataaTatefaere | FEAT wR 
qa aqenaacteat eT SVT Sd WSataa: | 
wrt: frat wetfad wal wigra dt etatierdted ito! 
sme: UpRat Weed: TUS: | ATA MM FST TAS: 1 49 | 
ses Ta MTech | UT: | ALOT A: STEVIA let: WOT: WeTTATTL & 2 | 
Raf a festraqsd dag | aegagaitsy 4 qed adatraraqi 43) 
Though destitute of desire, You actually bring about, O Lord, through the (three) 
Gunas (modes of Prakrti), the creation, preservation and dissolution of this universe. 
wielding as You do the eternal potency in the form of Time, and awakening by Your 
(very) penetrating look, the various dispositions, already present (in the Jivas in the form 
of predisposition) and (thus) carrying on Your sport, which is never futile. (49) All these 
forms in the three worlds—(whether they are) gentle, violent (Rajasika) or belonging to 
an ignorant (Subhuman) species (Tamasika)—pertain to You alone as described before 
(and exist for Your play). Of course, at present, the gentle ones are dear to You since 
You have descended (on earth) with intent to maintain the righteousness of the virtuous 
and continue (here) with a view to protecting them. (50) The fault once committed by his 
own dependent deserves to be forgiven by the master. (Therefore,) be pleased, O 
tranquil-minded Lord, to pardon the offence of this stupid creature that does not know 
You. (51) Be gracious (to him), O Lord; the serpent is about to give up the ghost. Let 
our life in the form of our husband be vouchsafed to us (helpless) women, deserving to 
be pitied by the righteous. (52) (Pray) ordain what should be done by us, Your maid- 
servants. For, one acting according to Your command with reverence is surely rid of 
mundane existence (which is beset with fear on all sides). (53) 
aya Jaa 
sa Aoeiieinay waned: iqhed ward faaantefirepet: 14x! 
vials: | chifetea: | ete | RA SAT SIT: HOT Ure haTostler: 144 | 
aa Ger: Pela aaa dheiwaa: | aual Gest Ast cheat AqaaMe: 146 | 
wat gee fast enenfofeasiay | amiearadidisiaacisngrarata = 1 49 | 
at A da Way aa Weeada: | Het easel Geeta Aled: CAAA! 4S | 
War, fe A aa Bagt sidtear: 1 ste Poe at waa aq fees 7148! 
Sri Suka continued : Thus fervently praised by the serpent’s wives, the aforesaid 
Lord spared the cobra, that had fallen into a swoon, its hoods having been smashe 
with the blows of His heels. (54) Having gradually recovered its senses and vitality 
and breathing in the normal way with difficulty, the wretched Kaliya prayed to Sri Krsna 
with joined palms (as follows)—(55) “We are wicked since (our very) birth, constituted 
as we are of (predominantly) Tamoguna and possessed of lasting anger. The nature 
disposition of living beings, O Lord, which is responsible for their identification with 
the body etc., (which is unreal) is difficult to give up. (56) This universe, O LOM 
which is a diversified product of the three Gunas, and is endowed with divers? 
peculiarities, bodily and organic strength, fecundity, power of procreation, latent desir oo 
and external forms, has been evolved by You. (57) And in that universe (toO) MG 
serpents, O Lord, are most ferocious by birth. How (then) can we get rid of Your May? 
(deluding potency), which is (so) difficult to escape, by our own efforts (without Your 
grace), deluded as we are ! (58) In fact, You, the omniscient Ruler of the universe, S¢™

‘, BOOK TEN, ..1= 183

] Br We He Be MERE ME He Mee We Be Ke He He ROME HME He He Be Me Me ar tege

s an instrument in overcoming Your Ma

a. Theref 
‘shment to us as You think fit. (59) y ore, show Your grace or mete out

Mh SAT 
garnvd aed: se rear, arengE: | at Wet we ed wag aie aT

pun

afer AAT Aaisats eardteneers: | sity a waa Aaa: we 1G 
aa Ae fee BetUS: | aA qoUleal AIO SAL 13 |

Sri Suka went on: Hearing this (prayer), the almighty Lord, who had assumed a human 
semblance on purpose replied, “You ought notto stay here, O serpent! Accompanied by your 
kinsfolk, progeny and wives, proceed you to the ocean without delay; let the river be used 
by the bovine race and human beings. (60) The mortal who duly remembers this command 
of Mine to you, reciting it both morning and evening, shall not have fear from you 
(serpents).(61) He who having bathedin this pool, the scene of My sport, propitiates the gods 
and others with (its) water and, observing a fast, offers worship to Me, thinking of Me (all the 
time), is completely absolved of all sins. (62) That Garuda (lit., he who is endowed with 
beautiful wings) for fear of whom you took shelter in this pool, leaving the island of Ramanaka, 
shall not devour you, marked as you are with My footprints." (63)

Ml SATA 
Taq = ATaT HMAaMeHaUT ASTATATA -WeT ATacas Ala GX I 
fersegita: ume yao: | ferengqeus ASA AGATSA 1G | 
Usa sae «eel «= TeStaL| Ad: Midissaaaid: Ulead W161 
wneageda 89 dameniaa «= gi dea ge aT Pafetersar 
AAS TAM: HISTATATAMATT: 1&9 | 
sfa Sierrad Fea TAS Seca aT Fateh saa ATA UTSeTISEATA: 126 |

Sri Suka continued : Commanded thus by Lord Sri Krsna of wonderful deed, Kaliya 
as well as his wives devoutly worshipped Him with joy by means of unearthly raiment, 
garlands and gems as well as with superb jewels, heavenly perfumes, sandal paste and 
a large wreath of lotuses. (64-65) Having worshipped Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the universe) 
and propitiated the Lord whose banner bears the device of Garuda and duly permitted by 
Him, Kaliya thereupon went round Him (as a mark of respect) and greeted Him and 
accompanied by his wives, kinsfolk and sons gladly withdrew to the island of Ramanaka

In the ocean, so the tradition goes. Rid of poison, the water of the Yamuna presently 
became nectar-like (again) by the grace of the Lord who had sportively assumed the

semblance of a human being. (66-67)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse entitled "Deliverance of Kaliya," in the first half 
of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PIRES ID

SIA ASA SATA:

Discourse XVII

The Lord rescues the inhabitants of Vraja from a wild fire

UAT 
ane HUG MM lisa: | pd fee al qauler daca e |

The king (Pariksit) submitted : Wherefore did Kaliya leave Ramanaka, the home of the 
Nagas, and what wrong was done by him alone to Garuda?(1)

Mh SaTI

sued: adsaaia amte at afer: | amet Aelalel aria We Prafaa: 1 2 | 
@ @ UM waesha arm: udier udftrimidienaeaa: ad qaula aes 3 | 
fasdiinaias: ameaae ailled: | mein mes Ga a ays aie x 
creep Hud Us War wats: | fafrarqderat: 9 caiieat ayaa! & |

qaudd aa faarae: TAM eas AHA: |

aes: quui aese cae: caouetigtepfaderea: | € |

q meg: a Fea wa waueam veer: |

vanr ae sfaueifaet eS Haafama: | © | 
quuiuentted: aileatsdia faa: i ge fade wifeeramd aaa ¢ | 
wae Sot Teel weadiftad arta: atufton seer atferisetd! ¢ | 
dM, de:Raar, Bt cM diaadt wai aa Atak: we aaa igo! 
oA Stara Test aie A A Meld | Ga: wMidgsa aera was 188!

a lied: Ut dq ara: met wee: | saree teste ta: po a ferarfaa: 122!

Sri Suka resumed : On every Amavasya (the day preceding a new moon) for their own 
protection all the Nagas gave to the high-minded Garuda their own share of offerings which 
was brought for them from month to month as previously arranged to the foot of a tree (at 
Ramanaka) by the worshippers of the Nagas, who served as food for the latter (and were 
consequently in constant terror of them), O mighty-armed one*! (2-3) Puffed up with price 
resulting from (Superabundance of) venom and strength, however, Kaliya, son of Kadru, 
would disregard Garuda and consume the offerings itself. (4) Seized with wrath to hear thls:

the glorious Garuda (the favourite of the Lord) swooped on Kaliya with tremendous spee 
with intent to make short work of it, O king ! (5) With its many hoods raised and its fiery eyes 
a a eee a

protection of Brahma, who summoned Garuda and brought about peace between the two parties by layingit down—with mut! : 
consent—fhat whatever was brought as an offering to the Nagas at the foot of a tree in the realm of the Nagas 9" pee 
Amavasya should be collected and offered as food to Garuda, who should satisfy his hunger with those offerings and dee

from killing the snakes:—

war wae YAY AG wag! wafer fered wataa erga fe il 
om fe Tree yan Fa deaqi sfa oaenat wal mis mia afel eee

|

pis. 17), He He eMC HE Meee BE He Me Me He Bee He He He Pe oF POIIK TEN 185

wide open, the cobra (which had poison for its weapon) advanced to meet Garuda—who was 
rushing with (great) speed—and bit him hard with its fangs, using them as its weapon, 
wagging its fearful tongues. (6) Pushing it back, the wrathful Garuda (son of KaSyapa), who 
serves as a seat of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) and is possessed of a terrible 
speed and formidable prowess, struck the son of Kadri with his left wing, brilliant as gold.(7) 
Beaten by the wing of Garuda, Kaliya felt extremely agitated and entered the aforesaid pool 
of the Kalindi, which was inaccessible to Garuda and could not be easily entered (because 
of its great depth). (8) In that pool once upon a time (during the reign of Emperor Mandhata) 
Garuda forcibly carried away, though stopped by the sage Saubhari, an aquatic creature (a 
large fish), his favourite food, hungry as he was. (9) Seeing the (other) fish sore afflicted and 
miserable consequent on their leader having been killed, the sage Saubhari compassionately 
declared (as follows) with a view to ensuring the security of that pool (against the onslaughts 
of Garuda):—(10) “If entering this pool the famous Garuda eats the fish (here), he will 
immediately be deprived of his life; | utter this (bare) truth." (1 1) Kaliya alone was aware of 
this utterance, no other serpent knew it. Afraid of Garuda he was living there and was now 
expelled by Sri Krsna. (12)

Pa Sale fattenrd feeraaresaras | Aeraforronesatot WRaAea dL 123 |

seman: We GAMUT garda: | watefayeast Ao: sent ex!

ager Uigot wal Weal gs aka Hal Wa Sele BAC HSMAAAT: 1241

Tasos = - ARTA Mafad | AM Mal FAT AT SHA UAT Wa 12a 1 
aa fam: Gare Wa: Anode: | Sa aleare fess ameares: 1291 
ef aa fesndat porfadieedad | ve: Masa Us TM: Gaul aatfasrd 1221 
aera AMM Asses Udliukeensanrear WAlaMaHet YE: 1ke1

Finding Sri Krsna come out of the pool adorned with an ethereal garland, bedaubed with 
a weird sandal paste and clad in heavenly raiment, decked all over with a number of large 
gems and graced with gold ornaments, all the cowherds rose even as the senses return on 
life being restored to them; and with their mind full of rapture they hugged the Lord with (great) 
love. (13-14) Meeting with Sri Krsna, YaSoda and Rohini, Nanda as well as the other 
cowherds and cowherdesses, O Pariksit (a scion of Kuru), regained sensibility and had their 
desire fulfilled. (15) And, embracing Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), Balarama, who knew His 
greatness, laughed. (Even) mountains, Cows, bulls and calves derived supreme joy. (16) 
Coming up to Nanda, the Brahmanas including his well-known preceptors with their wives 
Said, "Luckily (enough for us) your son, who was seized by Kaliya, has been liberated. (17) 
Bestow gifts on Brahmanas on the ground of Sri Krsna's deliverance." With a delighted mind, 
O king, Nanda thereupon gave them cows and gold. (18) The highly blessed and virtuous 
Yasoda too, who had recovered her lost child, hugged Sri Krsna and placing Him in her lap,

Shed tears (of joy) again and again. (19)

at UB aa WSR atyerar srenfear: | aapisitenet Wa: Hiller SAcHerd: 12ol

Ta afsaaredt arenfa: wad aera efter anger arya 12k

FO wer aeraT 2 warhraiase | UT aN alert Tat fe A: 123 : 
| Wee: MM ule Hers: Gee: NM IA «APART PeaMPAA ATL 1 VY I 4 
[565] B.M. Part II—35 a

<=

si wade «fitted SoTdten: | qarafteritasrassaar hen ekg IQu|

eft siEMTaa HE URES Seca <A Yates cron AA TaaRMSeATA: 1261

Oppressed with hunger and thirst and worn out with fatigue, O king of kings. the 
inhabitants of Vraja as well as their cows spent that night near the bank of the Kalindj. (20 
In the course of that night a wild fire, that broke out in the forest dried with summer heat 
surrounded the whole of Vraja lying asleep at midnight and began to burn it. (21) Being 
scorched (with the fire), the said inhabitants of Vraja rose bewildered from that place and 
sought Sri Krsna, the almighty Lord, who looked like a human being through His Maya 
(deluding potency), as their refuge. (22) (They exclaimed,) “O Krsna the enchanter of all, 
highly blessed one, O Rama of immeasurable prowess, this most terrible fire is actually 
consuming us, who are (exclusively) Yours. (23) (Pray) protect us, Your own friends, from 
the deadly fire, which is most difficult to escape from. We are unable to leave for good Your 
feet, our fearless asylum." (24) Observing the perturbation of His own people as aforesaid, 
the infinite Lord of the universe swallowed up that fierce conflagration, possessed as He was 
of unlimited energy. (25)

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse entitled "Sri Krsna rescues the inhabitants of 
Vraja from a wild fire,” in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

STATBTSRT Sea:

The Lord slays the demon Pralamba

AA HN: agar Te q 
ot 4 famlsdta Worermsaqeaitieh amdwaaetaresdhkon i 2 | 
a ad qdemiidad ga ofa: | aad WTA lene UAT WE sala: | 3 | 
aA Rethigichamatistieoent | Bartadlentsitagrausen Sd, 1% 1

Rat: Taran Marsa HENHAACUSLT | 
4 fast oa adleat cat frerraguchualsfanee | 4 | 
STMeTAearg etre SATE: Ofer: Gadd: | 
1 A Msn fasicam yal wi aeied a Weal ¢ | 
a 86a 60 iitackorfesrlimeseeeet «60 para fore 9 | 
pet) PN War Sedad: | aay faxoraa, Meters: <aatsfered| ¢ | 
Sri Suka began again : Surrounded by His kinsfolk, who were (all) delighted at heart, 
and being glorified by them, Sri Krsna presently entered Vraja graced with herds of cows. 
While the two (divine) Brothers were thus sporting in diverse ways in Vraja in the guise °

cowherds by recourse to Their Maya, there set in the season going by the name of summée! 
which is not very agreeable to embodied beings. (2) twas, however, regarded (by the people

i 
; 
| 
} 
j 
|

of Vraja) = susie it were spring due to the peculiarities of Vrndavana, where stayed in

erson Lor : | Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva) alongwith Balarama (3) There 
the chirping © crickets was drowned in the loud murmur of cascades and the land was 
adorned with ee of trees ever wet with their Spray. (4) Due to a breeze (constantly) 
plowing over the ripples of streams, ponds and rills and conveying the pollen of Kahlaras, 
lotuseS and water-lilies In that woodland abounding in green meadows, the heat radiating 
from the summer fires and the summer sun was notfelt by the denizens of the forest. (5) The 
sun's rays, fierce as poison, in that area did not suck up the moisture or the verdant character 
of the earth, whose mud alongwith the sandy banks was (ever) kept moist on all sides by the 
waves beating against the banks of rivers containing unfathomable water. (6) That glorious 
woodland (of Vrndavana) was full of blossoms and teemed with various animals and birds 
giving forth cries (of diverse kinds), peacocks uttering sweet notes and humming bees as well 
as with warbling cuckoos and cackling cranes. (7) Accompanied by Balarama and surrounded 
by cowherds and the cattle wealth, and intending to sport (there), Lord Sri Krsna entered that

forest playing on His flute. (8)

laapement = aT Aaa: 1 < 
PU Fad: hfs: hha ayotrs: ys: wIrgTAayt 1201 
Toss gar wean: get pont aw vet sa ae qaieei 
MASE: aurenledfacndul: | fastsdeaet chlenaarent miei?! 
Paya Aa Maal alent wai ataadeust are atfeafa area 1231 
wfae fara: wha He: a aMonAieh: | sTeqeAAe Tel: PaaS 12% | 
enfire edgrafitadeamread: | aatea, eter afffergeaear 124 
Wa dt olafaait: metiardriaassitiesy SAY GR WIke!

Adorned with tender leaves, plumes of peacocks, bunches and wreaths of flowers and 
minerals (of various kinds), the cowherds, of whom Balarama and Sri Krsna were the 
foremost, danced, wrestled and sang. (9) While Sri Krsna danced, some (of His friends) 
Sang; whereas others produced sounds with their flutes, palms and horns, while still others 
shouted applause. (10) The gods in the guise of cowherds extolled Sri Krsna and Balarama, 
who were (similarly) disguised as cowherd boys, even as dancers would praise their chief, 
O protector of men |! (11) Wearing side-locks (after the fashion of the day), the two Brothers 
Now diverted Themselves by revolving (in pairs with Their hands clasped together), long 
Jumps, putting the weight, slapping the arms, tug of war and wrestling. (12) Sometimes, while 
others danced, the two Brothers Themselves sang or sounded the instruments or applauded 
the dancers, O great king, by exclaiming "Well done ! Bravo !" (13) They would now play with 
Bilva fruits, now with Kumbha fruits and now with handfuls of myrobalans, and now divert 
Themselves by not allowing others to touch one's person, now by shutting another's eyes 
and (allowing him to guess who has done it) and other (similar) sports and now by mimicking 
beasts and birds, now by leaping like frogs and cutting jokes of various: kinds, now by 
Swinging (with the help of boughs of trees) and now by playing the part of kings. (14-15) In

IS way They rambled in the forest diverting Themselves with popular sports in streams,

Mountain valleys and bowers as well as In woods and ponds. (16) 
Wasa aedat WAPOA: | ToC TOASTS 1219 | 
a fet cent wna adeata: | sraiqd Tee ae cet fafa ke! 
schtorga sheer sen: wre feerfera & stor faefterh aatye sera 12a

aA Usp: URact Mot wast i perder: dfackay WAN AM 120} 
aaefeaen: lst amano: | aateed SAR aera aA ahtat: 1221 
aed AGAMA UR Me weds AM ae SAY: HOTA: 1221

(One day) while Balarama and Sri Krsna were grazing the cattle in that forest in the 
company of (other) cowherds, a demon named Pralamba arrived there in the guise of a 
cowherd boy with intent to kidnap the two Brothers. (17) Though knowing him (his rea 
character), the all-perceiving Lord, who had appeared in the race of the Dasarhas, approved 
of his friendship, contemplating the means of killing him. (18) Calling by his side to that spot 
(all) the cowherds, Sri Krsna, who was well-versed in play, said, "O cowherd boys, letus play 
(this time) dividing ourselves suitably into two camps." (1 9) In that game, the cowherd boys 
made Balarama and Sri Krsna (lit., He who is solicited by the people) their leader; some (of 
them) joined the group of Sri Krsna, while others took the side of Balarama. (20) They played 
various games which were characterized by the role of mounts (in the case of one party) and 
that of riders (in the case of the other party). In these games those who won rode, while the 
worsted ones carried the former. (21) (Thus) carrying and being carried, and pasturing their 
cattle-wealth, they (all) with Sri Krsna going ahead reached a banyan tree, Bhandiraka by 
name. (22)

Utagiet af stemqumea: i mist aferetieanqe: Honea F131 
sare PT Wa sama aud: 1 get wa erat evi 12s! 
sfaugl HRM: HO eAagSa: | Ged BA SPMeaeUT: WT IR4I 
ee iets vege fant ff ag: 
a suf: yreuttaser aut diseuniqgaidartsarga: 1261 
Piet eet Ie SS _ Yplederapen | 
wietsa ceniniiepusshaagd eat sara 12! 
saris «6 Get Ss ferererereifaa «= eee: | 
eagihefa aa aia quit fifa amizerieci 
a sted: aula fasitvinet qe an sfncedisar: | 
Tena add eee) ea) Street: 129 |

When (on one occasion) Sridama, Vrsabha and others, who had taken the side of 
Balarama, had the upper hand in the game, SriKrsna and others, O protector of men, carried 
them. (23) Having been worsted, Lord Sri Krsna bore Sridama: Bhadrasena, Vrsabha,; and 
Pralamba, Balarama (the son of Rohini). (24) Thinking Sri Krsna to be unbearable (for him, 
he chose to remain on His side) and acting as a mount for Balarama, Pralamba (the foremos! 
among the Danavas) ran posthaste beyond the limit fixed for demounting the riders. (2 
Bearing on his back Balarama, who had assumed the weight of Mount Meru (the chief of the 
mountains),the mighty demon found that his speed had altogether disappeared and, having 
resumed his own (demoniac) form and, adorned with gold ornaments, he shone like a cloud 
illumined with flashes of lightning and bearing the moon (the rulerofthe stars) onits back.(2 
Balarama (the wielder of a plough for a weapon) felt a bit afraid to perceive that body soaring 
in the skies at a great speed with burning eyes and hair glowing as flames and with its fea 
tusks reaching the end of its contracted eye-brows and looking uncanny with the splendou 
of its bracelets, coronet and ear-rings. (27) Balarama, to whom self-consciousness (ihe 
knowledge of His divinity) had returned the very next moment and who had (consequent

eee ee ee ee ee) Oe oe ee, he Bee eel ee: | ”

been rid of (all) fear, hit the enemy— who was carrying him through the sky as though it were 
some treasure found by him—in (great) rage on his head with his strong fist, which 
descended with the vehemence of a thunderbolt, even as Indra (the ruler of the gods) would 
strike a mountain. (28) With his head smashed forthwith and deprived of his consciousness 
when struck (by Balarama), and vomiting blood, the said demon fell dead, uttering aloud cry, 
as a mountain struck with the weapon of Indra. (29)

qe Sert Med sea amenfeat i an: afafea sreaare alftata ariea: 1301 
STATA SATO ART RAT | Tarawa «=: Safa@eredra: 1321 
aa ser fet ear: often: | saad ac aed: aetg: areata 1321 
gd arerad Hee oRASe Sedat SHAY Yale Serra APTBTESMSeATE: 1221 
Seeing Pralamba slain by the mighty Balarama, the cowherds felt highly amazed and 
shouted, "Well done, Bravo!’ (30) Uttering benedictions on him and embracing him as though 
he had returned to life after death, they extolled him, deserving as he was of such praise, their 
mind overwhelmed with affection. (81) Supremely gratified on the sinful Pralamba having 
been slain, the gods covered Bala with flowers and applauded him exclaiming, "Well done ! 
Bravo !" (32)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse entitled "The Lord slays Pralamba," in the 
first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

et Cnet Cet F.5 
(FIORE

S| Nope SATA:

Discourse XIX

The Lord swallows up a wild fire (again)

Ah FAA 
Higtaeg may dda gqeanwit:iat ace fafagequetta Tem! ¢ | 
st mat afeaga fda aaa aq! satreat fafa: seen qacdhtan: 1 2 | 
ASR: UY War: PORMTEIedel | Sagar + fagifaadt wat wry! 3 | 
Wratcarahearatteretisetttars, lanier aad apisiter faetara: | x | 
Weal «wsarni wand SMe! aaa Wear: Madde AAA | & | 
T Stet waa ATA frail aarat fad sat wfadtg: seftar: 1 & 1 
Sri Suka began again : While the cowherd boys were absorbed in play, their cows, 
grazing at will, strayed afarand, tempted by (green) grass, entereda dense forest. (1) Moving 
'om forest to forest, the she-goats, cows and she-buffaloes felt thirsty from heat and, wailing 
loudly, entered a thicket of rushes. (2) Not perceiving the cattle, Sri Krsna, Balarama and the

Other Gopas were now filled with remorse but could not find any trace of the cows even 
though they searched for them. (3) The Gopas, whose very means of livelihood had (thus)

been lost and who (consequently) felt (very) perturbed, all followed the track of the cows wit

the help of the blades of grass cut by their hoofs and teeth and marked by their footprints. (4 
Having duly found their cattle-wealth, whose passage had been intercepted In that thickey 
of rushes and which was piteously crying, the cowherds, who were seized with thirst ang felt 
exhausted (too), successfully drove it back from the thicket. (5) Called by the Lordina tone 
deep as the rumbling of clouds, the cows responded to His call, overjoyed as they were tg 
hear the shouting of their names. (6)

dd: Waele aMhdigeay Fhe tener |

aHita: wunfeaeaneqnidefees: Rega Ae! © |

ama «OUR «Cea )STTy Ta: «Wetted tet:

SIS PO as wot gaat ee yayatieat SA: 1 c | 
PO FN Ua F Waar laa SMA ATAATTACA: |< 
i mea: He A aewadteqri aa fe aden aateeaTaT: 1201

Presently, by the will of Providence there broke out on all sides a huge wild fire playing 
havoc with the inhabitants of the forest and, lapping with its (tonguelike) fearful flames the 
animate and inanimate beings, now that it was fanned by the wind (its helpmate). (7) The 
cowherds as well as the cows felt dismayed to discern the forest conflagration advancing on 
every side and, flying for succour to Sri Krsna and Balarama—even as people stricken with 
the fear of death would seek Sri Hari—spoke (as follows). (8) "O Krsna, the Enchanter of all, 
O mighty hero, O Rama of immeasurable prowess, be pleased to protect us, who are being 
burnt by a wild fire and have sought You (as our refuge). (9) Surely, Your relations, O Krsna, 
do not deserve to undergo suffering. We have as a matter of fact You (alone) as our protector 
and ultimate refuge, O knower of all righteousness !" (10)

MIA SAA 
aa Fara Hal aati wiam eh: i fdiead ar Ys otearicured 122! 
ae | aifematy | seraTafayestor | then es a page Sree sahara 182 | 
ais dsevadica gawivetariaen: | fama fate saan Ms Alferd: 1231

SUM Ata de Aeaaquiladd| cama: sa ater a Aftsaa 12x!

Sri Suka continued : Hearing the piteous prayer of His friends, Lord Sri Hari said, "Shut 
your eyes and do not be afraid." (11) When they had shut their eyes saying "Be it so,” the 
Lord, the Master of Yoga (mystic powers), swallowed up the terrible fire and (thus) completely 
rid them of the peril. (12) Nay, on opening their eyes they stood amazed to find themselves 
as well as the cows rescued and brought to Bhandira* (13) Perceiving that Yogic power 0 
Sri Krsna—manifested by His Yogamaya—which had brought about their deliverance from 
a wild fire, they believed Him to be an immortal. (14)

™: Oat Bere Aewat wares: 1 aq fara mame warfaBd: 18%! 
Tat Uae std Weraaeit | aot anata arat aa fearvadie6! 
aid APeMad Ae GRAS Seda cares yale cranford

AA STAMSEATA: 1231

* The tree is stated to have been at a distance of 10 miles from the thicket of rushes.

Driving back the cows at eventide, Sri Krsna (whois solicited by the people), accompanied 
py Balarama, withdrew to Vraja playing on His flute and extolled on all sides by cowherd 
boys.(15) Supreme was the joy of the Gopis (of Vraja) at the sight of Sri Krsna (the Protector 
of cow), in whose-absence a single moment hung heavy on them as a hundred Yugas. (16)

Thus ends the nineteenth discourse entitled “Sri Krsna swallows up a wild fire (again)? 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31y faantsear:

Discourse XX 
A description of the Rains and Autumn 
SAF

qaetegt mt aearaaternea: | tor: ava: aurea: Termawa a1 |

Tagg Wes dquenvd fafa: 1 ae faze HN at Ati 21 
Sri Suka began again : The cowherd boys narrated at full length to their womenfolk that 
extraordinary feat of the two Brothers in the shape of their deliverance from a wild fire and 
even so the destruction of Pralamba. (1) Astonished to hear it, the elderly among the Gopas

and the cowherd women too thought Sri Krsna and Balarama to be two foremost gods come 
down to Vraja. (2)

dd: Wadd Sad aden i fetdamahaidaphiaasteten 131 
Uacierdeain aaa: | supers saa a ati x! 
aBt Aram fata ae wasted aq SMa PARA Ustad: ale Bra 1 & | 
dfscarat TeMmasueyatatad: | SU slat Wel Wa: Heol sai « | 
qa: wate sida aviadt ati ata HradaEy: AWM dca! © | 
Pagag Walaa Wa A Fel: | Gat Ueda anaust a fe aat: et GTI C | 
at ustataé auget Stas fire: | Quit art: se age sero Paar |e | 
sa AaAaex: ASTI: |Get «aaa eR fauTATTE: 1201 
air oak: aifiieits olfen: | skecterpaesren qo sia yee 
| Sorfot wera: wet we ca lahaqudd aA careiaqeadr{ 122! 
| Tereuclee: wd aaathfdaeaisfawe set wa ger efter ie3! 
7 ais: aga: fargqadt aethia sopeatiiad ar WoT Ae 1x 
frat adercfiierrat a faeag:iafasearr 9 Sretceneardaa: 1941 
art ayg: afaereuiaoat Gee: ATTA: Aeat fest: HIE Fa IRE 
MleHaRyTY ag fagasiodtedl: | Bea A ag: calfaea: Geag wWotya 1291 
saat us fet a gern ar Wreaitntsaart yest sar ect 
7 wWhrigusa: weedeat: | steret siete SMTET Teal aT ke

- 
“ 
. 
= 
-| 
4 
= 
= 
* 
7 
~] 
. 
= 
- 
- 
a 
- 
— 
- 
=| 
= 
~ 
- 
— 
ee

$6 el Sere a Be eee * oF Pewee e™ «kt nn a

“Te. ey tres Sree er 
. . rr

Hanaiedal 46s SBT: Jere atuer: | Tey Aa fafeoor FATAL 120 | 
dam: We: «9 Ue: | ee ATA AAT AAT TATRA 129 | 
CIT ART: | SHAMS AMAT Sa ATRIA: 122) 
amsithiverd addl addtetiurafteamagedenmt: act aries) 
Ss aataiat yaaisaryd er: | aarsstarat fasada: cates chies fester: 12% | 
Then commenced the rainy season, conducive to the growth of all creatures (as being 
favourable to their breeding and nourishment both), characterized by bright circles (roung 
the sun and the moon) and thundering heavens. (3) Overcast with dense and dark clouds 
attended with lightning and thunder, with the luminaries rendered obscure, the sky shoneas 
Brahma (the Spirit) conditioned by the three Gunas (and known as the Jiva with its light of 
wisdom obscured by the Sativa, Rajas and Tamas corresponding in the case of the sky to 
the flashes of lightning, thunder and the clouds). (4) When the (opportune) time (in the form 
of the monsoon) came, the sun-god began to release the wealth of the earth in the form 
of water that had been absorbed by him during the (past) eight months (even as a righteous 
monarch would return to the people the wealth which he extorted from them in the form of 
land revenue and other legitimate taxes). (5) Huge clouds endowed with (the eyes of) 
lightning (and perceiving the heat of the world) and tossed by tempestuous winds poured 
down water, which brings joy to this world (even as the compassionate, observing the 
miserable plight of the world and stirred with a feeling of commiseration for the afflicted, 
lay down their very life and thus bring delight to the world). (6) Shrunk through the (summer) 
heat, the earth grew plump again when drenched by heaven, even as the body of a man 
engaged in austerities performed for attaining some selfish end, which is emaciated 
through such austerities, grow corpulent (again) on realizing the fruit of those austerities. (7) 
lt is the fire-flies and not the planets that shine at the approach of night shrouded in 
Garxness (occasioned by a thick coating of clouds obscuring the heavenly bodies), even 
as it is heresies and not the Vedas that flourish in the age of Kali contaminated with sin 
(born of ignorance that clouds one’s judgment). (8) Frogs, that had been silently hibernat- 
ing before, began to utter their croaks on hearing the roar of clouds, (even) as Brahmana 
pupiis at the end of their (daily) routine of devotions (during which they observe complete 
silence and on hearing the call of their preceptor) would start their recitation (of the Vedas)- 
(9) Small streams that were gradually drying up (now) overflowed their channel (even) as the 
bodily resources and material riches of a man who has no self-control flow in a wrong 
channel. (10) The earth looked green with its green meadows, crimson with the Indragopas 
(a species of red insects with a velvety skin) and shaded (rendered white) by mushrooms; 
(even) as the army of kings is arrayed in uniforms of various colours. (11) Fields with thet! 
wealth of crop afforded delight to the cultivators and caused agony to the rich, who ( envied 
their lot and) did not know that everything lay in the hands of Providence. (12) All the 
inhabitants of land and water put on a winning form and appearance through the use C 
fresh (rain) water (even) as devotees attain an attractive (divine) form through the worship 
of Sri Hari. (13) United with rivers, the ocean, which was (already) rough with waves 
generated by winds, became (all the more) turbulent (even) as the mind of an immature Yog!; 
tinged (as it is) with desire, gets agitated when brought into contact with sense-objects. (14 
Beaten by volleys of rain, mountains did not feel the least agitated any more than thos? 
whose mind is fixed on Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception) when they al? 
overwhelmed with calamities. (15) Overgrown with grass and remaining untrodden (for 
long time), the tracks became doubtful indeed even like the texts of the Vedas which are "° 
properly studied by the Brahmanas and are consigned to oblivion by the force of time-

Ps 
a

ra

Flashes of lightning did not bear constancy to the clouds, which are the friends of thé people, 
any more than libidinous women are constant (even) to men possessed of virtues. (17) In 
the sky, endowed with the attribute of sound, the rainbow (Indra's bow) without a string” 
shone like the attributeless Being (Brahma) in the manifest world consisting of the three 
Gunas. (18) Screened by clouds illumined by her own effulgence, the moon did not shine any 
more than the Jiva (an embodied soul) obscured by the ego-sense which is illumined by its 
(the Jiva's) own light. (19) Exulting over the appearance of clouds, with their hair standing 
on end, peacocks rejoiced (even) as householders feeling agonized and disgusted with the 
world do on the advent of servants of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord). (20) Sucking water 
through their roots trees, that had shrunk heretofore due to (the summer) heat, got 
.regenerated into numerous forms (in the shape of fresh foliage, blossoms, fruits etc.), (even) 
as ascetics that are emaciated and fatigued before through austerities grow robust again 
through the enjoyment of pleasures. (21) Cranes continued to live, O Pariksit, even in lakes 
whose brink was miry and full of thorns etc., (even) as householders whose mind is devoted 
to the pleasures of sense choose to remain in their houses, which keep them engaged in 
distracting duties. (22) While Indra (the ruler of the three worlds) poured down showers, dams 
got breached by floods (even) as in the Kali age the paths of virtue chalked out by the Vedas 
are destroyed by the false theories of heretics. (23) Driven by the winds, clouds now poured 
down nectar-like water to living beings (even) as rulers of men, directed by the Brahmanas, 
conferred from time to time desired boons (on those who sought them). (24)

UW at aq ais umeserquiataedd Cd aa: ofaareft: 1241 
eal wants setae yaar ageinadissat gi sear weet: 1261 
ade: safe 9 9 causing: isieera «= fitaferreaat «cast TT: 1201 | 
waa adams wert alftadia idea waar tA Hayes: 1261 | 
aed Bari frerat aloothdh i astediadyst md: agdonfad: 1291 : 
Week Marr ddat dlfedaon FAM Gar Aad MA SNA: 1301 
Tqesrat a dt dled adyddelaerl! Wa, Gash stieaaeafedry 132 |

Surrounded by cows and cowherd boys and accompanied by Balarama, Sri Hari 
entered deep into the said forest (of Vrndavana)—which was so luxuriant and full of ripe 
dates and rose-apples—in order to sport. (25) Called by the Lord,.cows, that walked with | 
a slow gait due to the heavy weight of their udders, marched with quick steps, their udders 
Showering milk (on the way) due to affection. (26) (As He passed through the woods) the 
Lord perceived the denizens of the forest (viz., the Bhilas as well as the birds and beasts) 
highly rejoiced, rows of trees dripping with honey, streams of water flowing from mountains 
as well as their murmur and the caves near them. (27) At times, when it rained on all sides, 
the Lord took shelter in the hollow of a tree or in a cave and sported (there) eating bulbs, 
foots and fruits. (28) Accompanied by Sankarsana (Balarama), He ate rice and curds 
brought by Him (from home) with vegetables etc., on a slab close to the water in the 
company of cowherd boys. (29) Beholding fully gratified bulls, calves and cows weary with 
the weight of their udders, sitting on the green meadows and ruminating with their eyes closed, 
aS Well as the aforesaid splendour of the rainy season, enhanced by His own (enrapturing) 
Energy and bringing delight to (all) created beings, the Lord welcomed them all. (80-31)

Wa «ofaadreafet «| Ceara Se, AANA SIM Ber queaihtey 1321 
ee ——<$<—

” There is a pun on the word Guna, which denotes an attribute as well as a string.

WN © re 8 Ms ee”

a

; Di 
We RE WeR WER ROR RR RN Re RO Re Me Re Ree Re Me Be Me We Be Be Be Be Re Be We We We We We We We Ve SERRA A AHEM HERB OU 
—_"

Ret. their drift saft aaq:iserifaa adie graineaar 139) 
Siissd yAMaet Ya: UsTaT Hem aera POY afer 1 ay 
ad@ sod fear fate: aac: | aa aon: Bed yal yenfsieaat: 134 1 
fret ye wea yaa: frani ae WAM Hie AA cat 7 at igK) 
Sarfaeq aiterarer eS Tee: | AMTSSAAE AAT AT YT: Heras: 13191 
TAA TATRA era LoL, laa afta: qu: qeratatritsa: 1321 
wa: wale: Us Wer a dies: iaeenaat tt: | AATICgaTeTY 13¢ 1 
Agere Bas: wer sed TAG ALATTA: 10 1 
HIVAKANSe Hie aead(h: | aa WW: Gad afte ahr: ive 
WMRSH STATA HAASE | Sat Se Yael aerate] 1s 
Tasua «460 oft a aR Gea Ge fet Beameeataaiay 1x3 
STEUSHUSA «SH Whilst: wali ae agua: Hen gforeHad yfa xxi 
STR PAI SEAaAnedI SAR eat A HPWledelga: 1s

Tal WM: GN Ara: Uva: Wala saa: We: wedtafal ga rsa 
SER akon gale pa fear wen g Aden ore am cee fat 7a ive! 
PPR IEE IB OLN C-O Es Welea: | Tt Y: UHAIed Hema Frat Se: 1c!

ateqmaqera frtenaia sofet) ateg aen fag: AUS Hie STA 148 | 
Sfa Serad AS URASE Sleds AMAA Yale Mgeanacrs AH faaiseara: 120 | 
While Balarama and Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva) thus dwelt in 
Vraja, there fully set in the autumnal season free from clouds and characterized by crystal 
waters and gentle breezes. (32) Due to the autumn, marked with the appearance of lotuses, 
waters regained their transparency (even) as the minds of those that have strayed from (the 
path of) Yoga recover their purity by resuming the practice of Yoga. (33) The autumn drove 
away the clouds from the sky, relieved the congestion of living beings (occasioned by the 
overgrowth of creatures), dried up the mire on the earth and eliminated the turbidity of water 
(even) as devotion to Sri Krsna puts an end to all evil besetting those belonging to the (four) 
Asramas (stages in life). (84) Having discharged all their wealth (in the form of water), the 
clouds shone forth in their white lustre (even) like ascetics that have given up (all forms of) 
desire (viz., the desire for progeny, the hankering for wealth and the ambition for glory) and 
have shed their impurity (in the shape of) tendency to action and have (consequently become 
composed. (35) As some places the mountains released their pure water whereas at other 
places they did not, (even) as enlightened souls impart their nectar-like wisdom on some 
(opportune) occasions (to the qualified), while at other times they do not. (36) The creatures 
living in shallow waters did not at all notice the water diminishing (everyday), (even) as stup! 
householders do not perceive their span of life shortening everyday. (37) Like a destitute and 
helpless householder, who has not been able to subdue his senses, suffering hardships: the 
creatures living in shallow waters experienced the heat radiated by the autumnal sun. (3 
(Virgin) tracts of land gradually gave up their moisture and the plants their unripe state, (even) 
as the wise slowly give up the sense of identification with, and the feeling of mineness wil 
respect to, the body etc., which are not the self. (89) On the advent of the autumn the ocean 
became calm and quiet (even) as an ascetic is relieved of his recitation of the Vedas when

— 
— 
r 
=. 
= 
— 
& 
&- 
-_ 
oo 
Ee 
j

Dis. 21 ] BOOK TEN 195

his mind is completely at rest. (40) Cultivators checked the water going out of the fields by 
means of strong dams (even) as those practising Yoga preserve the wisdom flowing out 
through the senses by controlling the latter. (41) The moon alleviated the suffering of living 
beings caused by the rays of the autumnal sun, (even) as (the dawn of) wisdom puts an end 
to the miseries born of one's identification with the body or as Sri Krsna (the Bestower of 
liberation) relieved the agony (caused by their separation from Him) of the women of 
Vraja.(42) The cloudless sky looked charming (at night) with its stars twinkling brightly due 
to the autumnal season (even) like the mind with the quality of Sattva predominating in it and 
revealing the (correct) import of the Vedas. (43) The full moon shone in the firmament with 
the hosts of stars (even) as on the earth did Sri Krsna, the Protector of the Yadus, surrounded 
by the circle of Vrsnis. (44) Embracing the temperate breeze that blew from the woods in (full) 
blossom, people dismissed their anguish (occasioned by heat), but not so the cowherd 
women (of Vraja), whose mind had been captivated by Sri Krsna (inasmuch as it tended to 
enhance the poignancy of their agony of separation from the Lord caused by His absence 
from Vraja during the daytime.) (45) Persistently sought by their partners cows, she-deer, 
female birds and women conceived under the influence of the autumnal season even as 
works intended to propitiate the Lord are necessarily followed by their fruit. (46) At sunrise 
(all) aquatic flowers bloomed forthwith the exception of water-lilies, even as (all) people 
barring the thieves are rendered fearless under a (good) king. (47) Enriched with ripe corns 
the earth looked happy with (Vedic) sacrifices carried on with oblations of first fruits at the 
end of the rainy season as well as with (other) grand festivals conducted for the gratification 
of the senses in cities and villages, and more so with Sri Krsna and Balarama (the two 
Avataras of Sri Hari). (48) Going out (at the end of the four months of the rainy season), 
merchants, recluses, kings and students about to return from the house of their preceptor 
after the completion of their studies—that had been detained* by the rains—(now) realized 
their ends even as those adept in Yoga and well-versed in Mantras (mystic formulas) etc., 
impeded by the span of their life, attain ethereal forms earned by them when the (appropriate) 
time comes. (49)

Thus ends the twentieth discourse entitled “A description of the Rains and Autumn” 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

a1 en faanseare: 
Discourse XXI 
The Song Inspired by the Flute 
Ah Sara 
sat eRe afer agar arat TTS: | kt 
RoIPG CdR 
wha «aT: TRIO Ag aut 2

* According to Hindu astronomy the four months of the rainy season are regarded as inopportune for commercial trips, 
©xpeditions for extending one's dominions, marriages and rambling on the part of recluses.

aq wafer sng aur war aad we pores Baeiatsaavtey | 3 
aq SUQIRen: Hea: POSE! Al FTI fafaratat Fa x | 
aeiité aeaxay: auld: afttert fawe ate: arnaltet ase a are |

GH AURA GA Wagedenvd wera slag Wetentit: 1 & | 
sa aud ow OR eT ae sere: Tal aie | g |

$17 Suka began again : Accompanied by cows and cowherd boys, Sri Krsna (the 
immortal Lord) entered deep into the aforesaid forest with its waters made transparent by the 
autumn and fanned by a breeze charged with the fragrance of lotus-beds. (1) Having entereg 
the forest—the lakes and streams as well as the mountains of which were resonant with the 
sweet warbling of birds and the (sweet) humming of bees, intoxicated by (the presence of) 
rows of trees in full bloom—and pasturing the cows in the company of Balarama and (other) 
cowherds, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of the Madhus) sounded His flute. (2) Hearing that 
(entrancing) music of Sri Krsna's flute—which kindled love (in their heart)—some women of 
Vraja proceeded to celebrate it in song before their female companions (all) out of His 
sight.(3) Recalling the (loving) gestures of Sri Krsna while commencing to describe the 
music, they (however) could not, their mind being distracted by the vehemence of love, O 
protector of men. (4) Exhibiting (before their mental eyes) an exquisite form resembling that 
of an actor (on the stage), adorned with a crest of peacock feathers, wearing Karnikara 
flowers on His ears, a wreath of flowers of five different colours and a golden cloth (round 
his loins), and filling the holes of His flute with the nectar of His lips (as it were), the Lord (they 
felt) entered Vrndavana, charming with His footprints (found at every step), His glory being 
sung by hosts of cowherd boys. (5) Hearing, O Pariksit, the (said) music of His flute, 
captivating to the mind of all living beings, and celebrating it (in the following strain), all those 
women of Vraja mentally embraced the Lord. (6)

MI] HY: 
saan Hee AW faa: We: wed faded: | 
aa ssa Ys dal = ftagpnciatenti w | 
Fea acta tach acest ae g ha Reararearraat 
WA fe We Nea TG aM aca w aU Maat ct 
Tira: feared sae TH aueldtereqerata weer | 
Yer Wa aca slew earaaisaqaaenal aassat: 1 ¢ |

The Gopis sang: This is the prize for those who have eyes, friends; and we know of no 
greater prize than that enjoyed by those who have feasted their eyes on the countenance— 
playing on the flute and casting loving glances (all round)—of the two sons of Nanda (the lord 
of Vraja) as They lead the cattle alongwith their playmates (the cowherd boys). (7) Singing 
at times amidst a circle of cowherd boys, and picturesquely clad in a garment fitted closely 
with tender mango leaves, peacock feathers and bunches of flowers (tucked to the curly 
locks), a pair of lilies (fastened to the ears), a lotus (held in the right hand) anda garland (worn 
about the neck), (the two Brothers looked most charming like a pair of excellent actors on 
the stage. (8) O Gopis, what meritorious act has this flute performed, by virtue of which ! 
freely enjoys (to its heart's content) the nectar flowing from the lips of Sri Krsna (who was one?

Dis. 21 ] BOOK TEN 497

tied by His mother with a cord at the belly)—thougha monopoly of the Gopis—so that nothing 
but sweetness Is left behind (in those lips) ! (Lo !) the rivers (by whose waters its parent 
stock—the Damboo—was nourished) appear with their hair standing on end (in the form of 
the blooming lotuses through rapture), while the (bamboo) trees (themselves) are shedding

tears (of joy in the shape of honey) even as the elders of a family are delighted to find their 
child enjoying the grace of the Lord. (9)

qaet aka yat facta aft aa tantqqqerguccrsten | 
TMfarqeupATATAe TAMA ATTA 1.20 | 
TT: W Yeast wa unt a Aarau | 
stenva cupid TEHOAN: Gat aefefaat sormaateh: 1221 
eu miter atidicaacaiie seat a denfiradufataarttas | 
cen fant: WAG weer yyeletter: 1221 
Tag 8 86opeMatriadupitadtgeqafacnuige: «= fara: | 
Meal: YAMA haat: A AMAA FAMASHoT: WA: 123 1 
wat sears fen Haat sash Harfardt agled Heap itary | 
ed F GIy, Sfeasalem, Warwifedesn fartarsrara: 1 ex

(The soil of) Vrndavana, O friend, enhances the glory of the earth (so as to make it 
outshine even the heavenly regions) in that the soil has been graced by the lotus-feet of Sri 
Krsna (the son of Yasoda*) and (further) because, witnessing the dance of peacocks 
enraptured to hear (the music of) Sri Krsna’s flute (which they mistake for the low rumbling 
of clouds) all other creatures on the summits of Mount Govardhana cease from every activity 
(and stand motionless—a thing which is not seen in any other sphere).(10) Blessed indeed 
are these female deer, though stupid of mind—that, on hearing the music of the flute, offered 
in the company of the male deer (the black antelopes) worship, performed through their 
loving glances, to the darling of Nanda, who has put on a wonderful garb. (11) Gazing on Sri 
Krsna, whose comeliness and amiable disposition are a source of joy to the fair sex, and 
hearing the weird notes of the flute played on by Him, celestial women riding in aerial cars 
(and embraced by their spouses) stood infatuated, deprived of their presence of mind 
through love, flowers dropping from their braids and their skirts unsettled. (12) Drinking with 
the cup of their ears, standing erect, the nectar-like music of flute flowing from Sri Krsna's 
lips and hugging Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) in their mind on His entering it through their i 
eyes, the cows as well as their calves (that had just been let loose to be suckled by their l 
mothers) stood motionless with drops of tears (in their eyes), the mouths of the latter f 
remaining filled with the draught of milk flowing from the dripping udders (of their mothers), 
having no strength left in them to swallow the milk). (13) In all probability, Oh mothert, the 
birds (dwelling) in this forest are (no other than) sages, who—having perched on the boughs 
of trees clothed with charming foliage (devoid of fruits and flowers) so that they may be able 
to behold Sri Krsna (without any hindrance) and (since they have no attraction for such fruits 
and flowers)—hear the dulcet music of the flute poured forth by Him with unwinking 
ease eee ee

" The word ‘Devaki' occurring in the above verse evidently stands for YaSoda inasmuch as the people of Vraja—and even 
the outside world—till the death of Karnsa took Sri Krsna to be the son of Yasoda alone, and we have the evidence of the 
Visnupurana to show that Yagoda bore the name of Devaki too—' 2 At FSSA Beiter SaeHicafy, ” |

+ Itis usual with Indian women to address their female companions as mother in moments of ecstasy and specially while 
Pouring out their heart through a song.

= nh 3

(sleepless) eyes, other voices having altogether ceased for them. (The Gopis have eviq 
concluded this from the fact that perching on the boughs of the tree of the Veda

corresponding to charming leaves—fixing their mind on the glory of Sri Krsna with the 
object of securing a vision of the Lord). (14)

aeretal aque Yraataadetaraat aaa: | 
seagrass =| Te HACNTEMT: 1241 
Spisscd A We Wad: AaaRMAqaaehan | 
Saag sea: Hanae: weqetend wags STAI 1 ket

Hearing the aforesaid music of Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) on that occasion, 
(even) the (inanimate) rivers—that had their rapid flow (towards the ocean, their darling) 
arrested through love (for Sri Krsna) betrayed by eddies—clasped both the feet of Sri Krsna 
(the Slayer of the demon Mura) with the arms of their waves in such a way as to fold them 
in their embrace, offering lotuses (as a symbol of their heart). (15) Witnessing (with the eyes 
of lightning) Sri Krsna duly pasturing the cattle of Vraja in the company of Balarama and the 
(other) cowherd boys in the (hot) sun and playing on the flute in their rear, a cloud appeared 
(over His head) and, swollen with love, did the service of an umbrella to its Friend (Sri Krsna, 
who resembles the cloud in hue and like a cloud allays the suffering of the people) with its 
body, covering Him (at the same time) with showers of flowers.*(16)

yo: ert | seTEUereiggeta «| aferdrerafteds | 
qTeterenguate fort saeaeey 3 weetafeir ie! 
edaniaen eictaadt aa wWapwMreorensismie: | 
WH ddl «aera «Utada: 1c 
TM Woe Aadleekaupad: Headey AA: | 
Wed Waa ones Fatttarmmmacerfefes 12° | 
Wan anadt at geleadterhur: | aula fren wer: sleet aa: 1201 
aid ASMA ARM Ue Seda casa Yale Supiid aenferaseaa: 122

Fully accomplished of their purpose are the Bhila women who, when smitten with pangs 
of love at the Lord's sight, dismissed that agony besmearing their face and breasts with the 
saffron paste (originally) painted on the bosom of His darling and rendered still more 
charming by contact with the reddish hue of the lotus-feet of Sri Krsna (who is widely 
celebrated) and (ultimately) transferred to the blades of grass (of Vrndavana due to His 
ramblings there). (17) Ah, this mountain (Govardhana), O fair ones, is the foremost of Si 
Haris servants in that it not only derives supreme joy from the touch of the feet of Balaramé 
and Sri Krsna (joy which is betrayed by its horripilation in the form of fresh blades of grass): 
but also extends its hospitality to the two Brothers alongwith their cows and followers th rougn 
(the fresh and pure) water (of its cascades), excellent pasture, caves (affording shelter to 
them) and its (produce in the form of) bulbs and roots. (18) It is most wonderful that due to

" Although the flowers were evidently showerd by the gods riding in their aerial cars (Vide verse 12 above), the Gopls in 
the ecstasy of love imagine them to have been showered by the cloud.

Ently

> . 2 an 
renouncing the fruit of actions promised in it, sages devote themselves to action alone

Sole

noorerenene serena eas 
1 ThTT Tw MAA | if

——— nee eee 
= - — :

j

~~

Dis. 22 ] , : : BOOK TEN 499

the highly delightful notes, consisting of low and sweet tones, of the flutes of the two 
Brothers—leading the cows from one forest to another in the company of (other) cowherd 
boys and distinguished by a string for tying the hind legs of cows while milking them (which 
they had twined round their heads) and acord for pulling unruly cows (which they had placed 
across their shoulder)—there should ensue among the embodied beings, O friends, 
(complete) lack of movement in those capable of locomotion (including running streams), 
anda thrill of joy should appear in (the stationary) trees! (19) Recounting to one another such 
pastimes that pertained to the Lord, who moved about in Vrndavana, the Gopis became 
mentally absorbed in those pastimes (themselves). (20)

Thus ends the twentyfirst discourse entitled "A Song inspired by the (Lord's) Flute," 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ct Pact Pact hi 
CIOS Rac a,

31D gfaanseara:

Discourse XXIl

The Lord steals away the garments of cowherd maids 
Mh SAA 
ead ea eee: | Aediael «YS: «Hie! 2 | 
SPATS ee Tord aledsent | reat sip eet fa Henei | 2 | 
TreaMied: aiuficiofieudiach: | sararctsiraene: Warehouses: 1 3 | 
mrad aera wveaitradtahiaentcdd ea uff A He a Aa: 1 
Sfa Wat OEM: US Ag: Haire: | ¥ | 
Wa Ue ad ae: para: HPOrada: | Asche Waa yalaraaa: Ufd: 1 & I 
SN: «SAA SSSea: | HOTS: Hier SIGs | & |

Sri Suka began again : In the first month (Margasirsa) of the Hemanta season 
(consisting of the months of Margasirsa and Pausa) the maids of Vraja, ruled over by Nanda, 
observed a vow of worshipping Goddess Katyayani, subsisting on only such food as Is fit to 
be offered to the sacrificial fire. (1) Having taken a dip in the waters of the Kalindi (Yamuna) 
at daybreak and making an image of sand on the river bank, they worshipped the Goddess 
(in that image), O protector of men, with sandal-paste etc., fragrant flowers, propitiatory 
Oblations (such as cocoanut), incense and lights, other offerings (such as articles of wearing 
apparel, ornaments etc.), high and low, as well as with tender leaves, fruits and (unbroken) 
Srains of rice. (2-3) The aforesaid virgins performed worship, each muttering the following 
Prayer—"Goddess Katyayani, the great deluding potency (of the Lord), possessed of infinite 
Yogic powers, O supreme Ruler (of the universe in a female form), (pray) make Sri Krsna (the 
Darling of Nanda, the cowherd chief) my husband ! Hail to You !" (4) With their mind (and 
heart) set on Sri Krsna the maidens thus observed the (sacred) vow fora (whole) month and 
worshipped Goddess Bhadrakali with due ceremony praying: "Let the Darling of Nanda be

EE ae

at ee 
eneieke: eee -

200, eae ReGnOEtTHARRTTEthnnetheTeeneeet eRe eeereeeReReenene aren eee wenn wees: 22 
" Bt 9 9,

our husband." (5) Rising early in the morning when called by their names (by other Girls), the 
loudly sang the praises of Sri Krsna as they went with their hands mutually clasped to bathe 
in the Kalindi everyday. (6) 
sat melferma at fafa yeas araife pot maw fase: afore FaT 1 © | 
aeRO Sta: | aaRNIGdeda TeAMAHAaA | ce | 
aqrat arate fluaregr Feat: | gah: See ate: GReTMaTaA FI e | 
SERIAAG: Ha SS ae: Wear! aa Hari At ad aq ya saccHfRtat: 1201 
q waleqd at amd diem fag: i uh: wdheed Bedlt Gaeaa: 1291

Arriving at the river on a certain day (the last day of the month, viz., the full moon, when 
they weré going to conclude their vow) and leaving their clothes on the bank as usual, they 
merrily sported in the water glorifying Sri Krsna. (7) Coming to know of this and surrounded 
by His companions, Sri Krsna, the Lord of (all) Masters of Yoga, went there in order to reward 
their act (of worship). (8) Taking their clothes, He hastily climbed up a Kadamba tree (near 
by) and, indulging in fun with the laughing boys, so the tradition goes, jestingly spoke as 
follows—(9) "Coming here, O maids, receive you each your own raiment at will. | speak the 
truth and am not jesting since you are (all) exhausted by (observing) the vow. (10) Never has 
a lie been told by Me before; these boys know it. Take your clothes one by one or all together 
(as you please), O slender-waisted ones." (11)

qa Ad adied ger ara: Smuftga: | sifsa: Sea aaa siictera A Prag: 122

Wa gala wfac adonssfeqada: | steven: ile AGAMTETAGa 1231

Wea Mt: Hae _ Panag Hea AAMiss aso efe araifa afta: 12x

Raa a ae: amram aatleqqice aria ada al dq Ua game 124 
Perceiving that joke of the Lord the cowherd maids were overwhelmed with love. 
Abashed to see one another, they felt inclined to laugh, but did not come out (of the 
water).(12) When Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) remarked thus, the cowherd maids, 
whose mind was enraptured by the joke and who stood shivering, immersed as they were 
up to the neck in the cold water, spoke to Him (as follows):—(13) "Pray, do no wrong by us. 
We know you well to be the beloved son of Nanda, the cowherd chief, and praised all over 
Vraja, O dear Krsna ! Please return our clothes; we are shivering (with cold). (14) O Fair one 
with a dark-brown complexion ! we are your servants and are prepared to do your bidding.

(Therefore), give back our clothes, O Knower of Dharma (the principles of righteousness) ! 
If not, we shall report the matter to the king." (15)

MATT TAA 
waa aie 4 det wai at after | same waraifa sdterq afafera: 126! 
ad Aerad Aat ater: statafaan: | orforat areresrear site: sitaenfatar: 12191 
Ware A sat BeMaveled: | ee Mera araifa sia: Mara aaa 16 
qi fate |= ek edge «SS Aa 
setae | qedaqddsed: peat AMset aed sa 12e1 
sagtitie atest Ua faaengad AT | 
actiienrandaattenaui Makes AGEL Ud: 1201 
TMA sl Ma eaeatyd: | arate ava: seed Heo atfad: 12k!

Dis. 22 J ee EME HORE He RON OREO RE CH BOOK TEN ; 201 i 
ge AMMA oa afar: weit: ateaas afar: | 
Seri Maree, at aE, fstrag fiat: 1221 
aR = aT gagerafern: | ygtafrat at Aerafiiessnften: 1231

The glorious Lord said : "If you are my servants andif you will do my bidding, come here 
and receive (from me) your clothes wearing a bright smile (on your lips)." (16) Shivering with 
cold all the maidens thereupon emerged from the river, shrunk with cold and covering their 
privy parts with the palms. (17) Perceiving them as good as dead (through great shame), and 
pleased with their pure heart, the Lord placed the clothes (kept so far on the tree) on His 
shoulder and, full of love, smilingly Said:—(18) "Since, having undertaken a (sacred) vow, 
you took a dip in the waters in a nude state, that has indeed been an offence on your part 
against the god of water (which has gone a long way to violate the sanctity of your vow); 
(therefore), receive your raiment (only) after joining your palms on the crown of your head 
and bowing low for the expiation of that sin." (19) Realizing their act of plunging in water in 
a nude state to be a violation of their vow as pointed out in the aforesaid words by SriKrsna 
(the immortal Lord), and seeking the fulfilment of that vow, the maidens of Vraja bowed to 
SriKrsna (who embodies the fruit of that as well as of all other religious rites); for it is He who 
washes away all transgressions. (20) Seeing them bent in the aforesaid manner and 
propitiated through such salutation, the all-merciful Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) 
returned their clothes. (21) Even though they were badly taken in, nay, stripped of (all) 
shame, ridiculed and treated as toys, and their clothes too were stolen away, yet they did not 
find fault with Him, (highly) gratified as they were through the company of their beloved 
Lord.(22) Having put on their clothes they riveted their bashful looks on Sri Krsna and could 
not stir (from that place), enthralled as they were by their meeting with their most beloved 
Lord and their mind having been captivated (by Him). (23)

arat fas war Buenas | edad «= Meee «= THe SatesT: 12 
Gaen fatea: aeeat wadat vedaqi naraaifed: aisat aat afaqnela 1241 
q Tweqafrarear arm: wma aead! fsa wefeear ear sat aise Ferd 126 | 
Gaaet ast fag waa waa am: iaeiesa adie aematla adi: 1201

| Perceiving the intention of those maidens, that had undertaken the aforesaid vow with 
| alonging to touch His feet, Lord Sri Krsna (who had once allowed Himself to be tied with 
a cord at the abdomen by His mother and thus demonstrated His love for His devotees) 
addressed the girls (as follows):—(24) "Your desire, O chaste girls, in the shape of

_ €agerness to worship Me is (already) known to Me. (Nay,) it has been approved of by Me; | 
| (hence) it deserves to materialize. (25) The craving for enjoyment on the part of those 1 
Whose mind is devoted to Me cannot lead to (further) enjoyment even as seeds of grain if 
(once) fried or boiled are not as a general rule intended to be sown. (26) Go (back), O | 
damsels, to Vraja. You stand accomplished of your purpose and will sport with Me during |

the coming (autumnal) nights, for which perpose you have observed this vow in the form |

:

- ES ene 
- ——ae- «= ----——«2 —“—-— -_—

of Worship of the Goddess, O virtuous girls !" (27) 
Sad

| Safest wad! eI: Serie: | ATTRA Seatac HTT 1 RSI 
commanded by the Lord and having (virtually) realized

Sri Suka continued : Thus ith great difficulty, contemplating on His

their ambition, the maidens returned to Vraja w 
lotus-feet. (28)

We Pe eR See Pe eee Se We Se Re ee RRR Re Re RE EE ee ee ee Me Wee Me We Be He Be Be Be We We We We We ee Re He eRe We Sey Dis. 
. CW y

ay Wa: URqal War saat: | adleale Wel El AR TM: WEE: 12e1 
fataraiad fea srenfs: wire: | sacar, det SAME site: 130 
@ Misa & sian sary Uses i famed defy sae ae 138 | 
Ustad AIM Wea | ardaniaafear Pet aRart a: 1321 
Ta Wi at Wa aevgusiad! Grea Asi a ager aia ae: 1331

UAUUT rea aA ach clara: | Terratec: Har faa 13x | 
Wasted eats ae i wneaiiaar sa wart wer i3us

sia Weise Taeeleh:: | CAN ABITGMT AeA AMAT We: 13e1

da TM: Waa: Fae: aitaen: frat: | al FT WS WAT: HA Ale WSIG 1301

qT Seat HH UR: UW WI Henerrs anal setae 13¢C1

sf SeMTad ARN Tee Sears MHA Yael tcreMTERT aA aTferens ear: 1221

Accompanied by cowherd boys and pasturing the cows Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of 
Devaki), one day (during the following hot weather), went far away from Vrndavana along- 
with His elder brother (Balarama). (29) Perceiving the trees, which played the role of 
umbrellas to Him with their shade in the scorching rays of the summer sun, the Lord 
addressed the cowherd boys of Vraja (as follows):—(30) O Stokakrsna, Amsu, Sridama, 
Subala, Arjuna, Visala, Rsabha, Tejasvi, Devaprastha and Vartuthapa, look at these highly 
blessed beings that live solely for others; enduring storm, showers, sunshine and snow 
(themselves) they ward them off from us ! (31-32) Oh ! enviable is the birth—serving as a 
means of subsistence to all animate beings—of these trees, approaching which suppliants 
never return disappointed any more than those that seek a benevolent man. (33) By means 
of (their) leaves, flowers, fruits, shade, roots, bark and wood as well as with their fragrance, 
exudation, ashes, coal and tender leaves they gratify the desires of others. (84) This much 
is the fruitfulness of the birth of embodied creatures in this world that they should constantly 
do good alone to (other) embodied souls through their life, wealth, intellect and speech. (35) 
Saying so the Lord arrived at the Yamuna passing through rows of trees whose boughs were 
bent low with clusters of young leaves, fruits and blossoms as well as with bunches of (other) 
leaves. (36) Prompting the cows to drink of the very sweet, cool and wholesome waters (of 
the Yamuna), the cowherd boys then drank, O protector of men, to their heart's content the 
tasteful water themselves. (37) Pasturing the cattle at will in the grove on the bank of the

Yamuna, Oking, they approached Sri Krsna and Balarama and, pinched with hunger, spoke 
as follows. (38)

Thus ends the twenty-second discourse entitled, "The Lord steals away the garments of the 
cowherd maids’, in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

st 
PDO SIS py

5, 23 : 
pis. 2 ] BOOK TEN 903

BY Waeagortseara: 
Discourse XXiIll

Redemption of the wives of some Brahmanas engaged in a sacrifice 
1 a”? 
we We Feat Get gefedor i war A set aera adeeer: 121 
The cowherd boys said: O Balarama, the delighter of souls and possessed of

extraordinary valour, O Krsna, the exterminator of the wicked, this hunger is actually 
pinching us; (therefore) be pleased to appease it. (1)

Wye SaTI :

sft fafa «wtisfary aaitga: | rear famerater: wetefrenaciiq 21

wad east TT ee: Wrage AT ered eefenrerar 31

aa aedlet wo areacenigatsa: i atdadt wad ark am ahem x

SeeSt WTA Wala A aM | Helosiferyer faury ausaq ufaar yfai&!

@ WMAea: NUT POTEMeeHIRT: | Wedssatd Wx Al MAL At WaaltaarL! & |

TyanaMatag 4 stet waregdt at aedt aeyferdt 
dditfest atesnfiridfe seer aw at aa adfana: © |

aaa: UT: Paras Wet: | saat diferentes aAKtayay fe quia < 1

fa a waters Avaxtsh 4 Waa: | ase YReatonr alee Fgura: 1 & |

Qo: THe: GMT Ret WaAdahasitsa: | eat STATA Heya «aaa: 1 20!

dq wal WH Wate Waddelay | Aegea Goa Ait 7 AMIR

a 8 welt wre Affe a ataa i ar Prom: weet cate: HORTA: 1 21

qeurepus 9a Wee SIMTCIPAT: | Asa UU awiaecittcnenl Aa! 23 |

a oma Uda: BdenoTa | ahead raat a: ferrem Tego Pera get 
Sri Suka resumed: Thus requested by the cowherd boys, Lord Sri Krsna (the 
Son of Devaki), who sought to shower His grace on certain Brahmana matrons devoted 
to Him, spoke as follows:—(2) “Repair to the sacrificial hall where certain Brahmanas, 
who are expositors of the Vedas, are actually conducting a sacrificial session, known 
by the name of Angirasa with a desire to ascend to heaven (after death). (3) Arriving 
there, O cowherd boys, as despatched by us, and mentioning the name of my venerable 
brother as well as my own, ask some cooked rice of them.” (4) Thus instructed by 
the Lord, they went and solicited the Brahmanas as directed with joined palms and 
lying Prostrate on the ground (in the following words):—(5) “O Brahmanas (lit., gods 
On the earth), listen to us! Know us, cowherd boys, to be the servants of Sri Krsna 
arrived (here) as directed by Balarama. May Good betide you ! (6) Pasturing their cows 
NOt Very far (from this place) and stricken with hunger, Balarama and Sri Krsna (the 
immortal Lord) long to have boiled rice from you. Give Them rice, O Brahmanas, when 
©Y (earnestly) ask for it, provided you have it and if you possess (any) reverence

Cr Them, foremost as you are of (all) knowers of Dharma (the principles of

aif

righteousness). (7) Indeed anyone eating the food cooked in the house even of a house. 
holder consecrated for a sacrifice other than the one involving animal slaughter and different 
from a sacrifice known by the name of Sautramani, O most righteous souls, is not defileg 
(thereby).” (8) Though listening to the aforesaid solicitation of the Lord, the Brahmanas Daig 
no heed to it, cherishing as they did petty hopes (of ascending to heaven from which One is 
sure to fall one day) though engaged in elaborate undertakings, and ignorant as they were 
though accounting themselves advanced (in knowledge). (9) The foolish Brahmanas, who 
regarded the mortal body as their own self, took no notice of Sri Krsna—who was no other 
than the almighty Lord Visnu, the supreme Reality, constituting as He does the place and time 
(for the performance of a sacrifice), the diverse substance (for being offered to the sacrificia] 
fire), the mystic formulas (employed in invoking the various deities and recited at the time of 
pouring oblations), the procedure (laid down for conducting a sacrifice), the priests (officiating 
ata sacrifice), the (sacrificial) fires, the divinities (intended to be propitiated through a sacrifice), 
the sacrificer, the act of sacrifice (itself) as well as the religious merit (resulting from the 
performance of a sacrifice)— looking upon Him as a mere human being. (10-11) When the 
Brahmanas neither said "yes" nor did they say "no", O chastiser of foes, the cowherd boys 
returned disappointed and informed Sri Krsna and Balarama accordingly. (12) On hearing 
of it the almighty Lord of the universe burst into laughter and spoke to the Gopas again (as 
follows) in order to show (to them) the conduct of the worldly people (who would) not feel 
humiliated much less relax their effort even when their prayer was turned down once):—(13) 
“Communicate to their wives the fact of my having arrived (here) alongwith Sankarsana 
(Balarama). They will give you food according to your desire, affectionate as they are (by 
nature) and living as they do in me through their mind." (14)

Tea Ueno sEISsdi: Bega: Ae festa: ss gaa k4 | 
awa at fasueisar feted aaa a: 1 scdtsfaet at Hwldeat aaa! 
TMI GNIS: BIA RAM: | qyfadea Aa ane wlan 12! 
Fargo Feat desta: | demefequaar AYGM AAA: 1LC1 
adit agmeameaa wer: 1 afree: fra aal: ageita fram: 128! 
fis: ufafauigiieefa: ad: | aacaaseta ctesytearerat: 120 | 
aaa ASeterrauewaa usd faced gd mW: areet cag: feta: 122! 
zara fecoeaheter SAMI MI aeaeaT AAA | 
TASHA «| Ast || HUI eleehchUlenGISASIaH, 122 | 
Ta: diaddternvigdie fannie: | 
wd: saga Yfat uke aad ot aerial fasteita 1231 
___ Presently the cowherd boys went and found the virtuous wives of the Brahmanas seated 
in the apartment reserved for the wives of the sacrificers, well adorned and, bowing to them: 
submissively spoke as follows:—(15) "Hail to you, Brahmana ladies ! (Pray) listen to OU! 
words. We have been senthere by SriKrsna, whois rambling not very far from this place- 
Pasturing the cows in the company of (other) cowherd boys and accompanied by Balaramé, 
he has come far away (from home). Let some food be given to him, hungry as he is alongw' 
his followers." (17) Hearing of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) having come (so) neat,

Brahmana ladies— who had been ever anxious to have alook at Him, their mind having beet 
lured by His stories—were seized with a flurry. (18) Taking (with them) in vessels excellen

Mies be

TIM im

pis. 23 ] BOOK TEN 205

food of four* kinds, they all marched towards their beloved Lord, like rivers flowing towards 
the ocean, even though they were being stopped by their husbands, brothers and other 
relations, aS well as by their sons, their mind being set on the illustrious Lord because of their 
having heard of Him for a long time. (19-20) The ladies (presently):beheld Sri Krsna 
_gauntering In a grove on the bank of the Yamuna—beautified by fresh leaves of Asoka 
trees— Surrounded by (other) cowherd boys and accompanied by His elder brother.(21) 
park-brown of hue He had about His loins a golden piece of silk; adorned with a garland of 
sylvan flowers, peacock feathers and tender leaves and painted with minerals, He presented 
the appearance of an actor (on the stage); He rested one hand on the shoulder of a devoted 
companion and was Swinging a lotus with the other; He wore a pair of water-lilies on His ears 
and a smile on His lotus-face, His curly locks hanging on His cheeks. (22) Ushering into their 
heart by the gates of their eyes Him on whom they had set their mind through the glories of 
that most loved One—which they had often heard and which had served as an embellish- 
ment for their ears—and embracing Him (there) for a pretty long time, they shook off their 
agony (of separation from Him), even as men with an egotistic turn of mind are rid of their 
anguish on embracing an enlightened soul, O ruler of men ! (23)

arta ahaaie: ITA sefeeern | fagrenhaeasst ose sefeara: 121 
ard at AAAI saat samt fei gat fazer smear sauate fe a: 1241

wag! Ufa dia gare: wieeait: | steqeaerafeat «afar = ae 1261 
WMUTe legate NIA ae: | Acercenld rat Street: cht aU: Fra: 12191

aq ad edad uaat at faaa:i met unfsea genie: 12¢!

Even though He had come to know that they had arrived (there) under the aforesaid 
circumstances (in the teeth of opposition of all their people) with the (sole) desire to see Him 
and having given up all hopes (of returning to their home and being welcomed again by their 
husbands and other relations), Sri Krsna (the Witness of all minds) addressed them as 
follows with a smiling face:—(24) “Welcome is your visit (to this place), O highly blessed 
ladies ! Let yourselves be (comfortably) seated. What can We do for you ? It is but proper 
for you that you have come with a longing to see Me (disregarding all impediments). (25) 
Surely the wise, who realize their own interests, duly practise disinterested and uninterrupted 
devotion direct to Me, their own beloved Self. (26) Indeed, who else could be dearer than 
one's own self, through contact with whom life and intellect, mind and body, kinsfolk, wife, 
Progeny and wealth etc., are dear ? (27) Therefore, return to the sacrificial hall, where your 
husbands—who are Brahmana householders—will successfully, conclude their sacrificial

Session with your help." (28) 
Wed aq: 
da fststft war ued wert at eg Prem da Weqe | 
um ad qefaqa wales celfidteniaega AEs 123! 
Tera at a ada: frat Gal al A Wiqeadyec: Ha Va Ar | 
qee Hasea: Urata At ATA aq Theiean dq faate 1301 
" The four kinds of food mentioned in our scriptures are:—

(1) 97821, that which can be easily gulped, such as porridge; 
(2) sh, that which has to be masticated before it can be swallowed;

(3) @é, that which can be licked, e. g., chutney and 
(4) “req, that which is sucked, e.g., an orange-ar sugarcane.

a StS”S*~<SttS 
The wives (of the Brahmanas) said : Itis not becoming of You, O almighty Lord, to Utter 
such crue! words. (Pray) vindicate the Vedic dictum, "One does not return" (on havin 
attained to Me). Ignoring all our near and dear ones we have sought the soles of You; fee 
in order to wear on our locks the wreath of Tulasi leaves kicked off (even indifferently at us) 
by You. (29) Neither our husbands, parents, and sons, nor our brothers, kinsmen and Other 
relations would accept us; how, then, would others receive us ? Therefore, (pray) so ordain 
O subduer of foes, that no other asylum may be left to us, whose body has fallen down at

the fore part of Your feet. (30)

Ua =| AR FUG IGaMea: | lena at AANA eat steaad 13e1 
I Mids dsage yurtelat Ala gam stferraareas 132)

The glorious Lord said : Your husbands, parents, brothers, sons and other people wil 
not be angry with you since you have been favoured by Me; (nay) even the gods (over there) 
‘approve of your conduct. (31) Indeed bodily contact (with Me) does not tend to the 
gratification or to heighten the love of men in this world. Therefore, devoting your mind to Me 
you will attain to Me before long. (32)

: NYP SAT 
samt fgsacden «agate oti: 1a aagaa: eife: eft: armored 133 | 
waet fag sat wad amaqqiadoq fast 2% aalqoeisx 
ward Were Wear aged wae a Gy Wy: 134 
wi Cora orHrqnears | TA WAT Tea wWoeTepsa: 136

Sri Suka continued : Thus addressed (by the Lord), the sages’ wives mentioned 
before returned to the sacrificial grounds. (Nay,) not finding fault with them, the sages 
too successfully concluded the sacrificial session with the help of their wives. (33) One 
of those ladies, who was (forcibly) held back by her husband, mentally embraced the 
Lord even as she had heard of Him, and cast off the body, that had been brought about 
as a result of her (past) actions. (34) Having fed the cowherd boys with the same food 
of four kinds, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) too, though all powerful Himself, 
partook of it (in the end). (35) Thus imitating the ways of men and delighting the cows 
and cowherds as well as the cowherdesses by His personal charm, speech and doings;

Lord Sri Krsna (who had assumed a human semblance for the sake of sport) carried on 
His pastimes (in Vraja). (36)

aay fered Satay Ha: | ae fadearatenrea 4 afasraat: 130! 
eel alo wat per ukenetatli sed a aa Canada Seat 136! 
Rel sra afege frat fert act fer agra fing aos fire fereretest Ferg & aes 
Ho Arad mer attra ateit ae act yet aut ware gees fest: 1X0! 
Sel Wat AToafe sae sme | geared aishrerqarene Werte SRI 
Treat fesniteeert a frareat apreftr 1 a act arecitatar a aie a feat: BAT: 182! 
4A 8 Gatadd |

lll

Tt (2D Uw nies ihn ane feaneene

rrr rrr rrr ee

5, 23 ma 
pis. 23 ] BOOK TEN Du7

ater a ra Aat wash: Fea: | Wee arat Afasien stench Frsret Ba 1<e | 
TRI wread = PUNTETgUSA | aaa wma: | antaaig 1401 
a 4 4 Sel: Gee: Veer | staat MTAeetashAd 142 |

Presently the aforesaid Brahmanas were filled with remorse to realize (through the 
fellowship of their pious and devoted wives) that they had committed an offence in that they 
turned down the solicitation of Balarama and Sri Krsna (the Rulers of the universe), who were 
behaving as men. (37) Perceiving the transcendent devotion of their womenfolk to Lord Sri 
Krsna and full of regret to find themselves devoid of it, they severely condemned themselves 
(as follow):—(38) "Fie upon our threefold birth (in the shape of our being born of Brahmana 
parents, investiture with the sacred thread and consecration for the sacrifice in which we are 
engaged) and learning (mastery of the Vedas); fie upon our sacred vow (of continence for 
the period of the sacrifice); fie upon our versatile knowledge; fie upon our pedigree and fie 
upon our proficiency in rituals when we have actually turned our face away from Lord Sri 
Krsna (who is above sense-perception). (39) Indeed the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) is 
capable of infatuating even those who are adept in Yoga (abstract meditation). That is why 
we, who are Brahmanas and (therefore) teachers of men, are ignorant of our real 
interest.(40) O look at the devotion even of (our) women to Sri Krsna, the Father of the 
universe, the depth of which cannot be easily fathomed by us and which has cut asunder the 
snares of death going by the name of household ties (that bound them) ! (41) Neither was 
the purificatory rite, (viz., that of investiture with the sacred thread) which is peculiar to the 
males of the twice-born classes undergone by them, nor did they reside in the preceptor's 
house (for learning the Vedas). No austerities were ever performed by them, nor was any 
enquiry made about the Spirit. Nor is purity (of personal habits) seen in them, nor (again) do 
any virtuous acts characterize them. (42)Yet there is actually found in them unswerving 
devotion to Sri Krsna of excellent renown, the Lord of (all) masters of Yoga; while it does not 
appear in us, who have undergone the aforesaid purificatory rite and are endowed with all \ 
the other qualifications (mentioned in the foregoing verse). (43) Oh, the Lord (who is the | 
Mainstay and the goal of the virtuous) awakened through the words of the cowherd boys us, 
Who were surely deluded in the matter of our (real) self-interest and whose judgment had 
been vitiated by our household activities ! (44) Otherwise what could He gain through us, who 
are Subject to His control—He who has all His desires fulfilled and who is capable of 
bestowing all blessings, the highest of them being final beatitude ? And His begging food of 
US (too) was a mere imitation. (45) Supplication (for boiled rice) on the part of the Lord—

whom Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) constantly waits upon with the hope of

Securing the touch of His feet, renounc! 
favour) and giving up Her own faults of fickleness etc.

© have actually heard that the 
Who constitutes the time and p Ol 
(intended for being offered to the sacrificial

Ne various deities and recited while pouring i 
“°nducting a sacrifice, the priests officiating at a sacrifice, the s

—deludes the (common) people. (46)

selfsame Lord Visnu, the Ruler of (all) masters of Yoga— 
lace of performing a sacrifice, the diverse substances 
fire), the mystic formulae (employed for invoking 
oblations into the sacred fire), the procedure of 
acrificial fires, the divinities

| 
i 
: 
) 
ng all others (Brahma and so on, who sought Her | 
:

ee

3

sft Sea HO A aden: | fegaatsereqaal: Hare le A AlaerL 142 | 
sft sterrad AS URGE Sleds SAH Yale Sa TST A AaeSMSeaATA: 123 | 
Recalling thus their own offence again and again the aforesaid Brahmanas, who had 
shown disrespect to Sri Krsna (by turning a deaf ear to His request for being supplied with

boiled rice), did not stir out, afraid as they were of Kamsa, though eager to behold the two 
immortal Brothers. (52) :

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse entitled "The Redemption of the wives of 
some Brahmanas engaged in a sacrifice", in the first half of Book Ten 
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Discourse XXIV

The Lord stops the sacrifice to Indra

Meh Sa 
Wierd dd sect Wat: 1ameaiaae wNorrsemaler.! 2 | 
aegis wa Palen adeela: | werredisgese GEM AUT! 2 | 
Head 4 fd: wisd aeMal a sorta: | fH He Hel ales: Sa aI Alea WE: | 2 | 
Ue Ale Fe SMe wa wea fea: 14 fe wre fe wet Hel Walarite |X | 
STRATES Ta Aenea gar, lsaiisRag avd siectad qeqerd | & | 
weanea aA chaifor siseagicste | fagu: arfates: wren arfaeat waa! & | 
wa Wad fara vedi feo frente: | stren atfrarerad Ges: Grey TOTAL | | 
, _ of Suka began again : Dwelling in the same land of Vraja accompanied by Baladev4: 
Sri Krsna too saw the cowherds engaged in preparations for the worship of Indra (the g° 
of rain). (1) Though aware of it, the Lord, whois the Indweller of all (hearts) and all-perceiving 
and was (yet) bent low with humility, enquired of the elderly people (of Vraja): the leader 0 
whom was Nanda, (as follows):—(2) “It may kindly be pointed out to me, O father, what IS 
this occassion for (unusual) flutter come up before you ? What will be the fruit (of it) ? For

whom is it intended ? And by whom and through what materials is this sacrifice going !0 e 
performed ? (3) (Kindly) tell me this, eager as | am to hear it, O father ! Great is my longing

WY Aqaanseara:

ae

Dis. 24 ] BOOK TEN 209

(for it). | ndeed no undertaking, in this world, of pious souls—who look upon all as their own 
self, in whose eyes none is their OWN or alien and who have no friend, neutral or enemy— 
is secret. (Of course, where this is not the case) a neutral (too) ought to be shunned like an 
enemy; whereas a friend has been declared to be as good as one's own self (and hence 
nothing should be kept secret from him). (4-5) People perform-actions either deliberately 
(after weighing their consequences) or without deliberation. But success does not attend the 
actions of a thoughtless man as it crowns those of a thoughtful person. (6) Of such actions, 
then, has this expedient in the form of ritual been considered by you ? Or, does it follow the 
course of the world ? (Pray,) explain this fully to me, inquisitive as | am." (7) _

TQ SO 
usin = - Tahar Terrenenda: | asheifa yar Mort silat aa: ct 
aq Wd at a ant ufeieisaecam feeds HAA: 1 2 | 
TeSAUNAsH ttt Pentheeda | Gat Yes ust: weed: 1g01 
a wa fagsa at uorewaing ac HUMIC MS Ale SATA SF AAA ABAAA 12 t 
Nanda replied : The all-powerful Indra is the god of rain, the clouds being his (so many) 
manifestations dear as his own self. They pour forth water, which is the delight and life of 
living beings. (8) We and other men, O darling, worship the aforesaid almighty ruler of the 
clouds through sacrificial performances conducted by means of substances produced with 
the water discharged by him, and subsist on the remains of such sacrifices for the attainment 
of the threefold reward in the shape of religious merit, enjoyment and worldly possessions. 
(In this way) it is Indra who yields the fruit (in the shape of a bumper crop) of men's efforts 
(in the form of agriculture). (9-10) The man who relinquishes a religious practice that has 
come down thus through successive generations from love of enjoyment, greed, fear (of 
opposition) or prejudice, surely does not achieve good results. (11)

My SAAT 
ad fart ace quae asian sat AY Say fat Be chara: 122!

5 Sri Suka continued: Hearing the reply of Nanda and the other inhabitants of Vraja, Lord 
Sti Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva) addressed His father (as follows) in order to

rouse the anger of Indra (and thereby crush his pride). (12)

MTA TAAT 
aim aaa wg: aia factatigd ga wa a pHvraisaaeld 123 | 
aha Ader: war HeRHdony| halt asa dist A end: aye a: ex 
faite wart wemalgatart eriearaa aq Aarateted FMT 184 
mnat fe wa: wwangadti amaeie al AcaTAeTIIA 186 
Seqeracrerg: sree «atom | araftagaretin: wil = - eta: 1201 
TR BSL Sh AMA: Sew | SSA aa add dearea fe eaaqieci 
aide ae qearqasttata (a were fared at SMe acter Fen 12g 
aia meron fast went taal qa: aeregq ardat sitetegaeg feseiaat 1201 
sRearorentrean gee igen wr we eee 28

ad wen oo feqeerdtaa: eta feameiei fated sm 13g, 
Tet diet ae aterat ada: sonata faaata Fes: fee afters 123,

The glorious Lord said : A creature is born by force of Karma (past actions), by force 
of Karma alone it dies and by force of Karma itself it experiences pleasure and pain, is 
subjected to fear and enjoys security. (13) If there is any supreme Ruler who dispenses the 
fruit of others’ actions, he too rewards or punishes (only) the doer; indeed he has no authority 
over him who does nothing. (14) What have created beings—that follow each the course of 
its own action in this world—to do with Indra, who is incapable of altering the course of actions 
performed by men according to their individual nature ? (15) Indeed every created being js 
a slave to its nature and follows its own natural disposition. The whole of this creation 
including gods, demons and human beings has its being in nature. (16) By force of Karma 
a soul takes (diverse) corporeal forms, high and low, and quits them. Karma alone appears 
in the form of an enemy, a friend or a neutral and Karma alone is our preceptor and almighty 
Lord. (17) Therefore, sticking to the Varna (grade of society) and Asrama (stage in life) 
determined by one's own nature and performing one’s own duty, one should duly worship 
Karma alone. In fact, that alone is one's deity by which one lives happily (in this world). (18) 
Depending on a particular deity, he who worships another does not derive happiness from 
the latter any more than an unchaste woman who loves a paramour. (19) A Brahmana should 
live by (the teaching and exposition of) the Vedas; a Ksatriya, by protecting the land; a 
Vaisya, by (what is known as) Varta; while a Sudra should live by service (rendered) to the 
(aforesaid) twice-born classes. (20) Varta is said to be of four kinds, viz., agriculture, 
commerce and rearing the bovine race, usury being the fourth. Out of these (four) the cow 
has ever been our (only) means of subsistence. (21) (The qualities of) Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas are severally the cause of the continuance, appearance and dissolution (of the 
universe); it is through (the quality of) Rajas that by mutual union (of the male and female) 
is brought forth the heterogenous universe. (22) Impelled by Rajas, clouds shower water all

round. It is through such water that living beings achieve their purpose (of getting their food 
etc.). What has Mahendra to do with this ? (23)

Ta: WU Saul Aaa a Jel aaqiffa adteaea adsiohrarfea: 12v1 
Tale Wal AMMA AG: 1a Saas Beal WE: 124!

Gert fataen: Utent: Gord: Ueaea: | AaaTaeeeI: Adele WEA 2& | 
es: «A ATM sigrarfaf: | ara agheret deat Sa at aqefaron: 1201 
STANAM AAS eM aa IAT aed: | aaa A wat aa feat daar afe: 122! 
BogM Brad: wife: area: iseeot a mea mMfaseudar ize! 
Ura ad mat frat aie Wed) si mtereondion we a afrat wa: 1301 
There are neither cities nor territories nor villages nor houses in our possession. We have 
ever had our abcde in the forest, dwelling as we do in woodlands and on mountains. (24 
Therefore, let there be instituted a worship of cows, the Brahmanas and the mountain 
(Govardhana). Let this worship be accomplished with those very materials that have bee” 
brought together for the worship of Indra. (25) Let different varieties of cooked food from "Ic? 
boiled in milk with sugar down to boiled pulses including Samyava (a kind of porridge made 
of wheat flour with milk and ghee etc.), buns and cakes be prepared and let all the milk bé 
collected. (26) Let fires be properly fed with offerings by Brahmanas who are expositors ” 
the Vedas. Let excellent food be offered to them by you as well as cows and sacrifici 
fees.(27) Food should also be given to (all) others down to the dog, the pariah and the fallen

as may be deemed proper. And after supplying grass to the cows let the (aforesaid articles 
of) food be offered to the mountain. (28) Duly adorned after taking your meals, artistically 
painted with sandal-paste etc., and decently dressed, go you round the cows, the Brahmanas, 
the sacred fires and the mountain, keeping them to your right (as a mark of respect). (29) Let 
this view of mine be adopted, O father, if it pleases you. This worship will be dear to the cows, 
the Brahmanas and the mountain as well as to myself. (30)

Mh SAA 
ae Wed ered Meataat i sikh Frere aren: aeayend dea: 1321 
aa A Sey: Wa aesse Ages: | arate wea aq zea fiffes 132! 
wea ae Pale aad Tari Mem guna PR ag: wafer 1331 
sriegget a aed Weg: | Wess qHendtatiin wera: aera: 13¥ 
PURI St Mofasrswt wa: | aerseifa gat wt aferned Feed: 134! 
TA AA AAS: Te DWSHSSHAISSAA | Bel URAd SISA WU ASATG STA 13 | 
Wiss Wet sArredt adtea: | shat Me APRA: Bal seta WaRL 131 
SaiaiigstTS argqeasanfedn: | aan faera a mot: aeHan Ast aq: 1321 
ofa sees Fee URASe Seca caaesHT Yale aaisatseaa: 1x1

Sri Suka went on : Hearing the words uttered by the Lord, who in the form of the Time- 
Spirit sought to crush the pride of Indra, Nanda and others received His advice with 
approbation and did everything (precisely) as Sri Krsna (the Destroyer of the demon Madhu) 
had said. After getting benedictory verses recited (by the Brahmanas) and respectfully 
offering all the varieties of food out of the oblations meant for Indra to the mountain and the 
Brahmanas and grass to the cows they as well as the cowherd women, who were well- 
adorned and were celebrating the exploits of SriKrsna, rode in their bullock-carts and placing 
their cattle-wealth ahead of them went round the mountain keeping it to their right, the 
Brahmanas pronouncing their benedictions. (31—34) Having assumed another peculiar 
form, that created confidence in the mind of the cowherds (to whom the mountain was 
represented as a god), Sri Krsna in that gigantic personality consumed the abundant mass 
of offerings saying, "| am the mountain (Govardhana) !" (35) Alongwith the people of Vraja, 
Sri Krsna Himself offered His greetings to that (other) Self of His, saying, “Oh ! look here, 
appearing in a visible form this mountain has shown his grace to us. (36) Taking any form 
at will this deity actually kills such mortals as dwelling in the forest show disrespect to him. 
(Hence) for our own welfare as well as for that of the bovine race we bow to him." (37) Having 
thus performed with due ceremony the worship of mount Govardhana, the cows and the 
Brahmanas as particularly directed by Sri Krsna (the Son of Vasudeva), the said cowherds 
returned to Vraja alongwith Sri Krsna. (38)

Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse in the first half of Book Ten of 
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

POI Sry,

Se ana cnaannnasneenneDReAhhONewennnnestntennnnwewdss

31Y Usfaanseara:

Discourse XXV

is. 
eee,

The Lord lifts up Mount Govardhana 
SR Jara

Ssameisseaa: ust faa faedt qai wea: peral vale a: 1g |

Tor Midd AA AGA Arden ss: Welles Hal AT Aeaarga | 2 |

Sat saenerel Wot srPalHai wet agai & agdaterts 3 |

ames: mind: soditataathrs: 1 feerrcitferent fear facta varotar 1 x |

war Binaieqel Hoenn! aad sea Ua Aad Aaa «& |

ie Ulad AMS se | WewMerdtdttansitarca 19 | 
Sri Suka began again : Then, coming to know of his worship having been stopped, O 
Protector of men, the aforesaid Indra became angry with Nanda and the other Gopas, who 
looked upon Sri Krsna as their Protector. (1) The indignant Indra mobilized the host of 
destructive clouds known as the Samvartaka host (so-called because it is ordinarily released 
only during the period of dissolution of the universe), and issued the following command, 
regarding himself as he did to be the supreme ruler:—(2) "Oh, the greatness of pride— 
begotten of wealth—of the cowherds dwelling in the forest, who have despised a divinity (in 
my person), depending as they do on Krsna a (mere) mortal ! (8) Even as those devoted to 
rituals seek to cross the ocean of mundane existence by recourse to sacrificial performances 
consisting of rituals passing for boats in name alone and (wholly) undependable, giving up 
the signs of self-realization, so having taken shelter under Krsna—a garrulous, foolish, 
arrogant and ignorant mortal, though thinking himself to be a great scholar—the cowherds. 
have given offence to me. (4-5) Get rid of the stiffness—caused by pride of wealth— of these 
Gopas, who have grown arrogant through affluence and whose mind has been puffed up by 
Krsna; and bring their cattle to destruction. (6) Riding my elephant, Airavata, | too am

following upon your heels to Vraja alongwith the wind-gods, who are possessed of great 
prowess, with intent to annihilate to Nanda's Vraja." (7)

sit sare

ya AMaMssa Aer fds: | veneer: USaTargustay |S | 
faataarn fees: ar: ertaa: | dtsdtegurfar aqysientehu: |g | 
wore ate yseatysiers: inet: great yategad adr 120! 
saranifdarda daral SAAC: 1 TAT WAST Aitaral fears BOT AA: 12! 
RR: Gig wet sesreTEifst: aca owned: § — greeTUTeTg: 122! 
PU PO ATU aa MH WA ar ara: afta aaa 123! 
Rrerasdard ear! Per sa AA afta aft: 12%! 
soda 8 ainftad femeai wart faedsenfat arena adh 124! 
wa sift aera eet olearnhmt dtemeiet oftae aa: 126!

pis. 25 ] BOOK TEN 243

a fe aaager qos: i aisadt Awe: yeriueneat 1201 
Tarr MWS AAs yaa mod area asd @ wa sufea: 12¢1

Sri Suka resumed : Thus commanded by Indra and completely freed from their binding 
chains (which had held them under check till the time of universal destruction), the clouds 
started tormenting Nanda's Vraja by their sharp driving showers with (great) violence. (8) 
Shining brightly with flashes of lightning and roaring with (rolling) thunders and driven by 
tempestuous winds, they showered hail-stones. (9) While the clouds were incessantly 
pouring forth torrents thick as columns, the earth being flooded by volumes of flowing water 
could not be seen with its distinction of high and low lands. (10) Seized with a shiver through 
excessive driving showers and tempestuous gales and afflicted with cold, the cowherds and 
the cowherdesses sought Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) as their refuge. (11) Oppressed 
with the torrential downpour and fully covering their head as well as their children with their 
trunk, they sought shivering the soles of feet of the Lord (and prayed as follows):—(12) "O 
Krsna, O Enchanter of souls, O highly blessed Lord, be pleased to protect the bovine race, 
which has its protector in You (alone), as well as ourselves from the angry Indra, O Lover of 
Your devotees !" (13) Perceiving the animals being beaten by severe hailstorm and getting 
benumbed, Sri Hari understood it to be the work of the indignant Indra. (14) (He said to 
Himself,) “His own worship having been obstructed by us, Indra is sending down this most 
terrible hailstorm accompanied by a tempestuous gale out of season for our destruction. (15) 
| shall (presently) employ an effective remedy against this by My own divine power and 
(thereby) dispel the ignorance—in the form of pride of wealth—of the gods, who through 
infatuation fancy themselves to be the rulers of the world. (16) Surely the pride of being the 
supreme ruler of the world cannot find place in the gods, who are endowed (in a special 
degree) with the quality of Sattva; and the humiliation of the vile at My hands conduces to 
their peace of mind. (17) | shall accordingly by My own divine power protect Vraja, which has 
sought shelter in Me, looks upon Me as its Protector, nay, which constitutes My own family! 
(In fact) this is the famous vow taken by Me." (18)

Saaden se HA Waar! aM Sioa HwOReaHta aleoch: 1291 
BME Wa Wa esa ad asia: i aetoste faa Fife ater: 1201 
I Wea se a: wat agentes | amadveaae dct fafed fe a: 122! 
am fafdfaspié 9 qpenafaqaal: | aaRt AeA: Aas: Arosa: 1221 
aera Gamat fear dadwearfaty: | cteraon aerate Aare Aree Felt 1221 
para a fanreaisifatera: | At waged: A Aa Aaa | RS 
G@ sugeafeet aaai a aarti Pema Wary Meaelaenisstate 124! 
fala zea ara mo: aeleasiat: isan amat aemenss fe: 12! 
ama firefgufor: ei MMlea Wer! werent sisted: A: 1201 
ama a ae wed Yaad Ty: Ueaat aay VATA Sia IAS 1 
Having observed thus, and uprooting with one hand Mount Govardhana even as a child 
Would pull out a mushroom, Sri Krsna sportfully lifted it up. (19) Then the Lord said to the 
cowherds, "O mother, father, the people of Vraja, comfortably take shelter in the cavity 
beneath the mountain alongwith your cattle-wealth. (20) No fear need be entertained by you 
about the fall of the mountain from My hand on this spot. Away with the fear of storm and rain,

Since your protection against them has (already) been ensured." (21) Their mind having been 
reassured in that way by Sri Krsna, they entered the cavity (and made themselves

214 SRIMAD EInINCHNY ES a [ Dis 25 
aa 
comfortable there) according to the space available alongwith their cattle-wealth, rin 
bullock-carts and dependant (viz., servants , priests and so on). (22) Being (Constant 
gazed upon by the aforesaid inhabitants of Vraja, who stood disregarding the Pangs of 
hunger and thirst as well as the need for personal comfort, Sri Krsna held up the Mountain 
for a (full) week and did not stir from His position. (23) Much astonished to see that wonderfy 
power of Sri Krsna, shorn of pride, and thwarted in his purpose, Indra totally Stopped his 
clouds (from pouring showers). (24) Seeing the sky clear of clouds, the sun risen ang the 
violent downpour and tempest stopped, Sri Krsna (the Bearer of Govardhana), spoke to the 
Gopas (as follows):—(25) "Dismiss (all) fear and go out, O cowherds, alongwith you; 
womenfolk, wealth and children. The storm and rain have ceased and the rivers are almost 
emptied of their water." (26) Taking each his own cattle-wealth, the aforesaid cowherds as 
well as the womenfolk, children and the aged thereupon gradually issued forth, their goods 
loaded on their carts. (27) The almighty Lord too sportfully set down the mountain as before 
in its own place, all the creatures looking on (with wonder). (28)

aq Saamiaya assist set aig: ufecsuniath: | 
Was | URAeSE,el cetatcTeae: §«=—|_ eriare: 1291 
Aailel Wet aAdl Wa afeat at: | HUMiisera qaqa: MecHia: 1301 
fefa canon: orem: fara: i\qadnade: guastfor urftia 13g 
eaata Agiefat canned: l MPAA ae OTA TW 1321 
ddisdt: Ug: uk wa A MS aaclsactaie: | 
qManreaa pd Woe mea sadiear ewe: 1331 
Sa AMeMad Ae URASa Sedat eH Yale Gefaaiseaa: 1241 | 
Overflowing with an uprush of love, the people of Vraja approached Him with embraces 
and other appropriate (loving) gestures and the Gopis joyously exhibited their loving regard 
for Him by sprinkling Him with curds and unbroken rice and showered their choice blessings 
(on Him). (29) Overpowered with affection, YaSoda, Rohini, Nanda and Balarama, the 
foremost of the powerful, hugged Sri Krsna and pronounced their blessings (on Him). (30) 
(Highly) gratified, hosts of gods, the Sadhyas as well as the Siddhas, Gandharvas and 
Caranas in heaven glorified Him and showered volleys of flowers (on Him), O ruler of the 
earth ! (31) Prompted by the gods conchs and kettledrums sounded in the heavens; while 
Gandharva chiefs—the foremost of whom was Tumburu—sang, O protector of men ! (32) 
Surrounded by loving cowherds and accompanied by Balarama, O king, the said Sri Hari

went back from that place to Vraja. Full of delight the cowherd women (too) returned (to their

respective homes) celebrating such exploits (as the uplifting of Govardhana) of Sri Krsna 
(who had captivated their heart). (33)

Thus ends twenty-fifth discourse in the first half of Book Ten of. the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS my ey

a

pis. 26 BOOKTEN | 215

We eee We We He Me Me we Me Ae ee ewe he ee ee ee He Me Re HE We We We WERE ee He HE He WE Mee HE Me He EHEC RE Me RRR R Re Re BRE HEHE REM HEBER Re Be He

Discourse XXVI

Nanda’s conversation with the cowherds about Sri Krsna's glory 
Hh SavI

vafaenfa eatfor wot: sone tea a1 argh: shq: waster afaferar: |e

SS ll aes Al hwMeae w age | 2 |

a: Wea se: ath siomi ad fave fitat gent merafal 2 |

aepaatesmMaot = GATaT «= Weis: | Ula: HA: GE UM: eae aa: 1X |

feadisd: WANA aera TUNGeh | sttsoda facet eed: soared & |

undead seit igen faeerieaa aguradie mnveaeaes & |

arigiqaera Wal Fe IHG Teal sal AAU! o |

at CAR AMM WU aechdd: | eda ah deal wmaatshkameai 2 1

aay adedu saad fare eal sodas aiuenh a dle e@ |

wal WaNeda «eI tea: bach odiead AH UhUGeEHeThadd Igo!

Tera mda aed aoanfeat| sttae aeag mMosMmvaated: 1221

steitfaaaadts afeat fand geld! Waele saat denser Prfaatecnra 1221

GAAS, AST Al Asia | Te a daasey deeitatier : HAT 1231

® Uae a1: H AelisaMom dat Al Wad Wel Asa dares evi

Sri Suka began again : Much astonished to witness such (superhuman) feats of Sri 
Krsna, the aforesaid Gopas, who were ignorant of His power, gathered together and talked 
(as follows):—(1) Since these exploits are most wonderful indeed on the part of a(mere) boy, 
how could he deserve a birth among rustics, which is (so) unworthy of himself ? (2) A boy 
of seven, how could he keep on holding (for a week ) with one hand a big mountain as 
sportfully as a lordly elephant would hold a lotus ? (3) By him as a (mere) babe with its eyes 
half closed was sucked the breast of the mighty PUtana alongwith her life, (even) as the life- 
Span of a living organism is (gradually) swallowed up by Time ! (4) Struck by the fore part of 
his feet (even) as he—(only three) months old—lay underneath a cart kicking up his feet and 
crying, the cart fell topsy-turvy ! (5) Being carried away through the sky by a demon while 
Squatting (on the floor) as an infant of one year, he killed the demon, Trnavarta (by name), 
Who was feeling oppressed on account of his being caught by the neck ! (6) Tied by the 
mother to a mortar on the ground of theft of butter, on one occasion, and crawling on all fours 
Detween the two Arjuna trees he caused them to fall down ! (7) Duly pasturing calves in the 
forest, accompanied by Balarama and surrounded by (other) boys, he tore asunder by the 
bill, with his arms, his enemy in the form of a heron, that sought to kill him. (8) Having killed

another demon,who, in the guise of a calf had found his way into his herd of calves with intent 
fokillhim, he sportfully caused with the carcass a number of Kapittha trees to fall (by dashing

wt

itagainst the Kapittha trees) ! (9) Slaying the demon (Dhenuka), disguised as a donkey, and 
his kinsfolk while accompanied by Balarama, he rendered safe the forest of palm trees (the 
home of Dhenuka); which was rich with ripe fruits. (10) Getting the terrible (demon) Pralamba

*

slain by the powerful Balarama, he rescued the cattle of Vraja as well as the COWherg 
from a forest fire. (11) Having subdued the most venomous Kaliya (a ruler of Serpents 
and rid it of haughtiness, he forcibly expelled it from the pool (inhabited by it) ang na 
the waters of the Yamuna free from poison! (12) The love of us all, who have our abode 
in Vraja, for this boy of yours, O Nanda, is such as cannot be easily given up ang his 
love for us (too) is quite natural. How is it? (13) A boy of seven years lifting UD a bj 
mountain—how inconceivable is this ! It is for this reason that our suspicion is arousgq 
O ruler of Vraja, with regard to your son (being God Himself). (14)

TT Sad

saat A aat Mor aq YET A atssich | Wi Hanged Wt A Aaara wien, 
auc: fare Jadtsaat wi: | Bact Hee dia gerit HPwrat Wa: 1 ee | 
wT dager aafaendeaet: | anda gid sTAMat: WTaaTd 1 V9) 
ae aha APT wae a Yaet Ai WurHaiqeuor aae Aq At VAT 1 ee 
Wa: Ha seMee Maneater ism wader qarosediters eet 
Git asd weal 9 aequifeat: | sisi wean frqdeqy aaa: | R01 
SZ Udey Aan: vitt eda Aer: | aRatshaactary «= faeopranfrarg: 1 2g 
ats HANS Ararat Ut: | fear lalqurad dente 4 fasta: 1 221 
Sader At afesa mt a waqe Ud | AA ANTaUaIg Horafacteaniharq! 23 1

Nanda replied : (Pray,) hear my statement, O Gopas, which is (precisely) what the 
sage Garga told me concerning this boy; and let your suspicion about the child melt 
away. (15) (Garga said:) Taking (diverse) forms indeed in each Yuga, this boy has 
manifested (in his body) three (different) colours, viz., white, red and yellow; this time he 
has assumed a dark complexion. (16) Some time in the past this son of yours was born 
in the house of Vasudeva; (hence) the wise (who know this truth) will duly designate him 
as the glorious Vasudeva (son of Vasudeva). (17) There are numerous names and 
forms of your son, conforming to his excellences and actions. | (alone) know them, not 
the commonalty. (18) The delight of the cowherds, nay, of the entire Gokula, this boy 
will bring you happiness. By his help you will easily surmount all difficulties. (19) Being 
protected and strengthened by him during a period of anarchy in former times, O lord 
of Vraja, pious souls, tormented by robbers, (eventually) conquered them. (20) Enemies 
cannot overpower those highly blessed men who offer love to this boy, any more than 
demons can prevail over those whose cause has been espoused by Lord Visnu. (21) 
Therefore, this son of yours, O Nanda, is a compeer of Lord Narayana in point of 
excellences, splendour, fame and glory, so that there is nothing to be wondered at his 
exploits. (22) Ever since, having directly exhorted me thus, Garga returned to his 
abode, | have recognized Krsna, who has (ever) rid us of affliction, to be (no other than) 
a part manifestation of Lord Narayana. (23)

gid Taare: sear whit asia: 1 gegen PUTA AAse: | 
Aled Tear: HOt aA Adferarar: | Ws! 
eat aula agfacraeer 9 amenaaitic: 
Mee Ra SAU; sears | 
Sela semacht icici ae 
faug Whsnaesnetd Wart sat TANT! 24 | 
dt Area A URAC Mears <eeH Yate wefeisiseara: 1 26 |

Having heard the aforesaid statement of Nanda recapitulating the words of Garga, the 
inhabitants of Vraja, who had already witnessed and heard of the glory of Sri Krsna, 
possessed as he was of infinite energy, felt rejoiced and worshipped Nanda as well as Sri 
Krsna, now that there astonishment was gone. (24) May Sri Krsna (the Ruler of cows) be 
gracious to us—Sri Krsna, who, when Indra (the god of rain), enraged at the interruption of 
his worship, sent down (heavy) showers accompanied by strokes of lightning, hailstorms and 
tempestuous winds, was moved with pity to see (the whole of) Vraja with its cowherds, cattle 
and womenfolk in distress and depending (solely) on Himself and, smilingly uprooting with 
one hand mount Govardhana, even as achild would pull up amushroom, held it up and (thus) 
protected Vraja, (thereby) crushing the pride of the mighty Indra ! (25)

Thus ends the twenty-sixth discourse in the first half of Book Ten 
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BIg Apfaanseara:

Indra extols Sri Krsna

MY SAT 
Maia ya ale sane Wad Aa WetHleas Hot qeiy: aon Wa a1 g 
fafam® suas sifea: added: i cet meat 6 feniléatchaciar! 2 | 
SSAA A VTaISA PULA: | ABetHawte FH Ble chdleifes: 1 3 |

Sri Suka began again : When Govardhana was held up and Vraja was protected 
(thereby) from torrential rain, Surabhi (the celestial cow of plenty) sought Sri Krsna from 
Goloka (the home of cows in heaven) and so did Indra from paradise. (1) Full of shame for 
his having shown disrespect (to the Lord), he approached the latter in a secluded place and 
touched His feet with his diadem possessing the splendour of the sun. (2) Indra—who had 
not only heard but (actually) witnessed the glory of the aforesaid Sri Krsna of unlimited 
energy, and whose pride as the ruler of (all) the three worlds had been crushed—spoke with

Joined palms (as follows).(3) 
sq Sard

: ; aq ma wet aed ween! 
asi | yoreyarat Sse «= ASQUTIATAN: | X |

ei y wana fa tam wae «aseetlery sar: | 
wen aug ura fui ter et GORA 4 |

— TER sararaentant area: wie Saidiaus: | 
Saraafa: ated at feepaamndternfar| & |

feara 
[865] B.M. Part II—36

a_i

4

a ufan smderifacat det areswaaRy, wey

fassiani sass «gat Goma «6 asaaeaat © |

a a@ wWaednqgae fammeeisiags: = wwe

aq ssisada yada Aa grata Asadtic |

aq ara ea aa GUNN atary | kt 
TG «| Wad TTC (TI Ta HOTA Aaa Aa AH: 120) 
STATA Rees | ade Udita aeyaTar | AT: 1281 
me We WSARMaaRaaiy: iaied fad aa ata dist ies 
AMATI «CARTES «META: 1 SAR ATS INT Ta: 1281

Sere Te er

Indra prayed : Your essential character, consisting as it does of pure Sattva, is 
uniform, full of wisdom and untouched by Rajas and Tamas. This phenomenal 
universe, which is a product of Maya, finds no place in You, persisting as it does 
through ignorance (alone). (4) How, then, could greed etc.—which are responsible for 
rebirth and are born of identification with the body, constituting as they do the 
distinguishing marks of the ignorant— exist in You? Yet You wield the rod of 
punishment for the maintenance of righteousness and for the punishment of the 
wicked. (5) You are the father, the preceptor and the supreme ruler of (all) the worlds; 
You are the Time-Spirit that cannot be easily set at naught and that holds the sceptre 
of sway (over the universe). It is for the good of the world that You carry on Your sport 
in embodied forms assumed at will, curbing the pride of those who fancy themselves 
to be the rulers of the world. (6) Fools like me, who regard themselves as rulers of the 
universe, speedily shake off that pride on seeing You undaunted even in times of 
danger and, rid of their haughtiness, take the path of Devotion trodden by the 
righteous. (In fact) Your very activity serves as a punishment for the wicked. (7) Such 
that You are, be pleased, O almighty Lord, to forgive me—who, immersed as | am in 
the pride of wealth and power and ignorant of Your greatness, have sinned against 
You—and to ordain that my mind may not be so evilly disposed again hereafter, 
deluded as my intellect is. (8) Your descent on this earth, O Lord who are above 
sense-perception, is conducive to the extermination of leaders of (great) armies—who 
are not only a burden to the earth themselves but who bring into existence many such 
Sscourges—and to the welfare of those devoted to Your feet. (9) Hail, hail to YOu, the 
almighty and infinite Lord, the Inner Controller of all, Sri Krsna, Son of Vasudeva, the 
Protector of the Yadavas.(10) Salutation to the Lord, who has assumed a form 
conforming the wish of His devotees, who is an embodiment of pure consciousnes>: 
who is all-formed, the Cause of all, the Soul of all living beings ! (11) On my worshiP 
having been interfered with, this (mischief) was done, O Lord, for the destruction of 
Vraja by means of torrential rain and winds by me who was full of pride and seize 
with violent rage. (12) My pride having been crushed and my efforts having been foiled: 
| have been favoured by You, O Lord ! | have (accordingly) sought You, the Supreme 
Ruler and Preceptor, (nay) my very Self. as my refuge.(13)

& s.8*.0620 0 a6

Dis. 27 ] BOOK TEN 219

AYP SAA 
"we agifia: set wats Waray! Heese «= are WeAlaAcusald 12 1

Sri Suka continued : Thus glorified by Indra, Lord SriKrsna heartily laughed and spoke 
to him as follows In a voice deep as the rumbling of clouds. (14)

MATTATTATA

meester § quearfet a uefa a sigrenftr reset Ter Sere 126 |

Tada Wh UR a: fad Usage! Viaat wUrany ad: erated: 1201 
The glorious Lord said : It was in order to shower My grace on you and to put you 
incessantly in mind of Me, highly intoxicated as you were with the fortune of Indra, that the 
interruption of your worship was brought about by Me, O god of rain. (15) Blinded with the 
pride of power and wealth, one takes no notice of Me, who wield the rod of punishment. Him 
(alone) do | cast down from an affluent state, on whom | intend to shower My grace. (16) You

may go now, O Indra; may all be well with you! Let My injunctions be followed. Devoted to 
your duty and free from egotism, hold on to your offices (as before). (17)

ae a: «= qemfted waettia@endeas 89 Aofouritaeieci

Hailing and accosting Sri Krsna, the supreme Lord disguised as a cowherd boy, along- 
with her progeny, the high-minded cow of plenty now spoke to Him (thus). (18)

queard 
PN Ho death fase farsa | Fadl Slee GAM «= aS 1281 
aa: wd da a A sal Wd Nala Ha Miascamt A aA Alea: lo! 
Sa aeafweam veo ated aan stadioista fama yauiogaa 1221

Surabhi said : O Krsna, the Enchanter of souls, O great Yogi, O Inner Controller and 
Source of the universe ! we have been favoured by You, the Protector of the worlds, O 
immortal Lord | (19) You are our supreme Deity. For the prosperity of the bovine race, the 
Brahmanas and the gods as well as of those who are pious-minded, be You our Ruler 
(henceforth), O Lord of the universe ! (20) Directed by Brahma we shall crown You as our

‘king, since You have come down to this earth for relieving the burden of the earth, O Soul

Of the universe ! (21) 
yh Sara 
Ws Gera AR: | WeTRISSCHA: | eeeHIAP TA TAT traded: 1221 
Se: ailifa: ale ated Sangh: | safer aes Miers sit AAT 1231 
: TARTAR aera TWeafaeneRraeganon: | 
oydat oo lene «RUT: Hera: 121

a aqeqeahtentaendat SaentsargageargsTy: | 
en: out fdingdeet Wawel Wa Tau 
ARG: Ua Gal se AIST: | arpErateeat =—- Fa sferwgVAL 12K |

pes uit Aalst Gere | Memvavaend Rava Peta: 1201 
sft winteenta Wercahifter a: 1 stagidt wat Bent gat carfefrigay 12) 
sfa SREP Tad ASM URASR Steal ara Yale Saas PafaeMseara: 1291

Sri Suka went on: Having thus prayed to Sri Krsna, born in the line of Dasarha, Surabh; 
bathed Him with her own milk (flowing from her udders); (even so) urged by Aditi and others 
(the mothers of the gods) and accompanied by celestial sages, Indra (too) bathed Him with 
the water of the heavenly Ganga, brought by Airavata (Indra's elephant) in its own trunks, 
and designated Him as Govinda (the Ruler of the cows). (22-23) Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, 
Siddhas and Caranas, headed by Tumburu and Narada (two Gandharva chiefs noted for 
their skill in vocal music), who had assembled there, sang the glory of Sri_ Hari, which is 
capable of destroying the sins of the world; while celestial damsels beautifully danced full of 
joy. (24) The foremost among the gods glorified Him and covered Him with showers of 
weird flowers. (All) the three worlds derived supreme joy; while the cows drenched the 
earth with their (overflowing) milk on that occasion. (25) Rivers flowed with delicious fluids 
of various kinds (such as milk); trees yielded honey in profusion, bumper crops appeared 
(even) on unploughed lands and mountains exhibited gems on their surface. (26) On Sri 
Krsna having been crowned (thus as the Ruler of the cows), all those (wild) creatures 
(which are ordinarily met with in a forest), O delight of the Kurus, became free from enmity, 
O dear Pariksit, though savage by nature. (27 Having thus crowned Govinda as the Ruler

of the cows as well as of Vraja, and permitted by Him, the celebrated Indra rose to heaven 
accompanied by the gods. (28)

Thus ends the twenty-seventh discourse entitled "Indra extols Sri Krsna," in the 
first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,

otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

mat Pace Paset P5 
PDT SOR

SIMS aan searea:

Sri Krsna rescues His father from the realm of Varuna

MY SAA 
Unie eR: aaael Sate! Sd Tea Gilera glezal wefaaid| & | 
a Welaad Yet aeorergshiarL| sagearad aet vfasqeh fafa! 2 | 
GERRTRa: FN Wad Moat: waaay frat aeoned!

pis. 28 ] BOOK TEN 221

We We Be We We Bee Be We Be Be He He He He Hy 
ge te AAI SE SEM We Me Be Re Be Me Wee Me ARE HE RR ERT Me Hee Ree He Ne He Me Me Re Re Re ME CME HE Ree Re Re Re RR RRR ERC A A

| : dehdch Wal Us MAPA fay: 131 
sma tet eae tee: aula cee usfeatsss destanelene: 1X 1

Sri Suka began again : Having fasted on the (following) Ekadasi (the eleventh day of 
a lunar fortnight) and duly worshipped Lord Visnu (who is solicited by His devotees and is 
the deity presiding over this day), Nanda descended into the water of the Kalindi (during the 
third watch of the night) in order to take his bath within the hours of the Dwadasi (the twelfth 
day). (1) A demon servant of Varuna (the god of water) seized and took Nanda to the 
presence of his master on the plea of his (Nanda's) having entered the water at night, 
(apparently) not knowing that the hour is reserved for the (activities of) demons. (2) Failing 
to perceive Nanda, the cowherds cried out, "O Rama! O Krsna!" Hearing the cry and coming 
to know of His father having been carried away to Varuna, the almighty Lord, who affords 
protection to His own, sought the presence of Varuna, Oking! (3) Finding Sri Krsna (the Ruler 
of the senses) arrived at his door, Varuna (the guardian of a sphere), who was greatly 
rejoiced at His sight, worshipped Him with grand presents and spoke (as follows). (4)

WLI] SATA

star Oya eetsderaisfima: satiate «aamag: Oneaa: | GI 
TRE Wad AT eT at es eT emg fsfaenerat | ¢ | 
saat AT THT Ae | Striieisa dal fen da Var aranela | 9 | 
Tae «= FANT 8 AddeeReR I Mia daa far a Pada! ¢ |

Varuna said : It is today that my life has been fulfilled and it is only today that a (real) 
treasure has been found (by me), (even though! possess all the treasures of the world, being 
the lord of the ocean, a storehouse of all jewels), O my Master. (The end of my worldly 
existence also seems to be near inasmuch as) those worshipping Your feet have reached 
to the other end of their life's journey (viz., final beatitude). (5) Hail to You, the almighty Lord, 
the all-perfect Supreme Spirit (the controller of all embodied souls), in whom Maya, which 
brings about the creation of the (various) worlds, is not even heard of. (6) This father of Yours 
was brought (here) by this ignorant and foolish servant of mine, who did not know his duty. 
May You be pleased to forgive this fault. (7) Be pleased, O Krsna, to shower Your grace on 
me too, O omniscient Lord! O Govinda, here is Your father, who may be taken (back), fond

as You are of Your parents. (8) 
sien SAI

Wa warled: Han WMTAMAAL: | SMETANA alaat ALA Alas. AeA! F | 
Takats BT BIHUTsASleaa | HA A Pale AS sieve fakeratssatd 120 | 
a wqaafaal Use Ae Mortal! st a: aie PaAqaraneqeanax: 1221 
sf mi a aman farrier Sa! Ugeafasat «aa uetdaferad 1221 
wa @ ole wifeafsornmandt: | seareerg ay A aq GT ait WAT 1 R31 
sft afr amar vernreforat eft: | agfarre oleh SWOT THe: WTR! 
Wet WaAR ae we MAA: GAT! hes GRahA Gra Toa aAfeaT: 1841 
3 a weed ata war: Hea Aaya: | eye wt TaA_USEATI GT Nk! 
Teng ad Bl UATahaaT: | HOt Se aaa: Waa Patera: 191 
afer SERIA FATT MTSE Steen SATA Fane: 1RC

Sri Suka continued : Thus propitiated (by Varuna), Lord Sri Krsna, the Supreme Rule; 
(of the universe), returned (to Vraja), taking His father (with Him) and bringing jOy to His 
relations. (9) Astonished indeed to witness the immense fortune of Varuna, which Was 
something that he had never seen before, as well as the submissiveness of the People of 
that realm towards Sri Krsna, Nanda spoke about it to his kinsfolk. (10) Believing Him to 
be God (Himself), they too thought with an eager mind, O Pariksit, "Would the Supreme 
Lord were to translate us to His own (divine) realm as weli as to His imperceptible 
(transcendent) state (known by the name of Brahma) !" (11) Having come to know by 
Himself the aforesaid wish of His own people, the said all-perceiving Lord graciously 
pondered thus with a view to accomplishing their desire:—(12) “Revolving through 
(diverse) states of existence, (both) high and low, in this (material) world under the force 
of ignorance (in the shape of identification with the body etc.), desire (born of such 
ignorance) and actions (prompted by such desire), indeed, this embodied soul is unable 
to realize its essential character." (13) Reflecting thus, the highly merciful Lord Sri Hari 
revealed to the cowherds His own (divine) realm (viz., Vaikuntha), lying beyond Prakrti and 
(before that) His (transcendent) state called Brahma, which is (absolute) truth, (pure) 
consciousness, infinite, self-effulgent and eternal, and which sages realize only when the 
three Gunas are transcended and when they have been fully composed. (14-15) Trans- 
ported (first) to the all absorbing state of Brahma and steeped in it, and eventually lifted out 
of it by Sri Krsna (as out of a trance), they beheld the (divine) realm of the same Brahma 
(crystallized in the form of Lord Visnu) by the grace of the same Krsna because of whom 
Akrura perceived that divine abode (on another occasion) in the past.* (16) Nanda and 
others were indeed exhilarated with supreme ecstasy to behold the said realm as well as 
Sri Krsna being panegyrized there by the (four) Vedas (in living forms), and felt greatly 
amazed (to find Sri Krsna in their midst once again as before). (17)

Thus ends the twenty-eighth discourse in the first half of Book Ten of 
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS my

* Vide Discourse XXXIX below.

BOOK TEN 293

We We We Ke We We We We He He By ; 
oe We We We Wr We We He We He He He BEE EE Mee We ee Re We We we ee eR ee eR eee

BAe SeAT::

Discourse XXIX 
A description of the (celebrated) Rasa Play (of the Lord)

SH SAT 
war a Wal: Bekpronieoat: | dex wy wagsa arrararquriira: |e | 
wag: eH: aie cen fame aa t 
a oadvinemeet as fra: fren sa dtdefa: 1 21 
t=) HU SMAaUSHUS Ss TAA : 
wt w> alaertiiniiets tee 
mera it tegaett 6 afa: «= peoeTAaT: 1 
ITAA: A BA iil WaleoHuscn: |X |

Sri Suka began again : Finding those nights* adorned with full-blown jasmines (even) 
in autumn, the Lord too (who has all His desires fulfilled) made up His mind to play, falling 
back upon His Yogamaya (wonderful divine potency that supplies all the requisites for such 
play). (1) Presently there appeared (on the horizon) the familiar moon (the king of the stars) 
painting the face of the Orient with a red hue by its most soothing rays—(even) as a lover 
appearing (returning home) after along absence would daub the face of his beloved wife with 
saffron paste—and alleviating the sufferings of the people (caused by the hot sun during the 
daytime). (2) Beholding the moon (lit., the friend of the lilies, so-called because a water-lily 
opens only under the rays of the moon) in full orb—which shone like the countenance of 
Goddess Laksmi and possessed a scarlet hue like that of fresh saffron—and the woodland 
(Of Vrndavana) illumined with its soft rays, Sri Krsna struck a melodious note on Fis flute, that 
enraptured the mind of the fair-eyed Gopis. (3) Hearing that music, kindling love (in the 
bosom of the Gopis), the women of Vraja, whose mind had (already) been captivated by Sri 
Krsna, sallied forth from all sides (with the help of the note of the flute) to the spot where that 
beloved One was—so (hurriedly) that their endeavour (to reach the Lord) could not be 
Perceived by one another—their ear-rings swinging due to their swift movement. (4)

greistreag: anfse ae feet Waa: | weiss «= eararygrea «Ag: 1 & | 
uftaeereethge Uae: PA Wa: | Seer: Oe aTeR eS ASA | & | 
FRA: TSA SASHA: HIM CAT | SACRA: ehTaTeL HeMTIPIch A: tO | 
a arian: ufafa: faqhratqene: | Weramenert A Aedat HAtfee: | < 1 
Semler: sii Metsmstaretar: | Hot AAaaeT aequifederaar: | @ 1 
q: Wetelarediadelarealar: LATEraRewaa $= AUT: 1k0 | 
aia quent wngefe Bg gor ee Tel: | NaHOTEEMT: 1221 
ee

" The above verse should be read with verse 29 of discourse XXII, in which,the Lord promised to sport with the damsels 
eI Vraja, who worshipped Goddess Katyayani during the previous winter in order to secure His grace.

is. 29 | 
a te HCFC Be We Ve We We He We Ke Ve He 
rit

See vececucereee terete rte tres Wc Ret $0 tr 8 SAC RECARO RCAC RESORT RARER ICI AOR AREA MAHER BM Brie Rem tte gig IS. 29 
CC st—~CS~ststSS 
Full of intense longing some, who were milking (their) cows, darted off leaving t

milking-vessel (uncared for); (while) others left as soon as they had placed the milk on th 
oven (without waiting for its being boiled) and still others went out without removing the 
(dressed) porridge (from the hearth). (5) Some, who were serving food (to their husbands 
and other relations) went away neglecting that duty; others, who were feeding their infants 
with milk gave up that work and ran. Still others, who were waiting upon their husbands 
turned their back on them and departed; while some (more), who were dining, bolted away 
leaving their meal. (6) Others, who were bedaubing their person with sandal-paste etc., jef 
that work half-finished; still others, who were rubbing and cleaning their person with Oily 
substances, decamped leaving off that work; and some (more), who were painting their eyes 
with collyrium, put off that work and ran to meet Sri Krsna. Still others sought the presence 
of SriKrsna with their garments andjewels wrongly placed. (7) Though being stopped by their 
husbands, parents, brothers or other relations, they did not turn back (homeward), infatuateg 
as they were (through love), their mind having been lured away by Sri Krsna (the Protector 
of cows). (8) Some cowherd women, who were inside their house and could not find their way 
out for a sally, fixed their mind on Sri Krsna with their eyes closed, seized as they were with 
an intense longing to meet Him. (9) (All) their sins having been burnt up by the intense agony 
of separation from Sri Krsna (their most beloved Lord)—which could not be easily endured— 
and their (entire) stock of merit depleted through ecstatic joy proceeding from the loving 
embrace of the immortal Lord secured in contemplation, the cowherd women, whose 
shackles of Karma (which kept them bound to the world) were (thus) completely sundered, 
forthwith cast off their material body, united as they were (in thought) with Sri Krsna (the 
Supreme Spirit), even though they recognized Him to be a (mere) paramour. (10-11)

UHATA 
po fag: Ut ami Ad Aelda AIi Waseda «quar |= HM 1kRI

The king (Pariksit) put in : The (aforesaid) Gopis knew Sri Krsna to be no more than 
their darling and in any case did not recognize Him as Brahma (the Infinite), O (holy) sage! 
How was the cessation of the stream (cycle) of mundane existences possible in the case of 
the aforesaid Gopis, whose mind was swayed by the three Gunas? (12)

MYH SATA

Sh Uedadd de: fate ae ua: ifgeata eather femqaretarsfran: 123!

a f:samata cakednadt qui steaennee firefore yore: 12%!

mM wmlat Wi Aeded Becta ai fret ea facadt ata aaa fe aie!

41 da fase: qraf val waa iantetet mel aga uaa faqerd 126!

0 gitar wear asad: | stateq aed sel ara: delflatert 1 2y! 
Sri suka replied : This has already* been explained to you how Sisupala (the ' ule f 
Cedi) attained final beatitude (oneness with the Lord) though hating Sri Krsna (the Ruler 2 
the senses). What wonder, then, that the Gopis who looked upon Sri Krsna (who |S ape 
Sense-perception) as their beloved Lord should do so. (13) The manifestation of the geet 
who is free from decay and cannot be cognized through the intellect, (nay), who is bey®

( l 
the three Gunas as well as their Controller, O protector of men, is intended (only) o 
bestowing the boon of final beatitude on human beings. (14) Indeed they who constan

r of

* Vide VIl.i. 22—31.

cherish (the feeling of) lascivious passion, wrath, fear, affection, kinship or devotion toward 
Sri Hari attain oneness with Him. (15) Hence no feeling of wonder should be entertained 
by you as you do with regard to Sri Krsna—the birthless Lord, the Ruler of all masters 
of Yoga—by whose grace (the whole of) this (mobile and immobile) creation can be 
liberated.(16) Finding the aforesaid women of Vraja arrived in His presence, the Lord, who 
is the foremost of (all) elocutionists, addressed them (as follows), infatuating them by His

elegant expressions. (17)

arr at Fann: Bret fe erat a: ase «aise | AaMTAAeNUTL 1201

TAT SRST aerarafaan | wierd ast te Wet My: |e: 121

are: TU: UAT Me: uaa a: | faferafa gaged ar ped ape 1201

ge HH sat cee amore 1221

saat vefiteee vac afar: | sta waa a: Sera wf sata: 1231

Wd: BWA alot ut swat Waa! asi a HeMva: WM Vargo 12x11

Gaitet gum ql set Weerist ariufa: att waet cregiardat 1241

Tea A OMT Has Wai wftad a ada stoned Hote: 1261

TAG SVlAle AMA Wealsehtda| A AM fader siesta ddl Wert iz

The glorious Lord said : Welcome is your presence (here), O highly blessed ones ! In

what way can | oblige you? Is everything well with Vraja ? (Please) reveal (to Me) the motive 
of your visit (to this place). (18) Frightful in aspect is this night and characterized by the 
presence of hideous creatures (too). (Therefore) return to Vraja (forthwith); you should not 
tarry here, O slender-waisted ones ! (19) Not finding you (at home), mothers and fathers, 
sons, brothers and husbands must be looking for you. (Pray,) do not cause anxiety to your 
near and dear ones. (20) The blossoming forest, illumined with the rays of the full moon and 
adorned with the tender leaves of trees waving before the sport of breezes from the Yamuna, 
has been seen (by you). (21) Therefore, return without delay to Vraja and serve your 
husbands, O virtuous ladies ! The calves as well as the children are crying (due to hunger); 
nourish them with milk and milk the cows. (22) Or (may be) you have come because your 
mind is bound by ties of attachment for Me. (If so) it is but proper for you; for (all) creatures 
find delight in Me. (23) Indeed the paramount duty of women is to waitina guileless manner 
upon their husband as wellas his relations and to nourish the children. (24) A husband should 
not be abandoned by women aspiring for higher (heavenly) regions, be he depraved, 
unlucky, decrepit, dull-witted, ailing or even indigent, unless (of course) he is a reprobate.(25) 
Intercourse with a paramour on the part of a woman of noble pedigree is a bar to heaven, 
Scandalous, mean, a source of trouble, fraught with fear and hateful everywhere. (26) Love 
for Meis fostered not so much by physical proximity (to Me) as by hearing My praises, looking 
at Me, meditating on Me or by singing Me glories. Therefore, return home. (27)

5 el el Bel el Bel 8 SRINAO eee rer errr ete : 
as faata sfaseant get aadfattaticacenrm: | 
3 fra viet 4 faerenreehnisqadent: 1301 
Sri Suka continued : Hearing the foregoing speech of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows), 
which was so unpleasant (to hear), the Gopis felt despondent and, finding their designs 
frustrated, were plunged into deep anxiety (that could not be easily overcome). (28) Casting 
down their faces with lips, cherry as a ripe Bimba fruit, parched up by their breaths hot with 
grief, and scratching the ground with their toe, they stood silent under the heavy load of their 
sorrow, washing the saffron painted on their breasts with tears mixed with the collyrium of 
their eyes. (29) Wiping their eyes bedimmed by weeping, the Gopis, who had given up all 
other) cravings for the sake of the Lord, full of love as they were (for Him), spoke (thus 
(thus) to 
Sri Krsna, their most beloved One—who was talking like one who had no love for them, as 
though rejecting their offer of love—in a voice choked with mild anger. (30) 
NT] HF: 
Wl US ATE A AMSA eal aMissageat Wsit FAA 132 I 
qed aot wert sft eaifacr warn 
sTecdandguarme asst NB ateqydt fas AMAT 132! 
Sata te aia td Halon: S ses Praise afergarefntde: far | 
aa: Wale Wat AT wt fen strat yet ala faratfaaaa 133 | 
ford «UGA Maded «Fey afafdaaa maa yard | 
Wel Ue A Model Uegene aa we amet qram fe ar isx! 
fase ARaeIAC welaelnnenittsiesatad | 
Al ae aa fares quads ear ara veel: ued Ta A 1gu1 
The Gopis said : You ought not to speak so cruelly to us. Kindly take in Your service us, 
that have sought the soles of Your feet renouncing all (other) objects, (even) as Lord 
Narayana (the most ancient Person) accepts (the worship of) those that seek Liberation. 
(Pray,) do notabandon us, O Lord whoare (so) hard to win over! (31) Asithas been observed 
by You, the Knower of Dharma (the principles of righteousness), that the natural duty of 
women Is to render service to their husband and children as well as to the relations of their 
husband, O beloved One, let such service be done to You, the almighty Lord, the (central) 
theme of all teachings; for You are the most beloved Friend, (nay) the (very) Self of all 
embodied souls (so that service rendered to You will redound to the gratification of all, even 
as by watering the roots of a tree all its limbs get nourished of their own accord). (32) Those 
well-versed in the sacred lore surely find delight in You (alone), their own eternally beloved 
Self; what purpose could be gained through a husband, children and others, who are sources 
of agony ? Therefore, be gracious to us, O supreme Lord; (pray,) do not frustrate our hopes 
centred in You for a long time, O lotus-eyed One ? (33) Our mind, which found delight 
(heretofore) in the home, has been easily lured away by You; and our hands too, that 
remained engaged in household duties, have been robbed of their capacity for work. Our feet 
(likewise) do not recede even a step from the soles of Your feet. How, then, can we return 
to Vraja or (even if we manage somehow to go there) what (useful work) shall we do there

(when our mind and other internal organs have ceased function; n 
ning altogether)? (34) Quenc 
with the flood of nectar flowing from Your lips the fire of passion kindled i nour Bach by Your

PoP Ve Ve Se Ge We He Be ee

pewitching) smiles, (loving) glances and melodious music. If not, on our bodies being

consumed by the fire of separation we shall (like Yogis) attain to the presence of Your (lotus) 
feet by force of meditation, O beloved Friend | (35)

merges a ens Taret erat enfeequersareT | 
THA TAY AMS wy aera wt UAT: 136 
AAT GATE Teen wea aaftug fers qeaEAL | 
TET: MSA PAS ATURE aa A Wa Wet: SORT: 1319 | 
aa: Sele GST Asef wat ferger aaditeaqureaan: | 
aaa | GENT ae TTL RC 
ama U yseusyt fasted aa: fade a warm are: 13e 
onl Gg AT AOU TaNeassdahtaa A taaeae | 
Tareas a fier ed ae MT: Yea Ivo t 
kh Var Avastin eal Gessfeges: Wretennar | 
qa Rafe augmdae deny a ara a fast ive

From the time, O lotus-eyed One, we touched at some unknown spot (in the forest) the 
soles of Your (lotus) feet—that concede the privilege of touching them (even) ta Goddess 
Rama (only) now and then—alas ! we are not able (even) to stand before anyone else, now 
that we have been blessed by You, to whom we (the denizens of the forest) are so dear, O 
Darling | (36) Having secured a place even on Your bosom, Sri (the goddess of beauty and 
prosperity) has (always) soughtin rivalry with Tulast (the deity presiding over the basil plant, 
the favourite of the Lord) for the dust of Your lotus-feet, actually enjoyed by Your servants— 
Sri, for (drawing) whose (gracious) look (on them) the other gods (strenuously) exert 
themselves. We too have likewise sought the dust of Your feet. (37) Therefore, be propitious 
tous, O Soother of (all) suffering, since we have sought the soles of Your feet quitting our 
homes with the (sole) ambition of waiting upon You. (Pray,) grant us, O jewel among men, 
the Privilege of serving You—us whose mind is tormented with intense longing awakened 
by Your piercing glances accompanied by charming smiles. (38) Beholding Your 
countenance—overhung by curly locks, with its cheeks illumined by the splendour of ear- 
INJS and lips full of nectar and characterized by smiles and sidelong glances—and gazing 
°n Your stout arms, that have vouchsafed protection (to Your devotees) as well as on Your 
bosom, the sole delight of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity), we would be Your 
Slaves, (39) Bewitched by Your music characterized by protracted rise and fall of voice and 
Consisting of melodious pieces, and having gazed (even once) on this form, most graceful 
Nall the three worlds—at the sight of which (and hearing which music) cows, birds, trees and

fasts (too) wear a thrill of joy—what woman, O Darling | in the three worlds would not 
€Viate from the conduct of virtuous women ? (40) Indeed You have been particularly born 
S the Dispeller of the fears and distress of Vraja, (even) as Lord Visnu (the most ancient 
“TSon) was born (in heaven) in the form of the divine Dwarf) as the Protector of the celestial 
alm, Therefore, place Your lotus-hand, O Befriender of the afflicted, on the burning breasts

“nd heads of (us,) Your servant-maids. (41)

pirucieneinascerenenvede>

MY FAA 
sf fagiad art get aMetat | see aed 9 WORTATATISeRRAT 1x2 | 
aufet: aaaEaasa: Paaipeoyqasacasd: 
SAT RT aT aa efter galgftda: 131 
saga 40 selaal Ss MTT TG: | ae fae asad Sasa GA Ivy | 
wan: Ufeamiasa wdtfiferancena | TA TAOS ASTMNEATAT 1G |

Wd Wad: PHOICHSAMI HeIe: | Seat A Gott Assaf Ala ive

qa di aed det aH a ease See (aT Ix 
AHA SEATE: 128 |

Sri Suka went on : Laughing heartily to hear the aforesaid pitiful prayer of the Gopis, Sri 
Krsna (the Lord of all masters of Yoga), proceeded to delight them out of compassion, though 
revelling in His own Self. (42) Surrounded by them—who had (now) gathered together with 
theirfaces blooming atthe sight of their beloved Lord—Sri Krsna of noble deeds, whose teeth 
bore the splendour of jasmine flowers during His charming smile, shone brightly like the full 
moon {the disk of which is marked with dark spots resembling the spots of an antelope) in 
the midst of stars. (43) Being praised in song (by the Gopis) and loudly singing (songs 
Himself) and wearing a Vaijayanti garland (strung with flowers of five different colours), Sri 
Krsna (who led hundreds of bevies of lovely women) sauntered about gracing the forest (with 
His bewitching presence). (44) Arriving in company with the Gopis at the bank of the river 
(Yamuna)—covered with sands rendered cool by a breeze affording joy through its contact 
with the waves of that river and charged with the fragrance of water-lilies (growing in the 
river)—the Lord sported (with the Gopis there). (45) Inflaming the passion of the charming 
women of Vraja by stretching His arms (in order to reach them from a distance), embracing 
them, touching their hands, locks, thighs, skirt and bosom, cutting jokes with them and 
digging the ends of His nails into their limbs, as well as by His sportful glances accompanied 
with smiles, Sri Krsna brought delight to them. (46) Having thus received loving attention and 
regard from the lofty-minded Lord Sri Krsna, the Gopis grew proud and thought themselves 
superior to all women on earth.(47) Perceiving their vanity produced by such (rare) good- 
luck as well as their pride, Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva) disappeared

on that very spot with a view to curbing their pride once for all and in order to shower His 
grace on them.(48)

Thus ends the twenty-ninth discourse entitled "The Lord's Rasa-Play" in the 
first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

| 
| 
| 
| 
|

BOOK TEN 229

Pa

HAY franseara:

Discourse XXX 
The Gopis' Quest for Sri Krsna during the Rasa-Play

My Sara 
arifed «= aft «= Aaa TIGHT: | StereTAAaTOM: afta sa gem 2 | 
TATRA aATeaaenaae: 
stfaaierm: =e taTadetet «= feet | Sjeetatierent: 1 2 
Takaanecrarsune, fen: faa 8 sfameqda: | 
sae «= kee oeteiictst «= =TAfeg: «= oentfaercfasre: 1 3 | 
Tea «Osea «Me « fafaagestamac «ae LI 
UTetanridant teddy Gd Yee aad xi 
Sri Suka began again : The Lord having disappeared all of a sudden, the (aforesaid) 
women of Vraja felt agonized not to see Him (even) as she-elephants would when they failed 
to see the leader of their herd. (1) With their mind captivated by the (charming) gait, loving 
smiles and sportful glances as well as by the delightful conversation, dalliances and graceful 
movements of Sri Krsna (the Spouse of Rama), the young women, getting identified with 
Him, imitated His various pastimes. (2) Imitating the dalliances and graceful movements of 
Sri Krsna, the (cowherd) women—who were His darlings and felt identified with Him, and 
whose frames had turned into (So many) replicas (as it were) of their beloved Lord in point 
of gait, smiles, glances and speech etc.—said (to one another), “Indeed! am Sri Krsna !" (3) 
Loudly singing His praises in a chorus while going from forest to forest, they searched for Him

alone as though they were mad, and enquired of trees about Sri Krsna (the Perfect Person) 
pervading (all) creatures inside as well as outside as ether (in the following words):—(4)

ql a: afseae gat zea al AA: lagaidt «6a Teale: |G 
PACT HaHa: (Wa «= AftaTat «=| defer: | & I 
aye mean Macau ae alfemetadue epeisttretsaa: | © | 
Wedel a: afaaieee sift afc i Sift al saad aid: Heeela Area: | C | 
ad rareataredtenllaanstg ch leiedapottene aaa: 
Asay uuevan BAIHel: Wey HPOMeal edie A: 1g | 
fie a ad fata am ad aacreteaaticanetendigectasnte | 
saa «senna a Stet ateays: URW Igo! 
sauaeyana: fede Waa gat aha qhsitaa a: |

ag frata suara qgiauel wageeitatiogetare: | 
ard se wena: som far arftrarafer ae MOTeTEAA: 122

fiat. i - 
7 Pe -

; % j 
Eat, NE 
tah

si » faa

Re Pee Se We Se Mee We Wee Ke Hee ee He A Se ee BE EHH eRe Re We Ree Re Re Re Re ER OR Re ee He He He

"© Agwattha (the holy fig tree), O Plaksa, O Nyagrodha (the banyan tree) ! was the 
Darling of Nanda—who has gone (this way) captivating our mind by His (sidelong) glances 
accompanied with endearing smiles—seen by you ? (5) O Kurabaka (a species of 
amaranth), ASoka, Naga, Punnaga and Campaka trees! did Sri Krsna (the younger Brother 
of Balarama), whose (very) smile takes away the pride of angry women, go this side ? (6) 
O blessed Tulasi (holy basil), to whom the feet of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) are (So) 
dear, was that immortal Lord, most beloved of you, seen by you bearing you (on His bosom 
in a garland) alongwith swarms of bees ? (7) O Malati, O Mallika, O Jati, O Yuthika! was Sy 
Krsna (the Spouse of Laksmi) seen by you causing delight to you by the touch of His hand 
while going (this way)? (8) O Cita (a particular variety of mango trees), Priyala, Panasa (the 
jack tree), Asana, Kovidara, Jambu (the rose-apple tree), Arka (the sun-plant), Bilva (the 
wood-apple tree), Bakula, Amra (the common mango), Kadamba and Nipa ( a variety of 
Kadamba) trees and whatever other trees stand on the bank of the Yamuna (and as such 
are expected to speak the bare truth), (pray) point out to us—whose mind is no longer with 
us (having been lured away by Sri Krsna)—the way to reach Sri Krsna, born as you are for 
the good of others. (9) Oh, what austerity, O Earth, was performed by you in that with the 
blades of grass and sprouts etc., (which look like bristling hair on your body) you appear 
thrilled with joy at the touch of the feet of Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva)? 
Has this joy been caused by (the touch of) the Lord's feet (just now) or is it due to your having 
been bestridden by the Lord with wide strides (during His descent as Vamana or the Divine 
Dwarf) or (again) by His embrace (even earlier) in the form of Varaha (the Divine Boar) ? (10) 
O she-deer, did Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) come over here in the company of His darling 
bringing excessive joy to the eyes of you all by His (charming) limbs, O friend ? (For) here 
comes the fragrance of the garland of jasmine flowers worn on the person of Sri Krsna (the

Protector of His race), and tinged with the saffron on the bosom of His lady-love at the time 
of her embrace. (11) Holding a lotus (in His right hand) and resting His (other) arm on the (left) 
shoulder of His darling and being followed by swarms of black bees attracted by Tulasi 
flowers (inter-woven in His wreath of wild blossoms) and blinded by intoxication (caused by 
their sweet fragrance), did Sri Krsna (Balarama's Younger Brother) hail your greetings by His 
glances surcharged with love, while sauntering here? (12) Make enquiries of these creepers 
(too, O friends); (for) lo! even though having encircled the arms (in the shape of boughs )of 
(their husband in the form of) a tree, they have surely been touched by His nails (while 
plucking their flowers), as (is evident from the fact that) they exhibit a thrill of joy (in the form

of sprouts). (13) 
separa: PUMTAGTAIAU: | Mle TTACAR Mya eAcAT: 1X | 
PAI GM: PONT AAA KH | Hela SIM elesscneradhy 1241 
eae Seraee onsen | fiearara saat aait aaa: 126 | 
poRad {MOS IS | acaradt aft Gea wae yf Tea 1 VI 
set ET a, PMR peti | aU] sori Hlexitam: saa areata (ec 
Pa Bye AA Ara Aq! Hose azaa ala ofeatata aaa: 128 
m Hs amasisat donut fafed uatisaadea Zan AePAGASTATH | 2 | 
sregenl Ualsserrar PETER TI Wee wes TTANSE Tora Ay RUSH IRE

BOOK TEN 234

Dis - gee 00% DT Mh! Wicd Mie Wicd Mic Mel Mick Mid Mc Mel Rel Mel Rell Rl ee WE We BER EHERERE MEREOME Hew HE ee He He 89-8 Ve

a

We we We Ve We We We We We He We He Wee DOR He Re He He WeWe We We We We We We We We ee He

Slated 2 TAT carta URAM HUT | leteMafress at fara SUS 1221 
agra Sst lifer az SHAS | site Gary faerares AS sifafesrraq 123 1

Thus raving like a madman, the cowherd women, who got very distracted in their quest 
for Sri. Krsna and felt identified with Him, actually imitated the various pastimes of the 
tord.(14) Personating Sri Krsna, one Gopi sucked the breast of another, who played the part 
of Putana. Behaving like infant Sri Krsna and crying (like a babe), another kicked a fourth, 
that rested on all fours over the latteras acart. (15) Playing the role of Trnavarta (the demon), 
a certain Gopi carried away another, who fancied herself to be infant Sri Krsna; while a third 
crawled on hands and knees (like infant Sri Krsna), dragging her feet accompanied by the 
jingling sounds of ner anklets. (16) Two (of the Gopis) played the role of Sri Krsna and 
Balarama indeed; while some behaved like cowherd boys (andthe demons Vatsa and Baka). 
Of the former two (viz., those that behaved like Sri Krsna and Balarama), again, the latter 
struck at her friend who personated Vatsasura’*, while the former struck at a fourth that had 
assumed the role of Bakasura. (17) Calling to the cows, thathad gone far away, in the manner 
of Sri Krsna, a certain Gopi behaved like Him, playing on the flute and sporting (as He did): 
while others applauded her saying, "Well done !" (18) With her mind absorbed in Him another 
Gopi walked (to and fro) resting her arm on some friend and said, "Hullo, |am Krsna ! Look 
at my graceful gait.” (19) "Do not be afraid of storm and shower; protection against them has 
(already) been provided by Me!" observing thus, one held up her scarf with one hand making 
a show of effort (in doing so). (20) Treading on another's head and standing on her, O 
Protector of men, a certain Gopi said, "O vile snake, clear away ! Indeed | am born (here) as 
the chastiser of the wicked." (21) One of those Gopis said (to others; visualizing them as so 
many cowherds), "O Gopas look at the terrible forest fire ! Shut your eyes at once; | shall 
easily vouchsafe protection to you." (22) Tied to another Gopi, that had been seated in such 
a way as to pass for a mortar, with a garland by another (who played the role of Sri Krsna's 
mother) and (consequently) afraid, one delicate lady of that lot with lovely eyes covered her 
face and put up a show of fear. (23)

Wa Fol GSA AdededeteL| Saad attest Gall UAT: 12¥1 
"alla otmadita TaGA eI: | GAA fg ase waaal sy: 12u] 
Cet AGRA AAT ATAU SAA SAC | @eal: Ud: Gohl fase: AAAs, 12 | 
mM: ue Aart AMM AGA | SATIS: Hw: HOT Bat 1291 
sass at war ade: | gat fagrea Where: sitet aaa Ye: 2c! 
SM Stal St SISA MAISON: (UT, Hela TAT Vet aeeciergaa 1281 
TM BIG a: altet Haga: Vella AL Ape MAT Wel YerhseqATeNy Zo! 
1 G8 ude da wa qug:: | fraIMahkremaaa rat Ta: 13% | 
safe vet aed agli Wer: ceed POTS ANA HAA: 122 
sara oar | Gere eAT 1 Sta Ea: fene SaeT Gat: | 
SUaIHHUl Ud Ugaaieenes Ud 133 | 
SE wa ae: HRA SLI ah qeae wrasse aA 1ys! 
According to popular tradition it was Balarama, and not Sri Krsna, who killed Vatsasura—

qe fedisaa AeA He: | 
Evidently this tradition is referred to by the sage Suka in the above verse.

) 
: 
: 
:

Sete eet ee eee ee tee eee eer ty Rowe ey Ae we We He We We We MR We Ae ey Wye We We We WE We We He Me we We We We He We We We Ve We Wee eee eee ee We We We We We Wr Wr % * We, 
S 6 os %e . -

Sa aa Paka STaRMserafted: | arftat eater oa Slot a SUP 134 1

Thus (imitating the pastimes of the Lord and) enquiring of the creepers and trees of 
Vrndavana (once more) about Sri Krsna, the cowherd women noticed Ina certain part of the 
forest the footprints of the Lord (embodying the Supreme Spirit). (24) (They said to one 
another,) "Surely these are the footprints of the high-souled Darling of Nanda since they are 
(easily) distinguished through the marks of aflag, alotus,a thunderbolt, a goad, abarley seed 
and so on. (25) Tracking His path with the help of those footprints, the poor women felt sore 
at heart to find before them the said footprints interspersed with those of a lady and spoke 
to one another (as follows):—(26) "Whose footprints can these be? Whois she that has gone 
(this side) in the company of Sri Krsna (the Darling of Nanda) with His forearm placed on her 
shoulder, (even) like a she-elephant walking by the side of a male elephant? (27) The 
almighty Lord Sri Hari has surely been propitiated by this lady in that, leaving us (all), Sri 
Krsna (the Protector of cows) has been pleased to take her apart. (28) Oh, blessed are those 
particles of dust under the feet of Govinda, O friends, that (even) Brahma (the creator), Lord 
Siva and Goddess Rama have borne on the crown of their head in order to drive away their 
agony of separation (from Him). (29) Those footprints, that meet our eyes, of that lady, who 
having stolen away Sri Krsna enjoys alone in secret the (nectar of) lips of that immortal Lord, 
the (common) property of the Gopis are causing great agitation in our mind. (30) (Proceeding 
further the Gopis remarked,) her footprints are not to be noticed here. Surely the Darling has 
lifted up His lady-love, whose delicate soles were being pricked with (sharp) blades of 
grass.(31) O cowherd women, behold these footprints, sunk deeper (into the soil), of the 
love-stricken Sri Krsna who was (apparently) weighed down by a (heavy) load, carrying His 
sweetheart (as He did). (32) (Going still further, the Gopis observed,) on this spot the lady- 
love has (obviously) been set down by the high-souled Lord for the sake of (gathering) 
flowers.” (Moving still further they said,) here flowers have been gathered by the Darling for 
the sake of His beloved, behold these impressions, which are not entire, indicating that the 
Lord (evidently) trod on the fore part of His feet (here). (33) (Proceeding still further, they 
Said,) here it seems the hair of that loving lady have been done by the love-stricken Lord,

_ while here the Lord has surely squatted (on the ground) while fastening the flowers to her

braid." (34) (Sri Suka continued) though (ever) delighted in Himself and sporting with His own 
self and remaining unaffected (by the charms of lovely women), SriKrsna toyed with that lady

in order to illustrate the wretched plight of the love-stricken as well as the evil-mindedness 
of women. (35)

ea ieee «= fate: 1 at dtarac pen faeraren: fea aa 136

Ma A dessa afte adatitar fen art: sear we wes fia: 1301

aa Teal aatext Gat Saad ia uRasé ale za ui ga X aa: 13c!

War: Bare wet seat | ddasrdda Ge: a aq~adad 12°!

@ Ta wu 3S wife ae Aes | ae Hoa A ae asta afar Xo!

Shas Wad ant THAN Saar: leaar: Hafaseaniteat g:faat Gar Ye |

vat iatreod anf a ear! aaa a akeae faert wel aq: 1%?! 
Thus showing to one another what they saw, the cowherd women wandered in 2 
bewildered state. That Gopi, again, whom Sri Krsna had taken away (with Him), leaving (all)

" The whole of verse 32 and the first line of the following have not been commented upon by Sridhara Swami, the earliest

BOOK TEN 233

Wee 80 Wi wr Wy; 
eWe Re We Be Fe ENON MEE RE He He HE HE He HH HEHE He He He we

DI S 31] wy He He He He 
«tS

ine other women In the forest, thereupon thought herself to be the most lovely of all the 
women. (She said to herself,) “Abandoning the other Gopis, that loved Him, the Darling is 
enjoying my company (alone)!" (36-37) Then, reaching a certain part of the forest, she 
arrogantly said fe Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva), "| am unable to 
walk (any more); Carry me wherever it pleases you.” (38) Requested thus, the Lord replied 
to His lady-love, Mount my shoulder (then) !" After that, (however, as soon as the lady tried 
to mount His shoulder),Sri Krsna disappeared and the said lady repented (in the following 
words):—(39) “My most beloved lord, O delighter of my soul, where are you, where are you, 
Omighty-armed one, pray reveal your presence, O friend, tome, your wretched servant."(40) 
Tracking the path of the Lord (still further), the cowherd women perceived not very far from 
them their afflicted female companion confounded due to her separation from her beloved 
Lord. (41) The Gopis felt highly astonished to hear the account narrated by her as also how 
she had received honour from Sri Krsna (the Spouse of Laksmi) and how (again) through (her 
own) wickedness she had met with disregard at His hands. (42)

ddaisfeaar, 4 sedi ae farted aa: sfaparsea adi fragd: fara: 1«3t 
THA RRACTOTATET ASTRA T eRT: L AQUI We ATAPI AAG: 14% 
WA: ean chile: HOA: | GAA BY: HO Aaraenliga: isu! 
ofa SerTad ASM GRASS Gfecal caeHAl Yale TaiSea HOTA A PAINS: 1301 
Again (in her company) the (cowherd) women penetrated the forest (further) so long as 
moonlight was visible. Perceiving (however) the darkness had set in they returned from that 
(very) point. (43) With their mind absorbed in Him, talking of Him, imitating His various 
activities, nay, identified with Him and singing His praises alone, the cowherd women did not 
recollect their own body, much less their homes. (44) Coming back to the sandy bank of the 
Kalindi, thinking of that Enchanter of souls (alone), and seized with a longing for His return, 
they sang of Sri Krsna in a chorus. (45) 
Thus ends the thirtieth discourse entitled "The Gopts' Quest for Sri Krsna during the Rasa 
Play," in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

372 chfagnseara:

Discourse XXXI 
The Gopts' Song (at the Lord's disappearance) during the Rasa Play

MA] HZ: 
sai asi wal ae: saa grau wWacA fe 1 
aa aerate | Mae gardarat faferad |g |

[ Dis. 
BB Pel Reel Mel Rell Rel el Rt Rl a Bl Rl a Ll el et hele ihe Rel Mel Ml Rel Mel Mel il Rl el Re Rl Bl Rel Rl Re Rl Rk Rl Rl Rel Rd Riel Bd Bl Bel Bal i et Deeg GN

Sngarara eSATA AST SLA TAT cat | 
gaa Asyeecifeet ate Peet te fh ae 1 8 
fame. «Seer. «= AN ATedilq AAT 
qunaregifegue aT 8 
q UG TfachAecal MAMA RAS AMAIA | 
faraid fara wa sa Wed gel x | 
The Gopis sang: Vraja shines all the more brightly by Your descent (in the house of 
Nanda and Yasoda); for Laksmi (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) constantly dwells 
here (from that time in order to catch Your glimpse). O beloved Lord! please (reveal Yourself 
and) see how Your sweethearts, who have centred their life in You, are searching for You 
in every quarter. (1) Is it no massacring here on Your part, O Granter of boons, who kill us, 
Your gratuitous slaves, O Bestower of enjoyment, by Your (shaft-like) eyes, that steal the 
splendour of the interior of a lovely and full-blown lotus growing in an autumnal pond ? (2) 
We have been saved by You time and again, O jewel among men, from death through 
poisonous water, from (the clutches of) a demon disguised as a snake (Aghasura by name), 
from showers and storm as well as from strokes of lightning, from the demon that appeared 
in the form of a calf (the young of a bull) as well as from Vyomasura * (the son of the demon 
Maya), nay, from every (other) peril. (3) Surely You are no (mere) son of a cowherd woman 
(YaSoda), being the witness of the internal sense (viz., the mind) of all embodied souls.

Solicited by Brahma, You appeared, O Friend, in the race of the Yadus for the protection of 
the universe. (4)

ate ard aac fra ae a: seme 4 | 
weridet ak atfeat fesmeaaedeaied 
TW Wa Vans: W Al Wow wre atlas | 
WUTaeheat uldenalt GUT et sitrenaat | 
TiurHuiad A Ura HY may A: Hh wai 
meat PRT Tea ST HAITI 
faterentticar an Wada yssaraqaal ato 1 
qa aay dasilad 86oamfataifea 896omerere 
sos waned wa wr a wer wari ei 
ved 86 fa | Saeitast feet eT 
wa dacl a gama: Hea a wa: atsaha fe igol 
det a4 ASE Wea Afeaqet waa a ua 
Riequigt: edit 4: afeedt wa: ard Tear eet 
ferafvara dimardedaeers faverqat | 
ae ala aga oa: wt Od af eR)

" Vide Discourse XXXVII below. According to a learned and saintly commentator the incident relating to Vyomasura took

place before the Rasa-Lila even though it is described by the sage Suka later.

‘- 31] | BOOK TEN 
. we We «

Place on our head, O beloved Lord, Your lotus-like palm, that has vouchsafed protection, 
Chief of the Vrsnis, to those that have Sought Your feet from fear of transmigration, (nay,) 
which grants (all) desires and has clasped the hand of Sri (as a part of the marriage 
seremony)- (5) O Alleviator of the suffering of the people of Vraja, O gallant Lord, whose 
(very) smile crushes the pride (born of unrequited love) of Your own people, accept (in Your 
service); O Friend, us, Your (avowed) servants and reveal tous (poor women) Your charming 
iotus-like countenance. (6) Seton our bosom Your lotus-feet—which dissipate the sins of (all) 
embodied beings that bow down to You, which follow (out of affection even) animals that live 
on grass, (nay,) which are the abode of beauty and prosperity and which were (dauntlessly) 
placed on the hoods ofa (terrible) snake (Kaliya)—and thereby soothe the pangs of love pent 
up in our heart. (7) (Pray,) revive with the nectar of Your lips O valiant one, these women, 
in the person Of ourselves, who are ready to do Your bidding and who are getting charmed, 
O Lord with lotus eyes, by Your melodious speech, consisting of delightful expressions and 
pleasing (even) to the learned. (8) Munificent are those men who extensively recite on earth 
Your nectar-like story, which is life-giving to the afflicted, has been celebrated by the wise 
and eradicates (all) sins, which is auspicious to hear and is most soothing (too). (9) Your 
hearty laugh, O Darling, loving glances and pastimes which are happy to contemplate on and 
Your covert jests uttered in secret, that went deep into our heart, really agitate our mind (now 
that You are away from us), O deceitful Lover! (10) Our mind, O beloved Lord, grows uneasy 
to think that Your feet, charming as a lotus, get pricked with spikes of corn, blades of grass 
and sprouts when You go out of Vraja pasturing the cattle. (11) You kindle love in our heart, 
O gallant Lord, again and again even as You reveal Yourself (before us) at the close of the 
day, wearing a countenance overhung by dark curly locks and soiled with the dust raised by 
cows (that constitute the wealth of the Gopas), and (thus) resembling a lotus* (surrounded 
by black bees and covered with pollen). (12)

SUTRA Uslsitfetct afore erate | 
mss wit A a WN A: Taq alee 123 | 
qeatt werd wakadgqr aa Arad 
saurferet = gt (free aR ARISE 12 
set aq «waMig@ sed | «AfedMad = araRad | 
geogs sq a a we Kladl TaNe aA IR! 
Ufa araa Afar eat arr ASAT: | 
niafearatanten: feta aifea: peastfaier eet 
wf 40 dfae (as ef STAT 
wet: fry dtr or to URteyeT Yet AT: 180 
at wim ad aan earteget = AfAGETA 18! 
aA AsdteRUMARE aT Ale: am: fra aetate Haag | 
Sarediaefa wa aera a Ratan, quttefrsiater sttaargat 4: 188 
Ata AAcaaSeAara: 1321

Lit., Sprung out of water.

O Delighter of souls, (pray) set on our bosom, O Reliever of agony, Your most blissful 
lotus-like feet, which grant the desires of those that bow low to them, and are worshipped by 
Brahma (the lotus-born), which are the ornament of the earth and are worth contemplating 
upon in (times of) adversity. (13) Vouchsafe to us, O heroic Lord, the nectar of Your lips, 
which heightens our enjoyment and destroys (all) grief, (nay,) which is fully enjoyed by the 
flute sounded by You and makes people forget all other attachments. (14) When You 
proceed to the woods during the daytime, (even) half a moment becomes an age to us, who 
fail to see You. And dull-witted is he (Brahma) who has created rows of hair on the edge (and 
thus interrupted the joy) of eyes of us (all), that eagerly behold (without winking Your splendid 
countenance overhung by curly hair (on Your return from the woods at eventide). (15) 
Completely neglecting our husband, children, kinsmen, brothers and other relations, O 
immortal Lord, and enchanted by the shrill note of Your flute, we have sought Your presence, 
knowing as we did Your (alluring) ways. What man, O Trickster, would abandon (helpless) 
women at (dead of) night ? (16) Perceiving Your amorous advances made in secret, Your 
smiling countenance, which kindles love in our heart, Your loving glances and broad chest, 
the abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity). Our mind gets infatuated again and 
again through intense longing (to meet You). (17) Your manifestation (on earth), O Darling, 
has put an end to the sorrows of the inhabitants of Vraja as well as of the denizens of the 
forest, and is extremely auspicious for the whole universe. (Pray) unreservedly administer 
to us—whose mind is full of longing for you—(at least) a little of that remedy (in the form of 
Your company) which may relieve the pangs of heart of Your own people. (18) You traverse 
the forest on those tender lotus-like feet which, O Darling, we have gently and timidly set on 
our hard bosom (for fear of injuring them). Are they not pained by coming in contact with

gravel etc. ? The mind of us (all), whose life is centred in You, reels at the (very) thought of 
it. (19)

Thus ends the thirty-first discourse, entitled "the Gopis' Song (at the Lord's disappearance) 
during the Rasa-Play,” in the first half of Book Ten of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Discourse XXXIl 
The Lord comforts the Gopis during the Rasa Play

Hyp Say 
Sit Wa: ee: seas fete | Bee: Ga We HoTeaooar: | ge | 
mre: aaa: | Utara: edt alee: | 2 | 
q faclearmd 3g shaepewasisacn: | srepirad. aatera: Soran | 3 | 
cited Age Wisiyesefem yeti ane sat Agee aeTeler ¥ | 
saitereMern Terral agen | Ut deefhenae Gaal WaaeMd| & |

——— ee

#

We We We Ve We We We Ve We We Ke Ke He We We Wee We We ees

, qa: Lanta ait WET: Bs Arts

Sri Suka began again : Thus singing at the pitch of their voice and raving in various 
ways, the cowherd women loudly wailed, O king, seizedas they were with a longing to behold 
Sri Krsna. (1) In their (very) midst appeared (all ofa sudden) Sri Krsna (a scion of Sara), clad 
in yellow (silk) and adorned with a garland and wearing a smiling lotus-like countenance, the 
Enchanter of Cupid himself (who maddens the whole world). (2) Beholding Sri Krsna, their 
most beloved Lord, come (back), all the women sprang on their feet all at once, their eyes 
wide open with joy, (even) as the limbs of a body would on finding the life-breath returned. (3) 
One (of them) clasped the lotus-like hands of Sauri with her joined palms with delight, while 
another placed on her shoulder His arm smeared with sandal-paste. (4) A certain Gopi of 
delicate limbs took in the hollow of her palms the betel chewed by Him, while another set His 
lotus-feet on her bosom, burning as she was (with the fire of passion). (5) Knitting her brows 
and closely biting her (lower) lip, another looked at Him as though tormenting Him with volleys 
of her side-glances, agitated as she was with anger caused by (unrequited) love. (6) Another 
continued to gaze on His lotus-like countenance with unwinking eyes, even though it had 
been duly contemplated (for a long time), but did not feel sated any more than saints would 
while contemplating on His (lotus) feet. (7) A certain Gopi ushered Him into his heart through 
the hollows of her eyes, shut her eyes (in order to preclude His egress) and, (mentally) 
embracing Him with the hairs of her body standing on end, stood immersed in bliss like a Yog! 
(one united in thought with God). (8) Enraptured with the grand feast provided by the sight 
of Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva), they all shed the agony caused by 
Separation from Him even as men get rid of their grief on meeting an enlightened soul. (9) 
Surrounded by those women, who had shaken off their sorrow, Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) 
shone very brightly, O dear Pariksit, like the Supreme Spirit endowed with His potencies (in

the form of Sattva etc.). (10) 
al: AEA aeriereni fafasa Ole fay: ; famach et eny aa aqIaaay 1egl 
face SaeieheTa a POT FeidtetferraHAsaghy 182 |

Teter wert grat eT 
aerate: als : IYgl 
ava: wad a gt aad Hic: | 
ache SIPIMITER GIRS a lore a aUserd 12% | 
aster ara gala TeracteaawTya | 
eae «9 geepfaat TTTANT R41 
almighty Lord repaired to tne delightful bank of the

Kalindi, whi k b drawn by (gentle) winds charged with the

, which was swarmed with black bees ?

'agrance of full-blown jasmines and Mandaras, where the darkness of the night had been .

ispelled by the flood of rays of the autumnal moon and on which soft sands had been spread 
the hands—in the form of waves—of the Krsna (Yamuna). (11-12) The Gopis, whose

Taking them (with Him) in a body the

Rit ted ic fad Rack cL Pied Dh ie cd Red Pl ed id Bil id Dk ld ee hh ie tlhe hee Boel Bel eles Peel Pc el ci el el el el We We We We We We We We eee eee ee Be We We We wy eH Ve,

heartache (caused by their separation from the Lord) had been dissipated by the joy flowing 
from His sight, attained the end of their desire even as the Srutis (Vedic texts dealing with 
rituals performed from some interested motive, and thus failing to perceive God) transceng 
the realm of desire (when they pass on to the topic of JNana or God-Realization and achieve 
their real purpose). (Now) they prepared a seat for Sri Krsna (the Friend of their soul) with 
their scarfs spotted with the saffron paint on their bosom. (13) Seated there and honoureq 
by them, the aforesaid almighty Lord, who stands enthroned in the heart of masters of Yoga. 
shone in the midst of that bevy of the Gopis, revealing a personality which Is the one abode 
of loveliness spread through (all) the three worlds. (14) Greeting Sri Krsna—who had kindled 
love in their breast—with their eye-brows, whose grace fulness was heightened by their 
sportful glances accompanied by (bright) smiles, and warmly praising Him while pressing His 
hands and feet placed in their lap, they spoke (as follows) feeling a bit enraged. (15)

MY] DW: 
TSE Uh Uderdaq awais wore Ue ale ATA UT: 1261

The Gopis said : Some love in return those who love them; while others do (just) the 
reverse of it (i.e., love even those that do not love them in return). Still others do not love 
either. Kindly explain this clearly to us, O Lord ! (16)

MATA ATA 
feat asta a oe: erate fe 81a aa Ged ert: eratet ahs Arse ier 
Wraiisd A a Hem: faa aemieat farisa Bee A Auyea: 121

,.

WaAMIS A a ehh Usa: Hel: | SANTA WIAHIA Stpdetl Wess: 121

Te ¢ wen seas wad wren |

amet oeedq faq cdafedarfayat a aa lol

Wa veuitedetedaat fe at aAaqquasacm: |

Tal wat stat fetfed arafad ara aq fra fear: 1201

1 Use Pag warped fagergqet a: |

a Was giteige: Wqset de a: waa eT 1221

The glorious Lord replied : They who love one another (for mutual benefit), O friends,

(really love their own self and none other; for) their endeavour indeed is solely actuated by 
self-interest. Neither goodwill nor virtue plays any part there; for such love has a (purely) 
Selfish motive and not otherwise. (17) They who actually love even those that do not love 
them (in return) are compassionate (and loving too) like one's parents. There is blameless 
virtue as well as goodwill operating here, O charming girls ! (18) Some indeed do not love 
even those that love them, much less those that do not love them. They are either sages 
revelling in their own self (and having no knowledge of the external world) or those who havé 
realized their ambition (and are therefore free from all craving for enjoyment, though 
conscious of external objects) or dullards (who are incapable of appreciating a good turn 
done to them) or ungrateful people (who bear enmity to their own benefactors that are as 
good as their father, though conscious of their services). (1 9) |, for my part, O friends, (40 
not come under any of these categories, being supremely compassionate and friendly:

‘inasmuch as |) do not (visibly) reciprocate the love (and remain out of sight for some time) 
of even those individuals who love Me, in order that they could ever think of Me in the same 
way as a penniless person would, on a treasure found by him being lost, remain engrossed 
in the thought of that wealth (alone) and would not be sensible to anything else. (20) Indeed 
in order to ensure thus your constant devotion to Me, O fair ones, | remained out of your sight 
(for some time), though loving you invisibly (and listening to your professions of love with 
great delight)—you, who have for My sake ignored (all worldly decorum as well as (the 
injunctions of) the Vedas and deserted your own people. Therefore, O beloved ones, you

- ought not to find fault with Me, your darling. (21) (As a matter of fact) | cannot even through

the (long) life of a heavenly being (36000 human years) repay My obligation (which is the duty 
of all virtuous men) to you, whose connection with Me is (absolutely) free from blemish and 
who have fixed your mind on Me completely cutting asunder the fetters that bound you to your 
home and which cannot be easily broken. (Therefore,) let your services to Me be repaid by 
your own goodness. (22)

Thus ends the thirty-second discourse entitled "The Lord comforts the Gopis during the Rasa- 
Play" in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

st f> Sh > “] $3 
DOD RISO

31M Aaheanseara:

Discourse XXXIll 
A Description of the Rasa Play

MY SAA 
SA Wa Wea: sal ara: Tagen: | Aeletest =| aT aagiafetcatara: | gt 
TARY Wat Weenlemgad: | Gketad: — sicteieegeref: 1 2 |

Sri Suka began again : Hearing thus the bewitching words of the Lord, the cowherd 
women cast off the agony caused by their separation (from Him), their desire having been 
fulfilled through the (thrilling) touch of His divine personality (the embodiment of Bliss). (1) 
Accompanied by those jewels among women (so) devoted and affectionate towards Him, 
who Stood (in a circle) with their arms interlocked, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) 
Inaugurated His (celebrated) Rasa-Play* on the aforesaid spot (the sandy bank of the 
Yamuna). (2)

Taree: aNedt wWdtaveemfted: | aaa Hela aa wet gales: | 
Masa Weld Hus Witenes fera: | 2 |

"In the Natya-Sastra (the well-known manual on histrionics attributed to the sage Bharata) we come across the following

definition of Rasa:—

1 Wa Adena Tae WA AVSeH Ys Ad Mt 
_ _ Rasais the name ofa particular dance carried on by a number of women dancing in a circle with their hands interlocked 
ele company of men who dance with them with their arms placed round the neck of their female partners.

We Ve We We Ge We Kee We He We Fe He He We eee Se Wee Hee

& wate avenae frraemegen| faleat PenrorategeeaRT AT | 
at ogual Aghtg: Wqea:ispiedada: = weilereteetsaw | & 
aeari quam fafeciat a away! ahrroraycreyet =—|- WATS |g 
aaa «=| aT SETA, Saatga: | Ae AUT AMT Heed AAMT © | 
cesta: afertiferenashernetisrerpere: usentusates: |

AEE: HAGA: POA Mae dist ga aM Age faty: 1 c 1 
Saar «wheat «= Uefa: | Greorrfraatafed AAMACHTGAH, |e | 
aad WH yest Sendai: | shat gira da aa are aleaie |

dea Tadaa Aa AM A aa|aid 10!

(Now) commenced duly the festive dance of Rasa adorned with the circle of the aforesaid 
Gopis standing with their necks encircled by (the arms of) Sri Krsna, the Master of Yoga 
(inconceivable powers), who (appeared to have) introduced Himself (in so many identical 
forms) between every two Gopis, and whom those (cowherd) women imagined to be by their 
own side. Presently the firmament was thronged with hundreds of aerial cars of heavenly 
beings, who were accompanied by their consorts and whose mind had been carried away 
by curiosity (in the form of a longing to behold Sri Krsna). (3-4) Then sounded kettle-drums 
(beaten by heavenly beings), showers of flowers fell, and the chiefs of Gandharvas sang His 
immaculate glory in chorus with their spouses. (5) There arose a confused din produced by 
(the jingling of) bangles and anklets and (the tinkling of) tiny bells attached to the girdle of 
the cowherd women joined with their beloved Lord in that ring of Rasa dancers. (6) There in 
the company of those girls Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) shone exceedingly bright like 
a large emerald* strung in the midst of (every two) gold beads. (7) With their (measured) 
treads, the motions of their hands, the playful movements of their eye-brows, accompanied 
with (graceful) smiles, bending waists, shaking breasts and fluttering skirts of their garments, 
€ar-rings rocking against their cheeks, perspiring faces, and their braids and girdles loosened 
(on account of their swift movement) and celebrating the Lord in song, the aforesaid darlings 
of Sri Krsna shone brightly like flashes of lightning in a mass of clouds. (8) Engaged in 
dancing and delighted with the touch of Sri Krsna, the Gopis—whose voice was sweetened 
with love, (nay,) whose (sole) delight was loving devotion (to Sri Krsna) and whose music 
filled (the whole of) this universe—sang at the pitch of their voice. (9) Singing in chorus with 
Sri Krsna a certain Gopi (ViSakha) struck at a high pitch notes (altogether) different (from 
those of Sri Krsna) and was applauded by the latter—who felt (much) delighted (by her 
performance)—in the words, "Well done !", "Bravo !". Another girl (presumably Lalita) 
reproduced the same tune at the top of her voice according to the measure of time technically 
known by the name of Dhruvapada (Dhrupad) and the Lord showed abundant regard to her 
(for her excellent performance). (10) Fully tired by the Rasa dance, another Gopi (probably 
Sri Radha) clasped with her arm the shoulder of SriKrsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu, 
and) who stood by her side, her bangles slipping (from her wrists) andjasmine flowers dropping 
a aS TRE Le Rars eel el tl needa Th Te

* Sri Krsna is said to possess the hue of the sapphire. Here He has been likened to an emerald apparently due to His colour 
being blended with the golden hue of the Gopis and thus appearing green rather than cerulean.

from her braid due to langour). (11) Smelling the arm—emitting the fragrance of a water-lily

and smeared with sandal, paste and resting on one of her shoulders—of Sri Krsna, (yet) 
another of those Gopis (Syamala) kissed it, So it is said, the hair on her body standing on end 
(due to joy). (12) Toa certain Gopi (presumably Saibya) who united with His cheek her own 
lit up with the lustre of her ear-ring tossed by the dance, the Lord gave His half-chewed betel.(13) 
Fatigued while dancing and singing with her anklets and girdle jingling (with the 
movement of her feet), another (Gopi, most probably Bhadra), pressed to her bosom the 
soothing lotus-like palm of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) standing beside her.(14)

THAN wseareyt chit Ha AraC | TeltenvareTeal Tee feist eu

SHUT ee lesen re cerasTAN AGATA TATE: |

wa Uhggenuiaaateretentetacreae4na: |

Ww Tan seTgraniforsion: woffa: 1 e191

Tae: sideigas ssf feemiemun: pegs ici 
guianiisd diet que: wdarfea: | amniféd: aengs aun fateaistad 12 1 
Pa Wade aadiicaaa: 1 a sarees cea 1201 
merida saat ac Gs 1 Ws HEU: WON Bddarsurford 1221

1: 8 UPdepiseg¢ratagnetra ferceratan |

Wd cia WANA BY: qa quar acheter: 1221

ads: smaegeay Yet: A papencierce: |

Tedafetaed sifase a: sed asifakerafsa Parag: 1231

assrae gala: aftfeerm: spore: seadtiticeddiss |

adic: pynaifticmm WW wa wufawt Webseite: 12x

war oyewAerungd seat waeye feta: ape: 1241

wa wmugigfasa Fen: A Aaa: |

fda sierdaegahd: dal: WeenleeHaais: 126!

Having thus secured Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), the only Beloved of Sri (the goddess

Of beauty and prosperity), as their Darling, and celebrating Him in song, the Gopis sported 
(With Him), theirnecks encircled by His arms. (15) The cowherd women—the charm of whose 
face was heightened by the water-lilies adorning their ears, cheeks graced with their (curly) 
locks and drops of sweat (glistening on their forehead)—danced with the Lord, keeping time 
by (the jingling of) bangles, anklets and girdle, that served as (SO many) musical instruments, 
€ garlands dropping from their braids, in that assembly of Rasa dancers, where (humming) 
lack bees played the role of songsters (all other music—both vocal and instrumental— 
Naving Stopped due to the Gopis being exhausted). (16) Thus by embracing them. touching 
€m with His hands, casting loving glances at them, making unrestrained amorous gestures 
and laughing heartily, Sri Krsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu, the Spouse of Rama) 
Ported with those lovely women of Vraja (even) as an infant would play with its own

reflections (seen through a set of mirrors). (17) Their senses overwhelmed with excessive joy 
caused by contact with His (Divine) person and their garlands and ornaments loosened, the 
women of Vraja were not able to adjust as before their (unsettled) locks, scart or (even) their 
brassiere, O jewel of the Kurus. (18) Smitten with love to witness the amorous sport of SriKrsna, 
the celestial ladies (too) fainted and the moon-god alongwith his retinue (viz., the twenty-seven 
Naksatras or lunar mansions) felt amazed (with the result that his progress In the heavens was 
arrested alongwith that of the other planets and the night extended to an inordinate length). (1 9) 
Sportfully revealing Himself in as many forms as there were cowherd women, the 
aforesaid Lord delightfully spent His time with (each of) them (individually in different forms), 
though revelling in His own Self. (20) With His most blissful hand, O dear Pariksit, the 
compassionate Lord lovingly wiped the faces of those girls, fatigued (as they were) by over- 
(exertion in) dancing. (21) Offering worship to the Supreme Person with the splendour of their 
cheeks, heightened by the lustre of their brilliant gold ear-rings and curly locks, as well as with 
their nectar-like smiles and glances and enraptured by the (thrilling) touch of His (blessed) 
nails, the Gopis celebrated in song His purifying exploits. (22) Accompanied by them and 
followed by black bees, humming like the leaders of Gandharvas and attracted by His garland 
squeezed by the embraces of the Gopis and tinged with the saffron paint on their bosom, the 
fatigued Lord—who had transgressed all limits (imposed by worldly usage and Vedic 
injunctions)—entered the water (of the Yamuna) in order to get over His fatigue, (even) as the 
leader of (a herd of) elephants would do in the company of she-elephants after having broken 
the dams. (23) Profusely sprinkled all over from every side by the young women—who were 
heartily laughing—in the water and affectionately regarded by them, O dear Pariksit, and being 
glorified by the gods (borne in their aerial cars and) showering flowers (on Him), the Lord 
Himself sported in their midst like a leader of elephants, though revelling in His own Self. (24) 
Surrounded by black bees and the bevies of young women, the Lord then rambled in a grove 
on the bank of the Yamuna, served on all sides by a breeze wafting the fragrance of flowers 
(both) on land and in water, (even) like a tusker shedding temporal fluid and accompanied by 
she-elephants. (25) The aforesaid Lord of unfailing desire, to whom those bevies-of delicate 
women were (so) fondly attached and who (voluntarily) exhibited in Himself the (various) 
amorous gestures, thus enjoyed all those nights“ illumined with the rays of the full moon and 
embodying all the charms peculiar to the autumn season and depicted in poetical works. (26)

UAHA 
Wea RTT stadia «fe «6marsla ST: 1201

a aa eed amt alfa isda sea wens ieci 
eet agai: pda a wafers fauna ud a: dart fist gaa ize!

The king submitted : It was in fact for establishing Dharma (righteousness) on a sound 
footing as well as for the suppression of that which is other than Dharma (viz., Adharma or 
unrighteousness) that Lord Sri Krsna, (the Ruler of the universe) descended (in the world of 
matter) alongwith His part manifestation (Balarama). (27) How (then) did He, the Promulgator, 
Institutor and Conservator of ethical standards, commit a transgression in the shape Of 
embracing others’ wives, O holy one ? (28) With what intention indeed did that Lord of the 
Yadus, who had all His desires fulfilled, perpetrate a repelling act ? (Pray,) resolve this doubt 
of ours, O sage of sacred vows ! (29)

MIP SAI 
etiam es gmt a Meat | dsiat A der a@: adusit aa iz01

* It has already been indicated in verse 19 above that the night on which the Lord enacted His celebrated Rasa-Play 
combined numberless nights, by divine will, although to the Gopis in their ecstasy of delight they appeared as one single night.

a

Dis. 33 ] BOOK TEN 243

wae tet ae We We We He eM He HE HE He Hi Wee We Me We Be He Ke we we wy We We We We Ke We WOME He Re Ke We We Wee Re We He He We Bee We We We We We We Ve We He We Ve Be Ve We He We Bi Be BOs Be We He He He

aad, Ware cree | arte: | feared temerereatsieant fare 132 | 
gare ad: Aa Aaa wis! det ad Saale heute BAA 1321 
querakdite wet a feaaifaadior amet fedéerfiot weit 133! 
feqmiaerant hreigeitdtan skasaimearrt aHeeepserd: 13x!

et otha Gras + AGASSI: GI Ua SRI: 1341 
Tat dade a aderta fear disaanht aise: alette Sevres 136! 
seta ATT TAN Searfeera: | ststel Me ait: alST TT: SAT AMA Wa BVI 
TRE, GS PMT Aifedateal AT | a: eI MERA: 136 
Wena sgt = -_- Tae qatfeen: | see ana: wer waka: 1321

Sri Suka replied : Violation of Dharma(the principles of righteousness) and overboldness 
(too) is (occasionally) witnessed on the part of the mighty. It does not (however) bring (any) 
sin on those possessed of exceptional glory as in the case of fire, that consumes everything 
(including even impure substances such as filth and corpses). (30) He (however) who is not 
(so) powerful (and is bound by his Karma) should never deliberately attempt this even 
mentally; for he who does so through folly (recognizing himself as powerful) will (surely) meet 
his ruin even as anyone other than Rudra would if he were to swallow the poison churned 
out of the ocean. (31) A precept (alone) of the mighty (those possessed of wisdom, 
dispassion and so on) is authoritative (and therefore worth following, if uttered in right earnest 
and not as a test of our wisdom). Their conduct (however) is worth imitating on certain 
occasions only. (Therefore,) an intelligent man should follow only such conduct as is 
consistent with their own precept. (32) There is no personal gain to be achieved here through 
such virtuous conduct by egoless people, nor does any harm come to them through the 
reverse of such actions, O king ! (83) How, then, could any virtue or sin binding those that 
are subject to His control attach to the (supreme) Ruler of all creatures, viz., sub-human 
creatures, human beings and gods. (34) Whence indeed could there be any bondage for the 
Lord, who assumed a personality of His own free will, when those who are sated (in the sense 
that they have no desire left in them) by enjoying the pollen of His lotus-feet as also those 
who have shaken off all their ties of Karma by virtue of their Yoga (mental union with God) 
and (even so) those who are given to contemplation on their identity with the Universal Spirit 
conduct themselves freely (in this world) and are never bound (by their actions) ? (35) He 
(alone) who indwelt (as the Inner Controller) not only the cowherd women and their husbands 
but all embodied souls (as a matter of fact), (nay), who is the Witness (of all minds etc.) 
Sportfully assumed a personality (and manifested Himself as Sri Krsna) in this world (of 
matter). (86) Having assumed a human semblance in order to shower His grace on (and 
attract solely towards Him) created beings, the Lord indulges in sports like the Rasa-Play, 
hearing of which man may get exclusively devoted to Him. (37) Deluded by His Maya the men 
Of Vraja did not regard Sri Krsna with jealousy; (for) each of them took his womenkind to be 
Present by his side. (38) When the early hours of the morning approached (at the close of 
@ Whole night of Brahma) the Gopis, who were (SO) beloved of the Lord, returned to their 
homes, though reluctantly, with the approval of Sri Krsna (Son of Vasudeva). (39)

fraiea asagfrke a fae: saitadisqgaret avtae a: | 
ahh ui wnat wed art catrmaiedeatat efit: 1xot

mare { 
Rie ag 
f eh er : A, 7 
at 
io ba 2D

He who full of reverence hears in the proper order of sequence or recounts the story of 
the aforesaid amorous pastime of Sri Krsna (who was no other than the all-pervading Lord 
Visnu) with the women of Vraja is blessed with supreme devotion to the Lord and, becoming 
a master of his self before long, speedily overcomes lust (which is a malady of the mind). (40)

Thus ends the thirty-third discourse entitled "A Description of the (actual)Rasa-Play", 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

7 wet Tr fet TA 
PISS

BIA Adan seaa:

The Lord makes short work of Sankhacida

Ah SATA

Unel aaa Wate Sidenldenl: |srifagem: wageisfacraq 2 |

dA leat aaa ea aqua fay smadedtisian edi a qadsiacri 2 |

Tat fed ara wey Aeaantedt: | seis ag: ad eat a: staarfafa 1 3 |

TY: Udi Be Wea Yaa: | wat a Aer Acgqacclead: | X | 
SriSuka began again: Their interest having been aroused in (undertaking) a pilgrimage 
for the worship of a god on a certain occasion, the cowherds (of Vraja) rode in their carts 
drawn by bullocks to (a forest known as) Ambika Vana (which was sacred to Goddess 
Parvati, the Mother of the universe). (1) Having bathed in the Saraswati river there, they 
worshipped the almighty Lord Siva as well as Goddess Ambika (His Consort) with devotion 
through (various) articles of worship, O protector of men! (2) Full of reverence they all gifted 
to the Brahmans cows, gold, clothes, sweets and rice boiled with honey praying "May the 
Lord be propitious to us !" (3) Having undertaken sacred vows and subsisting on water (alone

for the whole day); the highly blessed ones, Nanda, Sunanda (his younger brother) and 
others, spent that night on the bank of the Saraswati. (4)

eigtericetem faftristtqyfard: | ageassit A WaAATsA! & | 
G Gren Tet: FO HN HEI! AG ai wad aa od uit « | 
qe Ahrad ear Wore: Peale: | et a apr fawn: wt faereperqe: | © | 
Stee RTATASHA ASMA: | AIR UE STA Alaa Ufa: 1c | 
a a Wad: sineneeteyy: 19a adaufkear wu faerercffas @ | 
capSaiet: It wyChei derma aust ued gumfeigol 
cl Ta We GRMN Weadsegdawts: | Het aaftaadat aft ar srfralsaar: 122!

pis. 34 ] BOOK TEN 245

sate Be Be HEME EMER BE SESE SE SE TERE EBB REM B Be Re Me Ae Be WEARER ARAMA MMAR HE MERE MeN AeA A AME He He He ee eRe AeA te Or Oe te Oe ee te te te A ee

Sore pinched with hunger a huge snake arrived in that forest by the will of Providence 
and crawling, (imperceptibly), proceeded to swallow Nanda, who was lying down (there). (5) 
Seized by the python, he cried, "Krsna, O enchanter ofall, this huge serpentis devouring me, 
O darling (Pray,) deliver me, who have sought you as my refuge." (6) Hearing his cry as well 
as his wailing, the cowherds Sprang on their feet at once and, bewildered to see him caught 
(in the coils of a boa constrictor), Struck the serpent with fire-brands. (7) Though being 
scorched with pieces of burning wood, the reptile did not leave Nanda. Approaching the 
serpent (in the meantime), Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of the Yadus) touched the animal 
with HIS foot. (8) (All) his evil Karma having been wiped out by the touch of the Lord's glorious 
foot, the animal cast off the body of a serpent and attained a (shining) form honoured by the 
Vidyadharas. (9) Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the senses) questioned (as follows) the superhuman 
being, who stood beside Him adorned with a gold necklace and bowing low with a 
resplendent body:—(10) "Who are you that are shining with great splendour, endowed as 
you are with a weird form ? And how were you helplessly cast into this disgusting species 
(of a serpent) 2" (11)

ay Sara 
até facmenr: cis deal sa aa: i far meqauen faamara fea: 1221 
mi fasorfeca: sed .ecefta: 1 afar srftat aa smell: Ga ure 1231 
aa Asya had: meuneafy: 1 aes Glu ual WS aly: 1ev 
q ae atta WAM Waaeisiges aod: ceealedtas i2cl 
soash veh wees adi sasife al eta adetenatar ied 
seleuse faqmiss Vesa atid! aa Yeahaor, satqaearda = | 
ae: Ulla fee yet WB: vat fe a 1291 
Sayer «dae «Uefa «al dealt fea Sid: Hagacsy Atle: 1c 
Fama TICs Ma «sitet «= fafa: |

aarg df Fad wast Wage BAIA Aled: 12S!

The (erstwhile) serpent replied : "| am a Vidyadhara known by the name of Sudarsana. 
Endowed with (extraordinary) splendour and wealth of beauty | used to fly in an aerial car 
in all directions. (12) Proud of my comeliness | laughed at some deformed sages born in the 
line of the sage Angira. | was cast into this form (of a python) through my own sin by them, 
derided as they were by me. (13) (I now feel that) the curse was pronounced by those kind- 
hearted souls just in order to show their grace to me in that | have been touched with Your 
foot by You, the Father of the universe, with the result that all my sins have been wiped 
out.(14) Completely rid of the curse by the touch of Your feet, O Dispeller of SOrrows, | ask 
leave of You, the celebrated Lord, who dissipate the fears of those who are afraid of rebirth 
and have sought You as their refuge. (15) | have approached You as my protector, O great 
Yogi, O Supreme Person, O Protector of the righteous | (Pray) grant me leave, O Lord, O 
Ruler of rulers of all the worlds ! (16) | was immediately rid of the Brahmanas curse through

Our very sight, O immortal Lord ! A man uttering Your name purifies at once all those who 
hear him (do so) as well as himself. What wonder, then, that |, who was actually touched by 
the feet of such a Lord, viz., Yourself, should get purified (at once) !" (17) Thus taking leave 
Of Sri Krsna (a scion of Dasarha), going round Him (clockwise) and respectfully bowing to

im, Sudargana ascended to heaven and Nanda was rescued from a perilous situation. (1 8) 
With theit mind struck with wonder to witness such peculiar glory of Sri Krsna and completing

Re Ree REM Me Re RE RR Re RHE CE ee ee We eee ee Ae HB We He We ee .l We We We We wy, 
EWC We wy

We We Wee We We We MER ROR HEE eT We Wy Oe We We We

their religious observances there, the people of Vraja returned home from that (holy) place, 
O protector of men, talking about it with reverence. (19)

eae Wa gett: | fargdat wat wea asain i201 : 
sricat od stidedled: Ssogmdiomg! aha farsisat 129 : 
RUT AMaMIgediguinaL! Aeon YE PACA 122 
sq: aayat 9 FasaUTgerLI at Head Bd WAVSAfssary 1231 
Weragdaarud yfesdt Alaa TI SegROMIA Behe Ad: 12x!

On a certain occasion later on Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) and Balarama of 
wonderful prowess sported in the forest at night in the midst of women of Vraja. (20) They 
were being melodiously sung by the womenfolk—who had fastened their love on Them— 
were well-adorned, (nay) had their limbs smeared with sandal-paste, and were decked with 
garlands and dressed in immaculate garments. (21) Making much of the advent of night— 
which was marked by the appearance of the moon and the stars as well as by (the hovering 
of) black bees intoxicated with the fragrance of jasmines, and was fanned by a breeze 
charged with the fragrance of water-lilies—and simultaneously going through the whole 
scale of musical notes with a regulated rise and fall of sound, the two Brothers sang to the 
delight of the mind and ears of all created beings. (22-23) Hearing Their song, the cowherd 
women fell into a trance and did not notice their raiment falling off from their person or their 
wreaths dropped from their braid due to that trance, O protector of men ! (24)

Wa famisd: et Wad: awMad| Meas sit Wid Males 1241 
WaMu Ulett WAR werd leanne feggdtemarfsa: 1261 
ARI HO Wid faster wahae | BA WM SQA A Wratlaaeaa4y 129! 
T Waa Wet Aad isdeqe ata aka WHAT iR! 
a diet Magne wieqed sates fag Gh ye: seamilfaaea 12¢1 
wate Were a at a mata! feito cent tar Raat a: 1301 
stag Fa AAT UM eR aeatg «=eqemftt fay: 132! 
Wqas Meda afore well Seeeer Sen UzaRiat a areas 1321 
ad ASMA AEM WAS Aedes a Yates AISA A DaferaMseara: 13%

j While the two Brothers were thus revelling unconstrainedly and singing as though highly 
intoxicated, an attendant of Kubera (the bestower of riches) known by the name of 
Sankhactda, arrived there. (25) Nothing daunted, O king, he drove the screaming young 
women, though protected by Them, towards the north before Their very eyes. (26) Beholding 
Their own womenfolk crying "O Krsna ! O Balarama !" even like cows seized by arobber, the 
two Brothers ran in pursuit. (27) Shouting Their assurance of safety in the words "Do not be 
afraid " with a sal tree in hand, the two nimble-footed Brothers ran with quick steps and 
speedily overtook that vile Guhyaka (Yaksa). (28) Shuddering to perceive the two Brothers. 
close upon his heels like Kala (the Time-Spirit) and Death personified, the fool abandoned 
the womenfolk and ran post-haste with intent to save his life. (29) Intending to snatch the 
Jewel on his head, Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) chased him whithersoever he ran; while 
Bala stood guard over the women. (30) Approaching him as though he were not very. far off, 
the almighty Lord severed the head of that evil-minded fellow including the jewel on his crest

with a (stroke of) His fist, O dear Pariksit ! (81) Having thus slain Sankhaciida and taking his

pis. 35 | BOOK TEN ~ 247

oy oe 808 or ve Be REHM We We He We We We He We He Mee Wee We We We Hee He He WE He HE ee We We We We We We Ge We Ve Ke We We We Me Ke We We We We We ee He ee He He ee Ve He De He He ee ee Be Be He He He

splendid gem, He lovingly presented it to His elder brother in the presence ofthe women, who 
stood looking on (with wonder). (32)

Thus ends the thirty-fourth discourse entitled "The Lord slays Sankhacida", 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

~at 2. Set 8 “st $4 
ODOT See IL

Discourse XXXV

The Gopis' song in pairs of verses

AIA SAA 
Wea: PO Gt AMA AAAs: | HOS: WA Page aa ara | 2 |

Sri Suka began again: On Sri Krsna having proceeded to the forest (for pasturing the 
cattle), the cowherd women (whose mind accompanied Him to the forest) spent their days 
in anguish, loudly singing His pastimes. (1)

Ml Sa: 
aA eAaT ACHAT aheTa AEN aA aT I 
amogiotusrcant Wey gat Bt Asai 2 | 
araaataa: ae -_—sdfegfdiftmarerquert = Asstt: | 
cra oraa ddr: HRA aaa: 1 3 1

The Gopis sang: When Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) plays on the flute, applied 
to His lips—the holes of which are (gently) touched by His delicate fingers—dancing His 
eyebrows, His left cheek inclined towards (the root of) His left arm, O cowherd women, the 
consorts of the Siddhas (flying through the air), accompanied by the Siddhas (their spouses), 
are struck with wonder to hear that music and, blushing to find their mind made a target of 
the shafts of love, fall into a trance, forgetful of their skirts (that get loosened and unsettled

in that helpless state). (2-3)

Oh, hear of this strange phenomenon, O delicate women ! When this Darling of Nanda— 
On whose bosom smiling with pear-necklaces shines Goddess LaksmI (in the form of a 
golden Streak) like a stationary flash of lightning—sounds His flute, bringing delight to the 
afflicted people (smitten with the pangs of separation from Him), herds of bulls in Vraja as |

We We Ve Re We We Wee We Re Me we Re Re Si, ht tee oe! Pea Pie! Pea! Peete! Piel Peed Re el Pacd MciMicd Med Mick Med Mol Mick Mel Mel Rel Mel Rel Rel Rel el Ri Ol RR Rl Sel ll Ra ale ehhh WORE Ree ee-w, 
tot Oe

well as deer and cows (in the forest), stand with erect ears, as though they were asleep or 
painted, their mind captivated by the music of the flute heard from a distance, and mouthfuls 
of grass pressed between their teeth (without being swallowed). (4-5)

N é

afta eae anise a mont: aneat at yar i 
de wanda: ara a dderaseishedia 
Weadiaararsequar: saad yst: Rafaara: 1 9 |

Whenever the aforesaid Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), accompanied by Bala 
and putting on the garb of a wrestler decorated with a tuft of peacock-feathers and tender 
leaves, and painted with minerals (of various colours) O friend, calls the cows by their names 
(through the notes of His flute) in the company of (other) cowherds, the (inanimate) rivers too 
find their flow retarded and stand with their arms (in the shape of waves) thrown into motion 
(as if to fold the Lord in their embrace), and (when foiled in their attempt) yearning for the dust 
of His lotus-feet borne by the breeze but eventually with their waters stilled (as though in 
despair), possessed as they are of poor merit like ourselves. (6-7)

stqa: aaa totaate srfeqes saranda: | 
aman fiftteg udiduasseafa om: a aa felc 
Aedend Wad asl Seat sa YEHoe: | 
soraRaeat =—|- ALAN: WHEE: aaa; c: i o 
Whenever Sri Krsna, possessed of everlasting fortune like Lord Visnu (the most ancient 
Person) and with His prowess sung /n extenso (even as in the case of Lord Visnu) by His 
followers, calls by their (respective) names the cows grazing on the slopes of the mountain 
(Govardhana) with the help of His flute, while roaming about in the forest (Himself), the 
creepers of the forest as well as the trees (their partners in life), laden as they are with flowers 
and fruits, appear with their boughs bent low under their weight and with their frames thrilled

through (ecstasy of) love shed streams of honey as though manifesting (the all-pervading) 
Lord Visnu (indwelling them in the form of rapture). (8-9)

aalttataerchl SAINT oa AeA: | 
APO MTA A TAS, ate afeaay: 1201 
ata Anasdlaesiaretictedada Ue | 
eat tafe tifa «= gare: 188 
When Sri Krsna, wearing (on His forehead) a sacred mark (so) charming to look at, 
applies the flute to His lips, admiring the high-pitched and agreeable humming of swarms of 
black bees drunk with the honey of Tulasi (basil) flowers forming part of His wreath of sylvan 
flowers and emitting an ethereal fragrance, the cranes, swans and other birds (dwelling) in 
lakes, dear me, approach Sri Hari, their heart captivated by the dulcet music (of the flute),

and flock by His side with their mind (fully) collected and eyes closed and observing 
(complete) silence. (10-11)

ede: Mladatacrea: aay 8s fatfayat AAT: | 
wie 2 afe ST es Ci TT fa 1221 
Teahisruraigdet Wana Tst tet Te: 
wear «= gifs = af UTI 23 1

- —————— —-—v

pis. 35 ] BOOK TEN 249

When, accompanied by Bala and gracefully adorned with floral ear-rings, and standing 
on the summits of the mountain (Govardhana), O beauties of Vraja, Sri Krsna fills the 
universe with the sound of His flute, enrapturing all and filled with delight (Himself), the cloud 
rumbles In gentle tones (as if) keeping time with His tune, and afraid at heart (as it were) of 
showing disrespect to the Great One, and covers his Friend with a shower of flowers (in the 
form of spray), Spreading over Him an umbrella with his shadow. (12-13)

fafaemtoecty = faert = aur seer freferam: | 
qt Gt: waht aan caduaqd wend: 12%!

Teraretgreret GM: | THAT: | 
Hada BMdchea fara: HAAG Aaisaarat: 2&1 
When, placing the flute between His lips, ruddy as a (ripe) Bimba fruit, O Yasoda (a

virtuous lady), your Son, an expertin the various games played by cowherds, evolves varied 
original tunes in the domain of flute-playing, the chiefs of the gods headed by Indra, Lord Siva 
(the god of destruction) and Brahma (the highest functionary of the universe) listen to that 
music again and again with their neck and mind inclined (towards the quarter from which the 
sound comes) and, unable to penetrate into its subtleties, learned as they are, fall into 
confusion. (14-15)

= a 7 - fark ry: 
aay: WAL, Guile asieanicttisdayy: 1251 
aifa a aa Afacracdtaunttaravtaean: | 
anmifa wma a faq: aadead Hat aat ariel

When, playing on His flute, Sri Krsna walks with the gait of an elephant (the foremost of 
all creatures in point of bulk), soothing the pain of the soil of Vraja caused by the hoofs of the 
cattle (treading on it) by (the soles of) His own (tender) feet resembling the petals of a lotus 
and bearing the weird marks of a flag, thunderbolt, lotus and goad, we—in whom are fire of 
love is kindled by His amorous glances and who are reduced to the (insensate) state of trees 
by (the sight of) His (graceful) movements—are no longer conscious of our braid or (even) 
of our dress due to infatuation. (16-17)

aftr: maar MT Alea aad: | 
TORAIST cI (SRC TTA AL 181

wlUTaau taal erate: PUTA PORTE: | 
Torney 86 efevet |= tent )©=— gat FHT: 1991 
Whenever, wearing (a string of) beads (of various colours) and counting the (herds of) 
Cows (with the help of those beads) and resting His arm on the shoulder of a loving follower, 
SriKr Sna, adorned with a wreath of Tulasi flowers, the fragrance of which is (so) dear to Him, 
Sings somewhere (on His flute), the she-deer, the companions of black antelopes, whose 
mind is carried away by the music of His sounding flute, continue to be with Sri Krsna, the 
Ocean of virtues, once they meet Him, having abandoned like (us,) the cowherd women (all)

pes of returning to their home. (18-19)

TMamesadt aq | 
Togas aa aca ade: yorterar fasta 1201 
AASAAT AAO Ae, AAA |

ee a areniicafefa: aaa: 1221 
[565] B.M. Part lI—37

| [ Dis 
a eh Rahal Ral ae Ral Re Rl Rl Ra i ll Ba Lad We Be Ve We Ke We Wee Mee We We We We We We We He ee ere 
Wr

When, having gaily decorated Himself with wreaths of jasmine flowers, and Surrounded 
by cowherd boys and His cattle-wealth, your Darling, Sri Krsna (Nanda's Son), O Sinless 
Yasoda, sports on the bank of the Yamuna, giving delight to His loving companions, a gente 
breeze fans Him agreeably, welcoming Him by its cool and fragrant touch like that of sandaj- 
paste; and hosts of demigods (Gandharvas and others), who play the role of panegyrists, wait 
upon Him with their instrumental and vocal music and offerings (of various kinds and thereby 
delay His return to Vraja). (20-21)

acl oatar went adamam: uf qe: 
eenerayutel fara TMaduptsdentte: 1221 
saa sTaeata PHIGINE OG GRR | 
facaafa Aealiars Ww SAHIASIVSTA: [2B

With intent to grant the desire of His near and dear ones, here comes Sri Krsna (a 
veritable moon) born of Devaki's womb—who is (so) fond of the people of Vraja as well as 
of the cows, for whose sake He held up the mountain (for full seven days)—collecting all the 
cattle-wealth atthe close of the day, (nay,) playing on His flute and bringing delight to the eyes 
of all even by the splendour of His fatigued person, His feet being adored on the way by the

oldest of the old (Brahma and others), His glory being sung by His followers and His garland 
covered all over with the dust raised by the hoofs of the cattle. (22-23)

efagtidert sat Ara: gecl 9 - SAATT I 
aqugden = EMS US HUSA 12% I 
qeufafsrarsitaent aifadtataas feard | 
Yfeqaen cet Se eT «= feo 124 | 
With His eyes somewhat rolling through inebriety and His face turned pale as a (ripening) 
plum, lighting up as He does His soft cheeks with the splendour of His gold ear-rings, Sr 
Krsna (the Lord of the Yadus)—who is adorned with a wreath of sylvan flowers, wears a 
cheerful countenance and bestows honour on His near and dear ones—is coming over there

even as the moon at the close of day, sporting as the leader of a herd of elephants and

relieving the daylong and endless agony (of separation) of the women of Vraja (who are as 
docile and deserving of protection as cows). (24-25)

Myh Sara 
Wa asifeal Use preter 3 Aad: 1 Wises «aE Tele: 1261 
TMM Ted A TSpaSea: 1341 
Sri Suka continued : In this way, Oh Pariksit, the women of Vraja, whose intellect and

mind were absorbed in Him and who were therefore full of great rejoicing, delightfully spent 
their time (even) during the day, celebrating in song the pastimes of Sri Krsna. (26)

Thus ends the thirty-fifth discourse entitled “The Gopis' Song in pairs of Verses", 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita.

PID SSE IS

Bq yeaniseara:

Discourse XXXVI 
Karnsa sends Akrura to Vraja to bring Sri Krsna and Balarama to Mathura 
MWyH SaTI 
aq waited «6 eARBY «| queen: | Wel HeleapenTa: GE aera | 2 
THAT: GRA Vel a fateray wer sera Ges amit faster ater! 2 | 
foarte pa Meet: | oe eles fgto mat zur 3 | 
Uraeiedt TW: Bart a wa ai Midaha a ae aeons i xX | 
aq Megggier meat wWots dag: | Uaral agai Us Gees Meer! & | 
Fo HOt aA ad Mad aot aq: : Waa aa dle Mees Vafagai «© | 
am Sia firissar qargmureadi tore: agin oafad: feraqi © | 
aocde gsi ales Ue! sarehledreISRS awelett AMA! ¢ | 
Tea wnt sartafed aft: | aisea aritcishe: qunaraiera | 
SIGUA: Hae: HUATISAd | & | 
STASI: | ASIA SAH | HerarensayuiaageAl Sara aT 1Qol 
Tee ASI Al SEEM al Ai Veaalae War Wt: At AM 1ke! 
Gist wnat Gaeta aeat: | add faneaigt M:ae mleqisd: 1221 
amd «oa Ofer eet: Gel Aare Poe de | 
fica 4 aassireat grat faa war alsadd 123! 
TH at Ward Bae «fas Ole MAAR aATT: | 
sm «pes frac aa get: feeedt eftiiist au: 1 ev! 
wd mah war Kaa: wore: | fader as Tact Uta Aaa: 1241 
Sri Suka began again : Some time after (Sri Krsna's return from the forest) there came 
lo Vraja Arista, a demon disguised as a bull with a huge body and a large hump, shaking the 
Earth (already) torn by his hoofs. (1) He was bellowing very harshly and breaking the earth 
with his hoofs; (nay,) uplifting his tail he was throwing up the mounds of earth with the ends 
Of his horns and was (at the same time) discharging dung and urine in small quantities (at 
intervals), and staring with unwinking eyes. At his violent and thunder-like roar, O dear 
Pariksit, cows and women were prematurely delivered of their offspring at an initial or 
advanced stage of gestation indeed through fear, and clouds settled on his hump mistaking 
Itfora hillock. (2—4) Perceiving that animal with sharp horns the cowherds and cowherdesses 
elt dismayed and the cattle fled in terror leaving Vraja far behind, O king! (5) Crying "Krsna 
O Enchanter of all !!" they all sought Govinda as their refuge. Observing this and reassuring 
the people of Vraja, driven off by fright, in the words "Do not be afraid !" the Lord too 
challenged the diabolical bull saying, "What will you gain, O fool, through the cattle and the 
Cowherds being terrified thus, O vilest creature ? (6-7) Here am | to crush the pride, born of

might, of the wicked and evil-minded like you !" Slapping His arms (by way of challenge to 
a duel) and provoking Arista by means of the sound produced thereby, the immortal Sr Hari 
stood stretching His serpent-like arm on the shoulder of a boy companion. Thus angered 
the aforesaid Arista too rushed towards Sri Krsna in fury, furrowing the earth with his hoofs, 
the clouds dispersing at the touch of his erect tail. (8-9) With the ends of his horns thrust 
forward and his bloodshot eyes remaining winkless the animal darted forthwith towards Sj 
Krsna even like the thunderbolt hurled by Indra, threatening Him with his side-glances. (10) 
Seizing him by the horns, the Lord actually pushed him back, like an elephant driving a riva| 
elephant, to a distance of eighteen steps. (11) Knocked down by the Lord, the bull quickly 
rose again and, filled with fury, rushed forward sweating all over and breathing hard. (12) 
Seizing tightly the demon by the horns, even as he came rushing, and throwing him to the 
ground, the Lord set His foot on him and (pressing him at one end with His feet) wrung him 
even as a drenched cloth; and (then) pulling his horn struck him with it till he fell prostrate. (13) 
Vomiting blood, discharging urine and dung profusely and throwing up his feet with his eyes 
rolling, the demon experienced (great) agony and (eventually) met his end at the hands of 
Death (himself in the disguise of Sri Krsna, the Destroyer of Death). The gods (in heaven) 
applauded Sri Hari, covering Him with flowers. (14) Having thus disposed of the (demon in 
the form of a) bull and being glorified by His own kinsmen (the cowherds), Sri Krsna (the feast 
of the Gopis' eyes) accompanied by Bala (who had joined him on hearing of his encounter 
with the bull) entered Vraja (once more). (15)

ae «fet fa HOME Hare ATA AR caaglt: 12a! 
SMM: Fal HA eae: HIAA AWA wa Uieviiga agqeda fava 12! 
et aia ae a areata gen ea: | Para aq aisle: arard wefeatsa: 1 2c 
franaahaated ageatsaraa | Fark! Ane aal ACAIHA: 1281 
Hal Glee: Uae Be Aaa Wad q@ east cha srareq chi 120! 
yaaa ee STS Waa i dt «= ABemet ares alerehifachr 128 | 
Se, seaisa aes swe a wt freraatad dheupaisat 1221 
aeast | fered «= YMaMeHagh: | WAH adi val Ya: fone frafeta: 1231 
waaaiue Wael gaat Aeseiea | van: fant fafaen arorafesra: | 
ORT STAVE: Ga TAY ALATA | 2X |

Tea aT. sk Yeareioilaami feu: Hacamtel afe aa anrfadt 1241 
aaa «= aainsdeeat «= aerate | fasrergd Ta Nea, ITT Age 12!

The demon Arista having been slain by Sri Krsna of miraculous deeds, the holy Narada,

who was gifted with divine vision, presently (called on and) told Karnsa of the female child .

(which was supposed to be the eighth progeny of Devaki and had escaped death” at his 
hands) being (as a matter of fact) a daughter of Yasoda, as well as of Sri Krsna being the 
(eighth) offspring of Devaki, and of Balarama being a son of Rohini as also of the two 
Brothers—by whom Karhsa's men (agents) had been actually made short work of—having 
been placed by the terrified Vasudeva (Their real father) in the charge of his friend, Nanda, 
Kamsa, the chief of the Bhojas, whose mind was agitated through anger to hear this 
(revelation), snatched a sharp-edged sword with the intention of killing Vasudeva. Stopped

RR EE uae Ta ee 
* Vide verses 7 to 13 of Discourse IV.

F

however!) by Narada and coming to know (from the same sage) of the two Sons of Vasudeva 
o have been ordained (by Providence) to be his Death, he bound Vasudeva alongwith his 
wife (Devaki) with iron fetters. The celestial Sage having (now) returned (to his abode in the 
highest heaven), Kamsa conferred with Kegi and despatched him (to Vraja) with the order 
“et Balarama and Kesava (Sri Krsna) be disposed of (by you) !" Summoning in his presence 
Mustika, Canura, Sala, ToSalaka and others (who were renowned experts in wrestling) as 
wellas his ministers and keepers of elephants, Karnsa (the king of the Bhojas) then said, "O! 
Let this (command of mine) be listened to (and obeyed forthwith), O heroic Cantra and 
Mustika ! (16—22) I hear the two sons of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva), Balarama and Krsna, 
are dwelling in Nanda's Vraja; at their hands | am told has my death been decreed. (23) Let 
the two boys, when arrived here, be killed by you in a game of wrestling. Let galleries of 
diverse designs be erected (in the form of an amphitheatre) round the arena for the 
wrestlers, (and) let all the people of the city as well as of the country (the kingdom of 
Mathura) witness the voluntary combat. (24) O keeper of (my) elephants, O blessed one, 
letthe (mighty) elephant Kuvalayapida be brought to (and stationed at) the (main) entrance 
of the amphitheatre (and) kill through it my two (juvenile) enemies. (25) Let a bow-sacrifice 
(in which Lord Siva is worshipped in the form of a bow and which is recommended in the 
works on Siva-Worship as conducive to victory over enemies) be commenced with due 
ceremony on the (coming) fourteenth lunar day (which is held particularly sacred to Lord 
Siva). Let the priests immolate animals, fit to be sacrificed, to Lord Siva (the Ruler of the 
spirits and popularly worshipped even to this day at Mathura under the name of Sri 
Bhuteswara), the Bestower of (all) boons." (26)

SATAN Aaa ATEa aaa ay | Feat arforar uifet adismemara g 121 
mW Wt aaud vel feadt Aamed: | araeam feaaat fae atsraferg 2c! 
saat: aba awHrekaare astat fawarisrer waretaeaae fey: 129 | 
Ts Aca dt AdlaMHeeh: | aed Aad Wara a fa izol 
frp: faa 4a YAedadpusasea: | Aaa aq Waser: ANU: 1321 
eae seridt arent eft ate et ddl aeoalad aedre: 1321 
BRNECGDICSE IEE ARR | aes, Perens qRoriseenear 133 | 
Sad oa feat wiat waemedidedieah a a ard fafest aa 13x! 
aasver ust faa ufatt apavenrisee wa qefgfact afaa: ar 134! 
Tat wal aut waa adaleci: | ae quate sal Met Ael F134! 
Ursa fat wanonfadtet i aptartent se agua 13z0!

Having thus commanded his servants, Karnsa (who was well-versed in the methods of 
achieving his personal ends) summoned Akrira, the foremost of the Yadus (anda kinsman 
of Vasudeva), and, clasping his hand with his own, addressed him as follows:—(27) "O chief 
ofthe charitably disposed, let an act of friendship be done to me. None else is more honoured 
and more friendly (to me) than you in the race of the Bhojas and the Vrsnis. (28) | therefore 
depend on you, O gentle one, as the means of accomplishing a great purpose, (even) as the 
mighty Indra attained his end (in the form of sovereignty of the three worlds, that had been 
“USurped by Bali (the demon king), depending as he did on Lord Visnu (descended in the form 
2 Vamana*, the Divine Dwarf, his younger Brother). (29) Proceed (at once) to Nanda's Vraja;

" For the story of Lord Vamana see Discourses XVIII to XXIII of Book Eight.

ee RR

there reside the two sons of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva). (Please) bring them both here in 
this chariot; let there be no delay. (30) My death, | understand, has been pre-ordained at the 
hands of the younger one by the gods, who have their (sole) refuge in Visnu. (Therefore) fetch 
them alongwith the Gopas headed by Nanda and equipped with tributes of various kinds.(31) 
| shall have them despatched, when brought down here, by my elephant (Kuvalayapida), 
who is as good as Death (himself). If (however) they escape it, | shall get them killed by 
wrestlers (fierce) like thunderbolts. (32) On the two brothers having been killed | shall do 
away with their afflicted kinsmen—the Vrsnis, the Bhojas and the Dasarhas—headed by 
Vasudeva, as well as my aged father, Ugrasena, who is anxious to regain his sovereignty, 
his (younger) brother, Devaka, and whoever else are my enemies. (33-34) And then this 
earth, O friend, will be rid of (all its) thorns, Jarasandha is (my father-in-law and therefore as 
good as) my father; while Dwivida (the monkey-chief) is my beloved friend. (35) (Even SO) 
Sambara, Naraka and Bana have (all) entered into alliance with me. Destroying with their 
help (all) kings who are siding with the gods, | shall rule over the (entire) globe (myself). (36) 
Knowing this (but not disclosing my intention to the people of Vraja), fetch the two youngsters, 
Balarama and Krsna, here at once so as to enable them to witness the bow-sacrifice as well 
as to behold the splendour of Mathura (the capital of the Yadus)." (37)

SIG Sara 
Use WAled Wk dad Mlaaasia| fagufaeal: aa Hale ca fe Meares, 131 
THRU Hest «= Aleta | Goad eden aarenat Hah 21391

Akrura replied : Well-thought out is your remedy against the evil that stares you in the 
face. One should (however) keep one's mind balanced in success and failure; for it is 
Providence that procures the fruit of our endeavours. (38) Man entertains high aspirations, 
even though they are thwarted by Providence, and (thus) meets with joy and grief. 
Nevertheless | shall do your bidding. (39)

Sh SATA 
Tanticed Uigt abana fagea a:isfadsr We ae: MAEM Ixo!l 
Sid Arad Fe TAS Seca Sa Yaleisspeaer a vefraseara: 136 |

Sri Suka continued: Having thus instructed Akrira and sent away his counsellors, 
Kamsa retired into the gynaeceum and Akrira too returned to his house. (40)

Thus ends the thirty-sixth discourse entitled "Karnsa despatches Akrira (to Vraja)", 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS

AM AYA Sara:

Discourse XXXVII 
The demon Vyoma slain (by the Lord) 
Heh SATA

eet ¢ mesfer: wedi used foie aan:

ReaMiants 8sat a Bftasitferentfaes: 121

faantertat fameterantert Feel atenmergqean: |

arma: chufed fant @ Aes WIA aM 121

q Wd wart Vtee caafadalefaqttarge |

STIMIAaH TR A SASL 13 |

a a faraiaet aaa ae fatrarasacaadn: |

War GRataaarat quraaswestal Qa: 141

dq asia andes eat sya aeat uftfaer areal: |

Aaa «aad adigqdl «= rafera: 141

a weld: weft ea ater seit aenssadght |

asa aad wat Wa sagem ae fale

am ffaqunagnaget dreqqa: wet aa!

aes deena eet 9 aassna: wage safatd: 1191

aan «6 alltiTCTTC (CsI fafa 1

ufasia: uftgquetaa: und ous fags fadt aa: ic!

ded: Helene AMIS Yt Aly: |

arfaferatsadedtiveceta: WAasiatastetisd: 121 7

Sri Suka began again : Despatched by Kamsa* and anxious to oblige him, the aforesaid

Kesi of evilintent, for his part, went to Nanda’s Vraja in the form ofa colossal horse—quick 
as thought, with big eyes, a fearful cave-like mouth and a huge neck and resembling a large 
dark cloud—pounding and shaking the earth with its hoofs crowding the firmament with 
Clouds and aerial cars dispersed by its manes and terrifying all with its neighs.t (1-2) Placing 
Himself in the forefront, the Lord challenged the (diabolical) horse, that was frightening (the 
Inhabitants of) His Vraja with its neighs as aforesaid, throwing the clouds into commotion by 
the hair of its tail and seeking after Him for a duel; and the animal roared loudly like a lion 
(when thus challenged). (3) Beholding Him, the animal—which was not only difficult to 
€Pproach and possessed of terrible speed but formidable too—turned round and ran towards

im full of rage and, drinking the heavens as it were with its (wide open) mouth struck the 
lotus-eyed et with its (hind) legs. (4) Dodging the stroke and seizing the horse by its

a a a ne 
"Vide verses 20-21 of Discourse XXXVI above. hg 
t Verse 2 has not been commented upon by Sridhara Swami.

(aforesaid) legs, Sri Krsna (who is above sense-perception) whirled it in a rage with His arms 
and, flinging it disdainfully to a distance of a hundred bows (four hundred cubits), even as 
Garuda (son of the sage Kasyapa) would throw a serpent, stood as before (as if nothing hag 
happened). (5) Having recovered its senses and rising up again, the said Kesi rusheg 
towards Sri Hari with (great) speed, opening its mouth in fury. He too smilingly thrust His left 
arm into its mouth (as playfully) as a snake-charmer would put a serpent into a hole. (6) 
Touching the Lord's arm the teeth of Kesi dropped down as they would on touching a heated 
iron rod. Nay, finding its way into its body, the arm of Sri Krsna (the Supreme Spirit) swelleg 
to an enormous degree, even as (the fluid collected in the body of a man suffering from) the 
disease of dropsy would if neglected. (7) With its breath choked by the immensely swelling 
arm of Sri Krsna and its eyes rolling, and profusely sweating all over, the animal dropped 
dead on the ground throwing up its legs and passing excrement. (8) Drawing out His arm from 
its dead body, which resembled a (ripe) cucumber (that had burst open at several places), 
the mighty-armed Lord, who had killed the enemy without any effort and (therefore) stood 
unelated, was glorified by the highly amazed gods (lit., the denizens of heaven), who 
showered flowers (on Him). (9)

CORES 2 UPTAACTA Ta | HOMAfHsnaiat WAAC 120 | 
FN HOTA Ala Wielka areas Aradl WaT BAT 1ee1 
Se 4 aayaMal wilfakRaerarli wel Wea: wait sermges saz: 1221 
AMSA: YA Aaa BGs WII dhe Asda: YBsreeadtar: 1231 
a ad Wy easement sadiut fara Aga waura aiexi 
fest a fant cat ied ete: ia afadaeesramiae fear ie

Approaching Sri Krsna, who was unwearied in action, Narada (the celestial sage), the 
foremost of the Lord's votaries, O protector of men, spoke to Him in secret as follows:—(10) 
"O Krsna of incomprehensible character, O Enchanter of all, O Master of Yoga (possessed 
of inconceivable powers), O Ruler of the universe, O Vasudeva (present in all beings), the 
Abode of all, the foremost of the Yadus, O almighty Lord ! (11) You are the one Spirit, 
indwelling all created beings and remaining concealed like the fire hidden in logs of wood, 
nay, enshrined inside the intellect, the Witness (of all), the Supreme Person, the almighly 
Lord. (12) Depending on Your own Self, You evolved the three Gunas at the dawn of creation 
by Your Maya (creative energy), which is (no other than) Your own Self; and with their help 
You create, protect and absorb (into Your own Self) this (visible) universe, unfailing of 
purpose and almighty as You are. (13) As such You have descended (in the world of matter) 
for the annihilation of demons, goblins and ogres born as kings (lit.,the conservators of the 
earth) and for the protection of the virtuous (who are the living standards of morality). (14) 
Luckily enough by You, has been sportfully slain this demon (Ke$Si) in the form of a horse; 
frightened by whose neighs the gods (whose eyelids never fall) evacuated heaven. (1 5)

at Yee da ues afer wa a fred wad uedtsefr X fast 126! 
Ty Waa a Aint ai aM ey! 
Sie ea «| atdigicentfgmaror | Tet) AAT UIE Baa STA 186! 
Vasa A AON Me Aa YM a wieloTer wea: 128! 
wig ae usd anfrgaiss dan eae fet dere A Ueland 1201 
ait arent etatiet gerard ar) sat xeaers oft Henkr aaferfireffer 128

BOOK TEN 957

-- 37 ] 
iS. 3 ee We Be Be Re Be Re MC CPR. Ke RER He Ke He He wy 
Ce ARSESSORERESTNERTENT ERE E TER ENREN Eh RE Em RNE ERE R EERE MRT IEe 
SI S 
ga at BIOS aang: 21 satel fret ot 
| 37 SAATAAARA: 1221

The day aiter tomorrow | shall see Canura and Mustika and other wrestlers as well as 
he elephant (Kuvalayapida) and Kamsa (himself) slain by You, O almighty Lord ! (16) After 
that | shall witness the death (at Your hands) of the demon Pancajana (living in the form of 
. conch), the lonian hero (Kalayavana) and the demon Mura as well as of Naraka and (also) 
the carrying off (from heaven) of the (celestial) Parijata tree and the discomfiture of Indra 
(who will try to thwart Your purpose). (17) | shall also behold the espousal (by You) of the 
daughters of heroes—which will be distinguished by the fact that show of valour will be the 
(only) price paid by You (for the Same) and so on, and shall (further) witness the deliverance 
of King Nrga at Dwaraka from sin (in the shape of unwittingly giving away a Brahmana’'s 
cow as his own, for which he was hurled into the womb of a chameleon), O Lord of the 
universe! (18) | shall also witness the acceptance (by You) of the (brilliant) gem Syamantaka 
alongwith Jambavati (for Your wife from the bear chief Jambavan) as well as the restoration 
toa Brahmana of his deceased son to be brought by You from Your own divine Abode (the 
realm of Mahakala). (19) | shall (further) witness the destruction (by You) of King Paundraka 
and later on the setting on fire of the city of Kasi (the modern Varanasi) and (even so) the 
death (at Your hands) of Dantavaktra and (earlier) of Sisupala (the king of Cedi) in the course 
ofagreat sacrifice (viz., the Rajasuya sacrifice to be performed by Emperor Yudhisthira). (20) 
| shall also witness those feats of valour that You will perform while residing in Dwaraka and 
which will be celebrated in song by the poets on earth. (21) | shall then behold the 
extermination of a number of Aksauhinis (in the course of the great Mahabharata war) by 
Yourself as Arjuna's charioteer and assuming the role of Kala (the Time-Spirit) actually bent 
on the dissolution of this (visible) universe. (22)

faxiglagitat GARI aaa eaaarara esa, |

asta Paadaranrurae WTAE 123 |

miswineaqeeane «86a at AQ fROTETaT, 121

We approach (for protection) the almighty Lord (in You), who is pure consciousness

Personified, who has fully achieved all His ends by virtue of His being established in His own 
(blissful) existence, whose desire never fails to yield its fruit and by whose effulgence (in the 
form of consciousness) the stream of the three Gunas (in the shape of the world-process), 
having its origin in Maya, is ever shut out from Him. (23) | bow to You, the self-dependent 
almighty Lord who has evolved this (varied) creation out of all these differentiated categories

(the Mahat-tattva etc.) brought forth by His own Maya (creative energy), and who has now 
lor the sake of sport assumed a human semblance as the foremost of the Yadus, the Vrsnis

and the Satvatas. (24) 
Sy Sars

tS uguht get amaavadt gh: i womemagadt «sat aeetitera: 1241 
mamta gat BRRATEa caead oe: iceisraTee: 126 
Wear a wa CITES RATS | Sep oTesR SAAT ARTA: Le 
Tare, afferent: wens alata Aer te fergTgtt HAT: 12¢1

TaN need sil aoredaqe Aafsartare waster = TEL IReI 
Meat fafiferer ata <td Tera: | reat faedl gh wad:asaaifed: 1301

aa dd wa fag Ha: Ue: MALI Wa, Aad ae Fh eiihatstat 132 1 
q fi waarena firtaaest act) seq faaparan arene Weve: 132) 
4 fer aeat uefa adlac i ueadi fafa CaM = UQARAARAT, 133 | 
qatar fifa worm feed peg: aa: qeiid: sade eGo yy 
sf strerrad Feet Uae Gears carHs Yale ATS AA TafaaIsea: 13001

Sri Suka continued : Having thus bowed low to Sri Krsna, the Lord of the Yadus, anq 
gladly permitted by Him, the sage Narada, the foremost of the Lord's devotees, who was filled 
with ecstatic delight at His sight, departed (for his abode in Satyaloka). (25) Having made 
short work of the demon Kesi in a (personal) combat, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) 
too continued to tend the cattle as usual in the company of the cowherd boys, who were 
(deeply) attached to Him, bringing delight (thereby) to (the entire) Vraja. (26) Once, while 
pasturing the cattle on the mountain heights, the cowherd boys played various games of 
(cleverly) smuggling others' goods under the guise of thieves and guards. (27) Of them some 
played the part of thieves and others acted as watchmen, O protector of men; while still others 
of the Gopas played the role of rams. In this way they sported fearlessly. (28) Maya's son 
Vyoma (a demon), who was adept in great conjuring tricks and who made his appearance 
there in the guise of a cowherd boy, often playing the part of a thief, carried away many 
cowherd boys that were playing the role of rams. (29) Laying down each cowherd boy he 
carried away into a mountain cave, the mighty demon closed its entrance with a (large) slab. 
(In this way only) four or five (of the Gopas) remained (outside the cave). (30) Perceiving that 
work of the demon, Sri Krsna, who affords protection to the righteous, forcibly seized Him 
even as he was carrying away the cowherd boys, just as a lion would seize a wolf. (31) 
Resuming his natural (demoniac) form, resembling a huge mountain, the powerful demon, 
who was feeling pained by the grip, sought to extricate himself but could not. (32) Catching 
hold of the demon by the arms and dashing him to the ground, Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), 
made short work of him by gagging him and squeezing his windpipe while the gods in heaven 
stood looking on. (33) Having broken asunder the rock that blocked the mouth of the cave 
and rescuing the cowherd boys from their uncomfortable situation, and being glorified by the 
gods as well as the Gopas, the Lord withdrew to His (realm of) Vraja. (34)

Thus ends the thirty-seventh discourse entitled "The demon Vyoma slain," 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PEAT TH 
DSR SS

STATS aan Sears:

Discourse XXXVIII 
Akrura's arrival (in Vraja) 
Mah Saaq 
sips a at ut wage aera: 1 afer wre yet wanlqeri 2 | 
Tet Uae aa waagragaent: uth TIT 8 wardefadad! 2 |

BOOK TEN 259

fe waissanet Wk fee we aed au: 1 fe arenes a z ‘en 
meta, PH AT acide eeu Recast 
a AEST ereareresa | ean: semen wher wart 1G 
HIG? TE weaigta A wala wad aflame let 
coal Sept Asegag zedsafimet wfkdtiscat ee 
awe Sat we: asa UeAUEeaRT 1 |

MAROTTA ag fear PAPEL | < | 
seta Et Gemttemtifteh )«=— fratenreurenorert 
Ga UP Usleniqd yefact A sehr aA ym:1e | 
aa |= fawittgsenitgst «aaa «= galt Ss ster | 
cravat dada wel A A id Wea ga: 1201 
a Sfarcrarfedtscrercadt: AMARTH: 
oa Sarearassaa, «- Ufactetlevat «= rumareiifa: 4«=- Gatgsitaa 1221 
Sri Suka began again : Having spent that night* at Mathura (the city founded by the 
demon Madhu), the high-minded Akrura too mounted a chariot and drove to Nanda's 
Vraja.(1) Proceeding along the road the highly blessed one developed supreme devotion to 
the lotus-eyed Lord and thought as follows adopting the following line of reasoning:—{2) 
"What noble act has been performed, (nay,) what supreme austerity has been gone through 
or again what gift has been bestowed on a worthy recipient by me, by virtue of which | am 
going to behold Sri Krsna (the Protector of even Brahma and Lord Siva) ? (3) | consider it 
as difficult for me—whose mind is given to sensuous pleasures—to gain the sight of Lord Sri 
Krsna of excellent renown as a recital of the Vedas is for one born of Sudra parents. (4) 
(Rather) | should not think like that. Even to me, a vile creature, the sight of Sri Krsna, (the 
immortal Lord) must be vouchsafed; (for, though) borne away by the stream of Time, one may 
get to the shore (the end of mundane existence) some time. (5) (All) my evil has been 
destroyed today; nay, my birth too has become fruitful in that | shall bow to the lotus-feet of 
the almighty Lord, that are fit to be meditated upon by Yogis (those given to contemplation). 
(6) Ah, Karnsa has done me a great favour today; (for) despatched by him (to Vraja) | shall 
behold the lotus- feet of Sri Hari, descended in the world of matter—feet by the splendour 
of whose spherical nails people in the past have got over the darkness of ignorance, sO 
difficult to cross over, (nay) which are adored by gods headed by Brahma and Lord Siva (the 
Source of the universe), by the divine Sn (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) as well as 
by Sages and devotees; which move about in the forest alongwith their followers for the 
Purpose of pasturing the cows, and which are tinged with the saffron paint on the bosom of 
Cowherd women. (7-8) | shall surely behold the countenance of Sri Krsna (the Bestower of 
Liberation) with lovely cheeks and a shapely nose and with reddish lotus-like eyes casting 
Smiling glances, and overhung by curly locks; for the deer walk to my rightindeed.T (9) Ifthere 
Comes about today a meeting with Lord Visnu, the home of loveliness, who has of His own

Se SSS

* This has reference to verse 40 of Discourse XXXVI above. | | | 
Tt According to the science of omens this is considered to be a propitious omen as is borne out by the following verse:—

free will assumed a human semblance for relieving the burden of the earth, there is no 
denying the fact that my eyes will have easily attained the fruit of their existence. (10) He jg 
the Spectator of the cause as well as of the effect, though (entirely) free from egotism; in Him 
ignorance (veiling one's real character) as well as the notion of difference (resulting from it) 
and the misconception arising from such a notion stand eliminated by His own effulgence (in 
the form of eternal realization of His own essential character) and He Is seen (sporting) in 
arbours (or the dwellings of the Gopis of Vraja) in the company of Jivas (embodied Souls) 
endowed with the vital principle, senses and mind and evolved in His own Self by His Maya 
(creative energy) under His own supervision. (11)

aeikaeriaes: eageatear fafeet qorendorafy: | 
mia Sea Gara A sie Aetigeet: Wag AAT: eR 
a aad: fee aradrad waquemadartad | 
a fara ast ame gat waa cat aagreage 1231 
qd Ga qi wedi Aa we Aeterd sere 
ea oad fra gitar wat ATS: | MERIT: 18 
(Nay,) utterances connected with His excellences (compassion etc.), exploits and 
descents that wipe out the sins of all and are attended with (all) excellent blessings actually 
give (new) life and grace and lend sanctity to the universe while those removed from them 
are (though adorned with figures of speech and other elegances) considered to be as good 
as a (finely dressed and well-adorned) corpse. (12) Descended, as | understand in the race 
of the Satvatas (Yadus) in order to bring happiness to the foremost of the immortals 
maintaining the ethical standards set up by Himself, the same Lord is living (at present) in 
Vraja, spreading (far and wide) His glory which the gods (ever) celebrate in song as the 
source of all blessings. (13) | shall surely behold today that very Lord, who is the goal of 
exalted souls and the preceptor (of the whole universe) and exhibits a form which is loved

by (all) the three worlds, provides a grand feast to those that have eyes and is the coveted

Abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity); (for) all these mornings have revealed 
good omens to me. (14)

SMe: AU Wit WIAGeAt weer | 
faa ad anima ga ama sma a adm ante: 1241 
ameiye ula A fay: freerafastecgsr | 
ata Heys Meltaet a AUeo FOI e61 
ere aa eras alia «afer | aoe 
aq at fat astalivar st wate abiieterreauted 1201 
1 weaurahaterad: haa <a: sfedtsi faaqe | 
Uswtesaa wider Bat saaea age ici 
wmefyesated pdt ania aferaadar sar | 
MeMeaenican aet Ye adidfays sista ie 
Wet Wieacad deat geet ufedsa AM 
orem fe diviffmad dca A args aalat sapfae: 1201

Te SORTA at a TT 123 1

Alighted from the chariot immediately afterwards, | shall certainly bow at the feet of the 
almighty Lords (of the universe), the foremost Persons (Balarama and Sri Krsna)—which are 
(only) cherished in their mind by (great) Yogis for Self-Realization (but are never seen by 
them)—and alongwith Them | shall greet Their friends (the cowherd boys) as well as the 
(other) inhabitants of Vraja (consisting mainly of a woodland). (15) Will the Lord place on my 
head, when | am fallen at the soles of His feet, His own lotus-like palm, that has given 
assurances Of safety to men terrified by the speed of the serpent of Time and seeking shelter 
(at His feet)? (16) Placing articles of worship in (the hollow of) that palm, Kausika (a former 
Indra) attained the rulership of (all) the three worlds and pouring water into it the demon Bali 
(the celebrated demon king and devotee) secured (a title to) the sovereignty of the three 
worlds. Nay, it relieved by its (Soft and fragrant) touch the fatigue of the women of Vraja during 
the Rasa-Play, emitting as it did the fragrance of a Saugandhika (a particular species of lotus, 
so-called because of its remarkable fragrance). (17) Even though | have been sent by Kamsa 
as his messenger, Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord)—who is omniscient and the Knower of all 
bodies and who witnesses with His unclouded vision the activity of the mind, existing as He 
does inside as well as outside the latter—will not (1 am sure) harbour a feeling of enmity 
towards me. (18) If He smilingly looks on me—fallen at the soles of His feet with a fully 
controlled mind and joined palms—with a compassionate eye, | shall forthwith be absolved 
from all sins and, completely rid of (all) fear (of rebirth etc.), experience supreme bliss. (19) 
Again, when He folds in His long arms me, his most sincere friend and kinsman exclusively 
devoted to Him, my body will at once be actually turned into a (veritable) sanctuary and my 
bonds in the form of Karma will fall off from it. (20) When | have thus enjoyed His (blissful) 
embrace and stand bowing low (before Him) with joined palms, Sri Krsna (of wide renown) 
will address me in the words ‘Uncle Akrura !' Then (alone) will my birth be fruitful. Fie upon 
that birth of him who is not accepted as His own by Sri Krsna (the Supreme Lord). (21 ) Neither 
iS anyone beloved of Him, much less His dearest friend, nor again is anyone unwelcome, 
much less hateful or even worthy of being treated with indifference. Nevertheless He loves 
His devotees (alone) inthe same way as they do, justas a wish-yielding tree grants the desire 
of men (only) when approached (by them). (22) Further His elder Brother (Balarama), the 
foremost of the Yadus, would smilingly embrace me—bowing low (before Him)—and 
Conduct me; caught by my joined palms into the house and will enquire in detail of me, when 
l have received all attentions, about the conduct of Karhsa towards His kinsfolk. (23)

yh SAA 
sft afar ql auncenetelseatt | Wet tae) STH: Gaara FA Rs 
Uefa TRA Ae fer aessrqeaawon: | 
aeat ome farfaentqarha farcfardiaetarargetal: 124 
deaiarelatdagaea: DroedaaiycHelhea: | 
Wied a agqaed Tange sft ize!

Sgyataret fear asi Prt yan! dene a Rleiqaatterconiaha: 1200)

Sri Suka continued : Thus contemplating on Sri Krsna all the way, Akrira (the son of 
Swaphalka) arrived in Vraja in the chariot, while the sun reached the western hill (horizon), 
O protector of men. (24) He beheld in Vraja the footprints of Sri Krsna—the sacred dust of 
whose feet is borne on their crown by the guardians of all the worlds—which served as the 
ornaments of the earth and were distinguished by the marks of a lotus, a grain of barley, a 
goad and so on. (25) His impatience having been immensely heightened by the joy deriveg 
from their sight, his hair standing on end through love and his eyes bedimmed with tear- 
drops, he jumped down from the chariot and rolled on the footprints exclaiming, "Oh! these 
are the particles of dust of the Lord's feet !" (26) This much is the end to be attained by those 
invested with a body, viz., that giving up hypocrisy, fear and worry, they should cultivate 
through the sight of Sri Hari's images, the hearing of His praises and so on that ecstatic mood 
which was felt by Akrira from the time he received the mandate (from Kamsa). (27)

cel HUT WH a AA Welet Tall Uttoraent MAGA 12C 
festa samead sified seqstigqael qa saeferafamat ize 
TAA SPAS a eee ATL lava §«=—|-HelTergeprarferctarot 1301 | 
eee «Oat «= aafeat i queengiedet art fawrarcat 1321 
TEASE TC TMT I radloit Tee i) Aecharat 1321 
fran fafafrr Us Halon Wa WaT aM ANd: Aer Was pHacifeadt 1331 
Tne = AIS: «= Alefawe: |W SUI quad WAU: 13% 
TATSE A ASIA EAA AT ewan: | prem theres Stren UeTc ARTA ATTATT 134 1 
MTA aA WASiisdaort | URASAaTHe «Ml: «| WUT: 136 1 
GHAI SOIT 98—|_- ARTAAT: | Welea UNUM OUT sae Ala Fer 131

(Presently) he saw in Vraja Sri Krsna and Balarama with eyes resembling a pair of 
autumnal lotuses, (severally) wearing yellow and blue garments and present in the yard 
where cows were milked. (28) They were (mere) lads, dark-brown and fair (in complexion 
respectively) the abodes of grace, with long arms and a lovely countenance, the foremost 
among the charming and having the prowess of young elephants. (29) The two high-souled 
Brothers were gracing (the soil of) Vraja by Their feet distinguished with the marks of a flag, 
the thunderbolt, a goad and a lotus and were casting (all round) glances accompanied with 
smiles full of compassion. (30) Having bathed, they had put on immaculate clothes, were 
besmeared all over with sandal-paste which emitted a delightful odour and adorned with 
necklaces of jewels and garlands of sylvan flowers and were engaged in noble and charming 
pastimes. (31) They were the two foremost and most ancient*Persons, the Causes as well 
as the Rulers of the universe, descended for the sake of the worldin Their all-blissful essence 
as Balarama and Kesava (Sri Krsna). (32) (Shining) like a rock of emerald and another of 
silver, covered with gold, the two (divine) Brothers were ridding the quarters of theirdarkness 
with Their own effulgence, O Pariksit ! (33) Hastily jumping down from the chariot and 
overwhelmed with affection, the aforesaid Akrira fell prostrate at the feet of Balarama and 
Sri Krsna. (34) With his eyes blinded by tears of joy brought by the sight of the Lord and 
his frame covered with bristling hair, he was unable even to introduce himself (by uttering 
his name) due to his throat being choked (with emotion), O protector of men ! (35) Coming 
to know him (as well as of his intention through inference), the Lord (who is so fond of thos¢ 
who are bent low before Him), drew Akrira towards and near Him with His hand

pis. 39 ] BOOK TEN 263

characterized by the mark of a discus and, full of delight, embraced him. (36) The high- 
minded Sankarsana (Balarama) too hugged Akrira bowing low (before him) and, clasping 
his (joined) palms with His own took him to His house in the company of His younger 
Brother (Sri Krsna). (37)

upa ard da faa a ea | sates faftad, arat ayaeidoraetd 1321 
faa mt ated Gat saad: | att aeUT Bet srgeloree fay: 1391

qe Yad set wa: umenifed qaartienned: uxt sf sen Ga: 1x01

ures UPd Te: SY W Meaaeiaa sia aand aoe sara: «2!

Asada BAGS AVM sq we: | fs a Raresnat a: Hares faqanrae 1v21

sa Uta ate Ae Gasifsa: ioimet: «= aga | Srerareaafterm 1x3 | 
ofa aETTad AER TRA Ueda AHA Yale aT AWATENARMSEATA: 132

Then, enquiring about his safe arrival and giving him an excellent seat, Balarama washed 
his feet with due ceremony and fetched (for him) an offering called Madhuparka (consisting 
of honey, clarified butter and curds). (88) Again, bestowing on the guest a cow and 
massaging him, weary as he was, the almighty Lord respectfully and with (great) reverence 
brought (for him) pure food endowed with manifold excellences. (39) When he had finished 
his meals, Balarama, who knew the highest Dharma (in the shape of hospitality shown to a 
newcomer and so on), gave him supreme joy again by (lovingly) offering him articles (such 
as betel and cardamoms) intended to scent his mouth (after meals) as well as perfumes and 
garlands. (40) When he had thus been shown (the customary) hospitality, Nanda enquired 
of him:—"Like the sheep having a butcher for their keeper, how are you getting on while the 
ruthless Karnsa is alive, O Akrira (a scion of Dasarha)? (41) We wonder what safety, in truth 
could there be to you, the subjects of him who killed the babes of his screaming cousin 
(Devaki) a wicked fellow given to the gratification of His own self that he is." (42) Duly greeted 
thus with polite words by Nanda, who had (already) been subjected to (similar) polite 
enquiries, Akrura forgot the fatigue of his journey. (43)

Thus ends the thirty-eighth discourse entitled "Akrira's arrival (in Vraja)" in the first 
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

312 ch Tea aN SEAT:

Departure of Sri Krsna and Balarama for Mathura 
Ay SAA 
elas: wis cagnenitentisa: | Oe WAAL Mal Ui aS Rg tk 
feaena ana yan oifeati ata da usa fe avofa fest! 2 | 
WAR FA war sas: | ae ad Hae wesrafsetiiay| y 1

Sri Suka began again : Having been comfortably seated on a couch and greatly 
honoured by Balarama and Sri Krsna, Akrura actually realized all the aspirations that he 
had entertained on his way (to Vraja). (1) What remains unattainable when the Lord. 
who is the Abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) is pleased ? Nevertheless 
those exclusively devoted to Him, O king, seek nothing as a matter of fact. (2) Having 
finished His supper, Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) enquired (of Akrura) about 
the conduct of Kamsa towards His kinsmen and what else was sought to be done by

Him. (3) ; 
HATTA TAA 
did aramid: afd Mea sre a: 1 arta SA AaAATAAM AAT | 
fa Aa: Gals GS WM Homa he Ateag AM Aes AI & | 
sat sTeeye ak fiatdisadal: aed: GAA sedis aat: 1 & | 
fsa aalt AMI Aa a: UA Hie Gant ava Aa AAPTHAHNIAL | © | 
The glorious Lord said : O dear uncle, O gentle one, | hope you came Safely (all the 
way). May all be well with you ! | believe no outrage has been perpetrated (by the tyrant 
Kamsa) against your friends, your kinsmen and other relations and good health 
.is enjoyed by them all. (4) So long as Karhnsa—who, though passing by the name of 
my maternal uncle, is a (veritable) pestilence to my family—is thriving, O dear uncle, 
what good indeed is our asking about the welfare of our kinsmen and their progeny ? (5) 
Oh, (how) great has been the suffering of our noble parents for our sake; (for) it was due 
to us that the death of their (other) sons took place and it was on account of us that 
bondage was accepted by them. (6) Luckily (enough) has the sight of our kinsmen in 
yourself, O gentle one, been vouchsafed today to us, by whom it was (long) coveted. 
(Now) the motive of your visit (to Vraja), O dear uncle ! may (kindly) be communicated 
(to us). (7) : 
My SaTI 
Usl Wadi ad ava Aa: latest Gay ageaaeler < | 
ade dei at qd: asad: Bala ARC esse |e | 
aR: PM AG wai sea Ad foat uwanssfes fas: 1201 
THO, PAtleata, BIST Welt AE: | sarah Weed Beara wees az1ee 
aR: St Ae arena qad Tar! sea: que ud aha sagen: fea | 
USAT AM AAMT: KPiaHe 122!

Sri Suka continued : Questioned by the Lord (as aforesaid), Akriira (a scion of Madhu) 
related (to Him) everything, viz., the inveteracy of Karnsa's enmity to the Yadus and his 
attempt to kill Vasudeva, (also) with what message and for what purpose Akrira himself had 
been sent by Kamsa as his emissary and what was communicated to him by Narada 
regarding His having been born of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva). (8-9) Sri Krsna and Bala, the 
slayer of hostile warriors heartily laughed to hear the message of Akrira and apprised Their 
father, Nanda, of the king's command. (10) Nanda too duly instructed the Gopas (as 
follows):— “Let all the yield of the cows (in the shape of milk, curds and clarified butter) be 
collected. (Also) take (with you) presents (of various kinds) and let bullock-carts be go! 
ready.(11) We shall proceed tomorrow to Mathura (the city founded by the demon Madhu) 
and (on arriving there) shall present to the king delicious substances (such as milk, curds and

hee) and witness the grand festival (of a bow-sacrifice). | hear the people of the (entire) 
kingdom (of Mathura) are going (there)." Nanda, the chief of the Gopas, caused this to be 
proclaimed by the watchman all over his Vraja. (12)

Tega | saygqeiia yeriwanet gt AqHt semMTi231 
alisricpdeda aaa isa: | AAEM MATT TIS 12% 
COTES | Teas: | AMAA Claes Wa Sa ieal 
ACURA: Une: | eegafsame fie: wage: faa: 1261 
Tifa Yqotedt cast fererernacteaq steam aaiiet serrata aie 
free Gere stat fateentatt: | Waa: BEA: shapers: 1221 
The cowherd women, of whom so much has been said before, were sore distressed to 
hear at that time of Akrura having arrived in Vraja to take Balarama and Sri Krsna to the 
capital. (13) Some had the splendour of their countenance marred by the hot breaths 
proceeding from the agony caused by that news; others found their scarfs and bangles 
slipping off and their (braid-knots) loosened. (14) (Still) others, who had the functions of all 
their senses suspended by concentrated thought of Sri Krsna, had no consciousness left of 
their physical body, as though they had risen to the realm of the Spirit. (15) Other (cowherd) 
women fainted as they recalled the talks of Sri Krsna (a scion of Stra), which touched (the 
very chords of) their heart and consisted of wonderful expressions and were uttered with 
smiles full of love. (16) Thinking of the most graceful gait and movements, glances 
accompanied by loving smiles, jokes that dissipated grief and the extraordinary exploits of 
Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), the Gopis—who were terror-stricken and agitated by 
the (very) thought of the (impending) separation (from Sri Krsna), met together in groups and 
feelingly talked to one another the whole night (as follows) with tears on their faces and their 
mind absorbed in Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord). (17-18) 
Ml Hz: 
stat fasta A wfc eat Paka doa yor fea: | 
digtadatd faqiguuric famtfsd dsteneipd ae ee 
Ra 8 86osexaifadgrorgd «= grace Gena | 
Senmaledesaat «0h Ue, A HAA NRO 
peepee «OC CAfe «aA ATTA | 
asshaoetaes wader ad vega: 1221 
The Gopis said : O creator, there is no (trace of) compassion anywhere in you since, 
having united embodied souls through friendly behaviour and affection, you disunite them 
Even when they have not yet (fully) realized their ambition. Your capricious acts are as 
aimless as the movements ofa babe. (19) Having (once) revealed (tous) the face of SriKrsna 
(the Bestower of Liberation) with lovely cheeks and a prominent nose, (nay,) overhung by 
dark curly locks and charming with a gentle smile that dispels (all) grief, you are screening 
it from our view. This act of yours is far from good. (20) You are cruel indeed in that under

the appellation of Akrira (not cruel) you are like an ignorant person taking away (from us) 
the eye, given by yourself, with which we witnessed all your creative skill (concentrated) in

a single limb of Sri Krsna (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) ! (21) 
q wag: aumgeilee iad 4 pM ad

A Ae

aa wad wheter: wa aya: genfeat gan

a: alas Wa awed: Werdisichlmdarary 123 |

aeat decd agnauifucidiafean: was aA

ea Ud: Saaedsaer sre: aoothafawasaz ex

TI ya dA aa Basa aanedisrenqwrercade |

Weleda: sau qure seid A cleat cantar 24

Alas !| the Darling of Nanda (Himself) whose friendship is (but) momentary, and who is

fond of the new, does not even gaze on us, who have been enslaved by the spell cast by 
Himself and who directly sought His service renouncing our homes, relations, sons and 
husbands! (22) Happy will be the dawn following this night for the ladies of the city (of 
Mathura); (nay,) their aspirations have been surely realized; (for) they will fondly gaze on the 
countenance—full of nectarean smiles exhibited by the corners of eyes—of Sri Krsna (the 
Lord of Vraja), even as He fearlessly enters the city. (23) How, then, will Sri Krsna (the 
Bestower of Liberation) return to us, helpless rustic women—even though He has got other 
relations (too in Vraja), and although He is self-possessed—when His mind is captivated by 
the utterances, sweet as honey, of those ladies (of Mathura), and remains deluded by their 
bashful smiles and amorous glances ? (24) Today surely a grand feast awaits (in Mathura) 
the eyes of the Dasarhas, the Bhojas, the Andhakas, the Vrsnis and the Satvatas—who will 
behold Sri Krsna (the Son of YaSoda, nicknamed as Devaki), the Spouse of Sri (the goddess 
of beauty and prosperity) and the (one) Abode of (all) excellences—as well as to the eyes 
of those that will see Him (driving) on the road (to Mathura). (25)

Hdigeeneeura «STE (§“ (iC SMTA TET: | 
aster dead wa aio Aeit unmeds: 1261 
sages «waht we aradt a award adel: | 
To «sit: raced ed a asa sfanoited 1201 
Farnam: ware aed fa asakern aeaqgarie: | 
Faraee areal gease, cat faeafaddltetcary 1 2 | 
ARTA Teo fenct ca AAS eae aA eTO NT ITA 
Ale: GA A: gore atorar fart ct Mal: Het ahaa AM Sea 128 | 
aise: Fa aA: wil Ada, wee | 
aul aur adnate fad faoreqqd 4 Het waA 1301 
Akrura’ (one who is not cruel) should not have been the name of such a ruthless fellow 
who is extremely hard-hearted in that he is going to take Sri Krsna (who is dearer than life) 
beyond the familiar path, not caring to comfort us (the womenfolk), sore distressed as We 
are.(26) Sri Krsna (whose mind is altogether devoid of the moisture of love) is (already) 
comfortably seated in the chariot and, following Him, these arrogant Gopas in their bullock- 
carts are urging Akrura to make haste. (On top of it) the aged ones have grown indifferent 
(do not interfere). And Fate too is working against us today ! (27) Let us politely approach 
Sri Krsna (a scion of Madhu) and stop Him. What harm can the elders of the race or our

relations do to us, who stand deprived by Providence of Sri Krsna's company—which could 
not be easily forgone even for half asecond—and are (so) distressed in mind ? (28) How shall

eh nM oe.

Dis. 39 ] BOOK TEN 267

we, O cowherd women, be able in fact to get over the anguish of separation—which is so 
difficult to overcome—without Him in whose company a number of nights were spent by us 
as an instant in the Rasa assembly enlivened by His winsome smiles, charming whispers, 
playful glances and embraces, all of which were inspired by His love ? (29) How can we really 
survive without Him who—while entering Vraja at the close of the day, accompanied by 
Balarama (who is possessed of infinite strength) and surrounded by cowherd boys and 
playing on the flute, His curly locks and wreaths of flowers covered all over with the dust 
raised by the hoofs of the cows—used to captivate our mind with His sidelong glances full

wa gam fea yet asia: = qpenfaearan: |

fagea ws SSE: Het fee alee oreaf ise! 
watorTraa Vordaraed afadda | stpislearara «= aettonfeat TA 132 | 
THORS | AGEN: )«=—|-ehe Re: | BteTaaTA QR Har Wasa 133 | 
Mags cad Hema: isenest wad: HUAMaACAL 1 3X | 
area | aetdiiefet WII AeMa: | AiaaaTa aN sta ates: 1341 
Tadd 9 chdalaq We We Alsen seiataeferdn: 1361 
a7 In 8 fRagqguifaatatradt 1 fasten sett fata: freeiea 13001

Sri Suka went on: Talking (to one another) in this strain and sore afflicted at the thought 
of separation, the women of Vraja—whose mind was deeply attached to Sri Krsna—cried 
loudly, casting all bashfulness to the winds, “O Protector of cows, O Krsna (who was tied at 
the waist with a string by mother Yasoda), O Scion of Madhu !" (31) In spite of the womenfolk 
(of Vraja) wailing as aforesaid, now that the sun had risen, Akrura—who had (just) finished 
his (Sandhya) prayers to the sun-god and other devotions—presently drove his chariot (in 
the direction of Mathura). (32) The Gopas headed by Nanda thereupon closely followed him 
in their bullock-carts taking (with them) abundant presents including pitchers full of the yield 
of cows (in the shape of milk, curds and ghee). (33) The cowherd women too followed their 
beloved Sri Krsna (to a short distance) and delighted (to some extent by His turning round 
and casting loving glances at them) they paused (awhile) awaiting the Lord's message in 
reply to theirs (which had evidently been sent by them through some special messen- 
ger).(34) Observing them suffering agony as aforesaid at His departure, Sri Krsna (the 
foremost of the Yadus) comforted them with messages full of love, sent through a 
messenger, saying "I shall come (back)!" (35) As long as the flag (of Sri Krsna's chariot) was 
visible and so long as the dust raised by the chariot continued to be seen, the Gopis—who 
had sent their mind after the Lord—were seen (standing) like so many painted figures. (36) 
Hopeless of Govinda's return, they (all) retraced their steps and, rid of grief (by His loving 
ees) passed their days and nights celebrating in songs the pastimes of their beloved

Ord. (37)

waa wad wap rw aaa aiferchrrnerit13¢1 
wage UMta dhe Ws Afon| qaaueqiad erat «= Tafa 1321 
apg «fase a wha ane gaara aM faleacrerd I¥ol 
frase aha Bis TO WEI GAT Ma SEIS TAM UMA se 
at ozwaeh omafe §qararenge®: | aie Rad ran A At BT STS A: SRI

2 
a Reds ' 
ess.

ant a vagal gta 8:1 ae at at ger fe aloes dat: 1s3 1 
gaat dissed, WAAR fegarorracdwaticea: xX 
waar wa deamnonferi ders fraadd ag: daftra Iu) 
qa urea «diacnilaareea yes Gust Sid UaIoaTeclaory 1g 
areseaaaesi PRAIA! Gy AeeHUt | FeHUOTSUTET vio | 
Fora taryst Ggrenwebrer argqaus Faaht aferarsatary xc 
Fechlede mM Urns ATA, | Aesth AAG TOATA 1S | 
Real ROU ECE IHC ICL ESL tite | Aa ERAP ESM wae, 1ko | 
quelenturstctentlehechige: | HiSAaae gaa LpuSsey: 1GQ I 
SAH 89 Ualeet | AIGSNTETEN| Sacdaaed wished Sr 142 | 
Gera: 9 Ue: §« | UtehTfef a: | Gtaisielesteatvgy festa: 143 1

BAER EEE CCESIMIC Caste qa «= gerreaderfirerenren fa: 1G 
fren gsan Frat aren sitet deaeatstar | faeranfaeren set Aaa a Pasay 14 |

(On this side) the Lord, for His part, safely reached (about noon) with Balarama and 
Akrura, O protector of men, (the bank of) the Kalindi, that washes off (all) sin, in His chariot, 
swift as wind. (38) Washing there His hands and feet etc., and drinking of its sweet water 
green as an emerald, He went near a cluster of trees (where the chariot was made to stand) 
and got into the chariot alongwith Balarama. (39) Helping the two Brothers to get into the 
chariot and taking leave of Them, Akrura returned (for his midday devotions) to the pool 
(known by the name of Ananta-Tirtha or Brahmahrada) in the Yamuna and performed his 
ablutions with due ceremony. (40) Plunging in that water and muttering the (holy) Gayatri- 
Manira (the essence of the eternal Veda), Akrira beheld (in the water) the same Balarama 
and Sri Krsna seated together. (41) (He said to Himself), "How can the two Sons of 
Anakadundubhi, who are seated in the chariot, be here ? In that case (if they are really here), 
they should not be in the chariot." Saying so he emerged from the water and perceived the 
two Brothers seated even there (in the chariot) as heretofore. He (therefore) took a plunge 
again saying (to himself), "Is my having seen Them in the water false?" (42-48) This time he 
Saw in that very water, being glorified by Siddhas, Caranas, Gandharvas and Asuras with 
bent heads, the thousand-headed god Sesa (the lord of serpents) —with his thousand hoods 
protected by (the same number of) diadems—clad in blue (silk), (himself) white as a lotus 
fibre and rooted (there) like Mount Kailasa (the silvery mountain) with its (golden) peaks 
(corresponding to the diadems of Sesa). (44-45) He (further) beheld on the coils of the 
serpent-god Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), dark-brown as a cloud, clad in yellow silk, 
possessed of four arms and eyes reddish like lotus petals, and looking (very) serene. (46) 
He wore a lovely and cheerful countenance with winsome smiles and glances, shapely 
eyebrows, a prominent nose, beautiful ears, charming cheeks and ruddy lips. (47) He had 
pretty long and plump arms, high shoulders, a breast which is the abode of Sri, a conch- 
shaped neck, a deep navel and a belly shaped like a leaf (of the Indian fig tree) and marked 
with folds. (48) He had bulky buttocks and hips and a pair of thighs, tapering like the outer 
edge of the hand from the wrist to the root of the little finger, a pair of well-formed knees a5 
well as a pair of shapely shanks. (49) He had prominent ankles and was enveloped with rays 
of light radiating from the ruddy nails (of His toes) and had lotus-like feet charming with toes

pis. 40 ] BOOK TEN 269

and a pair of big toes tender as petals. (50) He shone resplendent with a diadem, bracelets 
and armlets set with most valuable gems, as wellas witha girdle, asacred thread, necklaces 
and pairs of anklets and ear-rings, and helda lotus (in one of His hands) andaconch, a discus 
and a mace (in the others). His breast was distinguished with a white curl of hair, the 
Kaustubha gem shining at His neck, and was adorned with a garland of sylvan flowers. (51-52) 
He was being glorified through praises expressive of divergent sentiments by attendants, the 
foremost of whom were Sunanda and Nanda (and who severally occupied the four quarters 
and the four intermediate points), the sage Sanaka and his three brothers (Sanandana, 
Sanatana and Sanatkumara, all of whom including Sanaka, were standing behind the Lord), 
the chiefs of gods, headed by Brahma and Lord Siva (all of whom occupied a position to His 
right), the nine foremost Brahmanas (Marici and others, who stood to His left), as well as by 
the foremost of the Lord's devotees of pure mind, such as Prahrada, Narada and the Vasu 
(Uparicara by name, allof whom stood in front of the Lord). (53-54) He was (also) waited upon 
(in living forms) by Sri (the goddess of beauty and good fortune), Pusti (the goddess presiding 
over nutrition), Saraswati (the goddess presiding over speech), Kanti (the goddess presiding 
over splendour), Kirti (the goddess presiding over glory), Tusti (the goddess presiding over 
contentment), Ila (goddess Earth), Urja (the goddess presiding over omnipotence), Vidya 
(the goddess presiding over spiritual enlightenment conducive to Liberation), Avidya (the 
goddess presiding over nescience, which binds the Jiva to mundane existence), Sakti (the 
foremost of all divine energies, going by the name of Hladini or the delighting potency) and 
Maya (the Cause of Vidya and Avidya both). (55)

faslet ya ict Wa GAA Aa: | CRE mach arcierest: 14 | 
fir wear Gas Urea: | Ura agiafea: cdtetfege: Wa: 1491 
ofa staearaa FE USS Glecral CAAA Yoleisetary Celanese: 133 | 
Extremely rejoiced to perceive the Lord and summoning his presence of mind, Akrura 
(who belonged to the Satvata clan) and was full of supreme devotion, greeted the Lord with

his head (bent low), and with joined palms anda concentrated mind slowly proceeded to extol 
the Lord in a voice choked with emotion, his hair standing on end and his mind and eyes

moistened with love. (56-57)

Thus ends the thirty-ninth discourse forming part of the story of Akrura 's withdrawal 
(to Mathura), in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PTET 
(ISS I OD

31M Acalhanseara:

Discourse XL

Akrura's eulogy (of the Lord) 
ARK SAA 
AdSGaAS aihaweded ATAU Yoana | 
aarfasreraarene «oo senssrredta, ad UT eH 1k

Waals: uaa: wuifedersitena Stesxartar |

adkerat faamgs ad & dae was yA: 1 2 1

3S wea faqueast aeteaisaedat Weld: |

smisqae: FU Wet Wi W aq A A BS! 3 | 
at atl asreiel Fees arene afd a asad a rere: | x | 
sen a fader fa al a Acer fests! Ast faddasa faeces 1G | 
Th Mikaeanni dae wd: la wee aha wf & 1 
3 a deem fate alata aurea a agiaghiong| © | 
wma faa unio faa sgrrdfatet 9 Ta AUT Ic 
wd We ata wl wdeandamiaseeadim aeaafia: ste | 
AMEIa A: Ustegke: siti fasta ada: fae] carat Wats: 1201

Akrira prayed : | bowto You, Lord Narayana, the most ancient and undecaying Person, 
the Cause of all causes (the Mahat-tattva and so on), from the lotus bud sprung from whose 
navel emerged Brahma, from whom evolved this creation (both animate and inanimate)! (1) 
Whatever causes there are, viz., the earth, water, fire, the air, ether and its cause (Ahankara), 
the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), Prakrti (primordial Matter) as well as 
its Cause (the Spirit), the mind, the Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs 
of action), the objects of all the (five) senses as well as the deities (presiding over them) have 
all evolved from Your (divine) Person.(2) (All) these (causes), Prakrti and so on, which are 
(objectively) perceived, fail to know Your essential character because of their being material 
(other than the Spirit); while You are the Spirit. The celebrated Brahma (too) who is 
conditioned by the modes of Prakrti, is unable to know Your reality, which lies beyond the 
three Gunas. (3) (Yet) pious Yogis (those given to contemplation) directly worship (and 
thereby seek to attain) You as indwelling the (diverse) limbs of the body (the eye, the heart 
and so on), (nay,) informing all material bodies and presiding over the bodies of the (various) 
gods, the Inner Controller and Ruler of the universe. (4) Some Brahmanas given to sacrificial 
performance worship You alone under the name of gods invested with different forms, 
through extensive sacrifices as revealed by the three Vedas (Rk, Yajus and Sama). (5) Some 
men of wisdom, who have developed dispassion, worship You, the embodiment of (pure) 
consciousness, through sacrifice in the form of spiritual enlightenment (consisting of 
absorption in to the Self), renouncing all actions (in the form of worldly as well as religious 
duties). (6) And, having consecrated themselves (through initiation in the various forms of 
worship), and (fully) absorbed in You, others worship You in a plurality of forms (viZ., 
Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha) or in one form (that of Narayana) 
according to the procedure taught by Yourself (in Tantric works such as the Paficaratra). (7) 
Others (the votaries of Lord Siva) duly worship You alone in the form of Siva along the lines 
recommended by Siva (Himself), (of course,) differing in detail according to the teachings of 
a plurality of teachers, O almighty Lord ! (8) Even those who are devoted to other (minor) 
deities, although they look upon those gods as other than You, O Lord, all worship You alone, 
the almighty God representing all the gods (in Your Person). (9) (Just) as rivers having their 
source in a mountain and made full by the god of rain (and branching forth into so many

streams), O Lord, find their way into the ocean from all sides, so do all paths ultimately lead 
to You alone. (10)

str tr BB SEM ERE SO RE Re Me Me We Me eRe Me Re MBER BRE Be Me MERE BE He Me MERA BREA Me He He Be Re Be eRe Re Be Bete Re Ae He Wee Oe te Be He Re he Re Me RH HE A

aa «wea sit vac: Meperton: 1 aq fe Meat: Mal stisereaed: 1221 
C4 weiscafarmgea water adit a arfart 
TWUMIaetsaafeerar ord: Tadd Casita 1221 
afya dsatrefitect gf ad ariel fea: Aft: | 
at: t ytsrea areatsuter: plated Worse Wenfeady 1231 
waifor -qaiteera: farteet fer: urenferreanf Asse | 
Raat wet 6oouitigg «6s afeeran—C iss i TAT 1 x 
SAS Yet sear cleat: Aaet agiaage: | 
am We Ued Wetaisaget at ase AAA eu!

aa ate war mise fait fi case olen Wel Maha a Gar: 1261

qa: OTe «Neate «algal ana Aachen 1201

spun «= ad GCC GCAO i feeefaenta «=: «2S Geer 121

aH WU wa aadadesci ane Wala Walideta 10!

waa aed aa: agora wiyeetega eaal add AA: 1281

7a 6a 6 6 OCmemanifA i memaamed AME | cfeHeftet 1221

Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are the (three) modes of Your (own) Prakrti (energy). Hence 
those endowed with a material body—from inanimate creatures (trees etc.) to Brahma (the 
creator)—(ultimately) enter into them (and they into Prakrti, the latter merging in You. In this 
way all the gods finally enter into You). (11) (My) salutation be to You, whose mind is 
unattached, identified as You are with all and the witness of all minds ! This stream of the 
(three) Gunas (in the form of the cycle of birth and death), brought about by Avidya (an energy 
of Yours that veils one's essential character), operates (only) on those that are identified with 
a celestial, human or sub-human form. (12) Fire has been conceived (by Your worshippers 
for the purpose of meditation) to be Your mouth, the earth as Your feet, the sun as Your eye, 
the sky as Your navel, and the quarters as Your ears, the highest heaven (the abode of 
Brahma) as the top part of Your head, the chiefs of gods (Indra and others) as Your arms, 
the oceans as Your abdomen and the air as Your life-breath and strength. (13) Trees and 
annual plants are looked upon as the hair on Your body, clouds as Your locks, the mountains 
as the bones andnails of Your transcendent Self, day and night as the twinkling of Your eyes, 
Brahma (the lord of creation) as Your membrum virile and rainfall as Your semen. (14) 
Conceived in You, the perfect and imperishable person, who can (only) be hinted at by the 
mind, the (numberless) universes—teeming with innumerable Jivas (embodied beings) — 
with their guardians move about like the eggs of tiny aquatic creatures in water or even like 
the (tiny) insects in (the interior of) an Udumbarea fruit. (15) With their grief dispelled by the 
thought of the several forms You assume (from time to time) for the sake of sport, people sing

our glory with delight. (16) Hail to You, who appeared as the divine Fish from a definite 
Motive and roamed through the ocean that deluged the world at the time of universal 
dissolution. Salutation to You, the Slayer of (the demons) Madhu and Kaitabha in the person 
Of Hayagriva (the Lord manifested with the head and neck of a horse). (17) Hail to You as 
the gigantic Tortoise that supported Mount Mandara (on His back). Salutation to You in the 
form of the divine Boar that sported (in the ocean) for lifting up the earth. (18) Hail to You in

23,

the form of a weird lion (half man and half lion), O Dispeller of the fears of the righteous! 
Salutation to You, again, as the divine Dwarf, who covered (all) the three worlds in one 
stride.(19) Hail to You in the form of Parasurama (the Lord of the Bhrgus), who cut down 
the forest of haughty Ksatriyas ! Salutation to You as Sri Rama (the Chief of the Raghus), 
who put an end to Ravana ! (20) Hail, hail to You, manifested in the (four divine) forms of 
Vasudeva (Sri Krsna), Sankarsana (Balarama), Pradyumna* (Sri Krsna's Son) and 
Aniruddha (Pradyumna's Son) ! Salutation to You, the Protector of the Satvatas. (21) Hail 
to You as Lord Buddha, who was (altogether) faultless (though His gospel ran counter to the 
teachings of the Vedas) and who deluded the Daityas and the Danavas (by preaching an anti- 
Vedic doctrine) ! Salutation to You in the form of Lord Kalki, (who is going to appear towards 
the end of Kaliyuga as) the Destroyer of Ksatriyas, who will have well-nigh been reduced to 
the position of Mlecchas ! T (22)

qMasiawinisd Aled Asti st AAC wed Hdadig 1231

ar AMAR aasANey | wa Tarenedy Ye: Tafsir fast ix

AMAIA: SY, farted | SERMTAaSt FS ISSA: FTA 1 24

AMG ss feat Sitesa dand: 1 omafa qugent a aga WWeqE: 1261

aetese «UU: «9 aeeted «wa: tg 869 rferferenatfgamrortae: 1201

ASé AqSHUIAISeaaAa AM Ade Yaeqre Sa At | 
Ga wae ale Wawnuatiaazery Beuraqa Ala: MIL 12C! 
at fagrara AaIaaeda | THAI ACVUSTAMha 12 I 
Tet aed way aight AA soe ue AT WA 1301 
sit Aad AM WAS Seda Ca Yaltispeaa AanaNseara: 10 |

O Lord, infatuated by Your Maya (deluding potency) and (consequently) clinging to the 
body and those connected with it (which are all devoid of reality) as the very self and as one's 
own (respectively), this (entire) world of living beings is made to revolve in the maze of 
Karma.(23) | too revolve in the domain of the body, offspring, homestead, wife, wealth, 
relations and so on—which are all (false) like a dream—thinking them to be real, a fool that 
lam, O almighty Lord ! (24) Holding as a matter of fact a contrary view with regard to the 
transient and to that which is not the Self as well as about that which is rooted in sorrow (or 
in other words mistaking that which is transient to be eternal, that which is not the self as one’s 
own self and that which is full of sorrow as an embodiment of joy) and taking delight in pairs 
of opposites | am unable to know You, whoare dear to me, enveloped as|am in (the darkness 
of) ignorance. (25) (Even) as an ignorant person would actually run after a mirage, 
abandoning water screened by its own products (viz., duck-weeds and other aquatic plants), 
so have | turned my face towards the body etc., leaving You. (26) Possessed of a poor 
understanding (clouded by an appetite for sensuous pleasures), | am not able to restrain my

mind, agitated as itis by cravings and activities (of various kinds) and dragged here and there 
by the turbulent senses. (27) As such | have sought as my refuge Your feet, which are (SO)

* Even though Pradyumna and Aniruddha were not yet born, Akrira refers here to Their eternal forms which are only 
brought to light during Their descent in the world of matter. 
T A Mleccha has been characterized by Baudhayana, a Hindu law-giver, as follows:— 
Tae ay fres ag weadietefadaa mes safaetean 
“He who eats beef and indulges in self-contradictory statements, and is devoid of righteousness and purity of conduct 
is called a Mleccha.”

ES AT

Dis. 41 ] BOOK TEN 273

difficult of access to the unrighteous. This too | think is possible (only) with Your grace; (for) 
devotion to You comes through the service of holy men (only) when the end of (the cycle of) 
birth and death for a man draws near, O Lord with a lotus sprung from Your navel ! (28) Hail 
to You who are all perfect and possessed of endless potencies, are invested with a body 
consisting of (pure) consciousness, the Source of all knowledge and the Ruler of all those 
(viz., the Time-Spirit, Karma, nature and so on) that control (the destiny of) the Jiva ! (29) 
Salutation to You, the Deity presiding over the intellect (in the form of Vasudeva), the abode 
of all created beings (in the form of Lord Sankarsana, the Deity presiding over the ego-sense, 
which is the sustainer of all living creation)! Hail to You, O Ruler of the senses in the forms 
of Pradyumna and Aniruddha (the deities presiding over reason and the mind respectively)! 
(Pray,) protect me, fallen at Your feet, O Lord ! (30)

Thus ends the fortieth discourse entitled "Akrira's Eulogy (of the Lord)" 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BI NcHaca aN Sea:

Discourse XLI

Entry into Mathura (of Sri Krsna and Balarama)

MIG SAT 
Wada Wa aif ee AG: | Ya: AAS HOM Ael Aleaftarera: | ge | 
asta arated ated Sew Wat: | Heal Maza Ga fafa tawarmad | 2 | 
aaypesgiion: fe a eeftargay! yt faaia dat a den al mae | 2 |

Sri Suka began again : Having shown (to Akrura) His (Narayana’s) form under water, 
Lord Sri Krsna withdrew it again, (even) while he was eulogizing Him, (just) as an actor would 
wind up his part. (1) Perceiving the vision withdrawn and emerging from the water, Akrura 
also hurriedly finished all his unavoidable routine of devotions, and returned wonder-struck 
to the chariot. (2) Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the senses) asked him, "What wonder did you see 
(just) now on earth, in the heavens or in the water (of the Yamuna)? (From your moist and 
blooming eyes and cheerful countenance etc.), we conclude you to have witnessed

something unusual. (3) 
Sg SATA 
Seite alata amt faafa Al Se | wafa faa aa fe Ases fauzad: 1 x 1 
zargmft watfn qt feat at seit arama wert fee gElrErgay | & | 
See desma wee Mreitga: | aqua UH Hw aa feet 1 & | 
af mesa USE wade: lagetadt ater sitet gfS 3 aeg: | 9 | 
Wag aAstlnaen aMaTeANSaAM: | AAATATATEL WelarasaaRAr 1s | 
a eaale wari soda: erat fort urfot wierd seahra | < |

qa Maat wea: wt yeniad flaggers ad zeae qa 1R01

Akrura replied : "Whatever wonders there are on this earth, in the firmament or in water 
exist in You (alone), who ensoul the universe. What wonder can, therefore, remain unseen 
by me, when | am directly looking at You ? (4) When | am gazing on Yourself, in whom all 
marvels exist, O infinite Lord, what miracle could have been seen by me (elsewhere, viz..,) 
on this earth, in the sky or in water ?" (5) Observing thus, Akrura (the son of Gandini* ) drove 
his chariot and brought Balarama and Sri Krsna to Mathura at the decline of day. (6) People 
from the country, O king, who flocked at every stage on the road, felt delighted to behold the 
two Sons of Vasudeva and could not withdraw their eyes (from Them). (7) Meanwhile the 
people of Vraja, headed by Nanda, the chief of the cowherds, (who had left the main road 
when they found Akrira tarrying on the bank of the Yamuna, and taken a shorter route) 
reacheda garden inthe precincts of the city inadvance and stood waiting (there for Balarama 
and Sri Krsna). (8) Having joined them, Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the universe) clasped 
with His own hand the hand of Akrdra, who stood bent low with reverence, and spoke to him 
as though laughing heartily :—(9)"Enter you the city in advance with the chariot and return 
home. We, however, shall presently take down our things here and having rested awhile shall 
then visit the city.” (10)

SGX SATA 
We waa ved: weet AQ Bl Gp Alea Al AA eh A Wma 1221 
Ts AA Ne A: HAA HAM | Ae: Aor: Peles ETT 1221 
Wife UWesta Wer at yea asteaaqea faa: araqa: Wu: 1231 
seer steer tadaqe ot waht acniaat qd at iext 
STAM SSHstaaicoihMoaasaa | RAAT A: Ba: Sala: GANAS: 1AeI- 
caca TATA WUatavichidd | AearaReteh ARTA AMIS AIL!

Akrura submitted : Bereft of You both | shall not enter Mathura, O Lord ! You ought not 
to abandon me, Your devotee, my master, (so) fond of Your votaries. (11) Come, let us (all) 
go (together). (Pray,) grace our house, O Lord, who are above sense-perception, with the 
presence of its master (in You), visiting it alongwith Balarama (Your elder Brother) as well 
as with Your near and dear ones and (other) cowherds, O best Friend ! (12) (Please) sanctify 
our house, householders as we are, with the dust of Your feet. With the water washing Your. 
feet (and collected in a basin in one’s house or flowing in the form of the holy Ganga) the 
manes as well as the gods including the fire-god get eternally propitiated (if it is offered to 
them by way of Tarpana). (13) (Nay,) by washing both Your feet (the celebrated demon king) 
Bali not only became worthy of (sacred) renown and great (in point of merits) but (also) 
attained incomparable affluence and power as well as the goal which is reached by those 
exclusively devoted to You. (14) The waters that washed Your feet (when You measured the 
earth and heaven in a couple of strides, and which flowed in the form of the holy Ganga) and 
were (thus) hallowed (beyond all measure) sanctified all the three worlds (through which the 
Ganga flows), the (great) Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe) bore+ them on His head 
and the (famous) sons of Sagara ascended to heaven (by contact of their remains with those 
Sacred waters). (15) (My) salutation be to You, O Lord of the universe, adored (even) by the 
gods, the hearing and recital of whose praises brings (supreme) merit, O jewel among the

ee 
* The name of Akrura’s mother.

+ Vide IX. ix. 9.

Dis. 41 ] BOOK TEN 275

we te O08 Re WOME He He Ve Me He He He He Ve

yadus, O Narayana of excellent renown ! (16)

SM TTATATA 
Tae adit Tengartantad: | decane eat fade: yefsraieet

The glorious Lord Said : Accompanied by My elder brother, | shall visit your house (only) 
when | have slain Kamsa (the enemy of Yadu's race), and bring delight to My (other) relations

(as well). (17) 
Hyp Sara 
wget wT AsEt fart sai git sfae: cera amide ye aatiec 
Aa Wa AT: Ugiontad: | aeRt wife wWafsea: uftarfea: 1291 
aazl a BSCE RU EE AEY TeSAHATCARUM |

Gah eATOTA rere TATA LIAISE 122 |

STU prra ereraat ate: sqaatara toot: ACC: |

agarays: wad: Regdseyet alge: 1231

Sri Suka continued : Thus spoken to by the Lord, the aforesaid Akrira entered the city

like one sad at heart and, having apprised Kamsa of what he had done, returned home. (18) 
Accompanied by Sankarsana (Balarama) and surrounded by the (other) cowherds, Lord Sri 
Krsna, who was eager to have a look at the city, fearlessly entered Mathura the next 
afternoon. (19) (Presently) He saw the city with high gateways (in its fortification wall) and 
portals (of its houses), made of crystal and fitted with huge doors of gold and embellished 
with ornamental arches—also of gold—over them. It had granaries etc., of copper and brass, 
had been rendered difficult of access by a moat and was adorned with gardens and delightful 
parks. (20) It was (further) graced with sheds of gold erected on the cross roads, mansions 
and rest-houses also of gold, halls for the meeting together of individuals following a 
Particular trade and other (public) buildings, and was resonant with the noise of pigeons and 
Peacocks perched on small wooden sheds erected in front of houses, platforms under them 
air-holes and pavements, (all) inlaid with cat's-eyes, diamonds, crystals, sapphires, corals, 
Pearls and emeralds. Its roads, market-places, streets and quadrangles were profusely 
Sprinkled with water and it was strewn with flowers, sprouts (of barley), parched paddy and 
Nce-grains. (21-22) The entrances of its houses were artistically adorned (on both sides) with 
a pitcher full of water and sprinkled with curds and sandal-paste, (nay,) surrounded with rows 
of flowers and crowned with rows of lights, with (bunches of) leaves thrust into their mouth 
and strips of silk tied round their necks and with (trunks of) plantain, and areca-nut trees 
alongwith bunches of fruits fixed beside them and (festive) flags hoisted near them. (23)

; eiitqeaiter: fat waiitr 9 darengitteqan: 121 
as fade 9 fae aa | ANGeUNT: |

pacar Aeaat fedt aU) wR |

mu sera fara sad sores raz: 1261

Tifa arearafaraerers: TIEUSloleadiaarehs: |

STAM «sass «ee | Seta anfer_ 1 2c 
TaeRretec: Wa eEeeTErge: |sraada aaa: sel aerhaal 12¢1 
aed: eda: NNW: idem: wafedret at fea: 1301 
Sq: UI sal Mere: fea wedi at Meaqaeaha «| Ament 132

Eager to have a look at the two Sons of Vasudeva— who had duly entered the city by 
the main road and were surrounded by Their companions—the women of the city hurriedly 
came together (at every stage) and climbed up the mansions (lining the road), O protector 
of men ! (24) Some ran with their garments and jewels wrongly placed, while others came 
out forgetting one of the ornaments worn in pairs. Some left with ornaments (only) on one 
ear and with anklet only on one ankle, while others painted only one of their eyes (with 
collyrium), omitting (in their hurry) to paint the other. (25) Full of joy some, who were taking 
their meal, went away leaving it; others,who were being smeared with oil, came away without 
taking their bath. Some, who were lying asleep, sprang on their feet as soon as they heard 
the noise (of the spectators at Their arrival); while mothers, who were fondly suckling their 
babe, sailied forth leaving the child (crying). (26) Possessed of the gait of a lordly elephant 
in rut, Sri Krsna (of lotus-like eyes) captivated their mind by His smiles and glances full of 
charming sport, providing a feast to their eyes by (the sight of) His (divine) personality, the 
delight of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity). (27) Beholding Him, who had already 
been heard of (by them) many a time (before), and feeling honoured by being sprinkled with 
the nectar of His penetrating glances and unreserved smiles, the women of Mathura, whose 
mind had already taken wings after Him, (mentally) embraced that Embodiment of Bliss— 
now that He had been ushered into their mind through (the gateway of) their eyes—thrilling 
all over (with joy), and shed their agony (of separation from Him), which knew no bounds, 
O queller of your foes (in the shape of lust and so on)! (28) Standing on the top of mansions, 
their lotus-like faces blooming with delight, the women covered Bala and Sri Krsna (the Ruler 
even of Brahma and Lord Siva) with showers of flowers (which embodied as it were their 
affectionate feelings towards the two Brothers). (29) At every step overjoyed Brahmanas 
worshipped the two Brothers with curds and unbroken grains of rice (with which they adorned 
Their foreheads as a mark of auspiciousness), garlands and perfumes (of various kinds), 
offerings (in the shape of sweets, fruits etc.) as well as with vessels full of water (for washing 
Their hands and feet with). (0) The women of the city said (to one another), "Oh, what great 
austerities did the cowherd women (of Vraja) perform, by virtue of which they actually behold 
without interruption the two Brothers who afford great delight to the human world ?" (31)

Wi pissed «= Wqehnt NS: | eprarad «araifa etaraeqht at 1321 
cee: ages AeA edt: | afer at Hal aq a Waa: 1331 
a aad amram ukyia ada: 1 ore ofa: ore wet uae: aede: 13! 
equrda areata «fret fiarent:iuftes fieqega 9 usecnvasicre 134!

pis. 41 J BOOK TEN a7

ararey Stfer Het sre ae fastiaeri aaha wea wate ed aeaenfr a 1961 
wa eee Sitdt eaentaa: | weet aeaur fr: HraTeadad_ 1 319 | 
qatar: Ae aa: aren fergea 41 eee: weet Art arate saeseqa: 13c! 
afuaissata aa sen: SA_NOTETaT | teToTTE Tray fergea yfa saree 13 |

Seeing a certain washerman, who was (also) a dyer (of clothes), coming (that way), Sri 
Krsna (the elder Brother of Gada* ) asked of him the very best and well-washed clothes (in 
the following words)—(32) "(Please) give Us both—who deserve the gift (from you)— 
eminently suitable clothes, O dear one! The highest blessing will be yours if you make the 
gift: there is no doubt about it." (33) Solicited (thus) by the Lord, who was most perfect in 
everyway, that extremely arrogant servant of Karnsa (the king of Mathura), angrily and 
tauntingly replied (as follows):— (34) "Do you always wear such (excellent) clothes alone, 
roaming aS you do on the mountain and in the woods, that, transcending all bounds of 
propriety, you dare seek to have royal goods? (35) Get away soon, O foolish ones! You 
should never make such requests if you wish to survive. The king's men actually putin bonds, 
slay and strip the insolent of their possessions." (36) While he was thus bragging, Sri Krsna 
(the Son of Devaki) got angry and severed the head of the washerman from his body with 
His finger-tips (alone). (37) Leaving the bundles of clothes, all his servants ran away in every 
direction and Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) seized the clothes. (38) Putting on two pieces of 
cloth (each) of Their choice (one about the loins and the other across the shoulder 
baldricwise), Sri Krsna and Sankarsana distributed the rest among the (other) cowherds 
according to their liking, casting some to the ground. (39)

ae aa: staeatdeqencaad! fafarauisieatnctaen: Ivo} 
Meena sot fat: | aegd seas delta fade ise 
Ta Waal War Weld Beanies: | Sa a aa ah aoadadiisay 1s

Then, again, a weaver full of love adorned the two Brothers with ornaments of cloth of 
various colours in a befitting manner. (40) With Their decorations of divergent patterns Sri 
Krsna and Balarama shone brightly like a pair of young elephants, one dark and the other 
white, tastefully adorned on a festive occasion. (41) Pleased with the weaver, the Lord 
conferred on him (a title to final beatitude in the shape of) similarity of form with Himself as 
well as great prosperity, (physical) strength, authority, God-consciousness and acuteness

of the senses in the world. (42)

ad: Went wad ATEN Wa: ict ger a Agena 7AM Rea ya 12! 
warren owe 4 areatdenefa: gst awards 9 eraededs: ivi 
we a: eis wa ufad a HS WA fagqeatat va WI Gea aq ixu 
wax) fsa feast wea: Ht WI sadiuifase a aA Va axa 
a fe at fawn ae: geatsitarcemt: | aaa: addy Wd | aA ive 
aaa yet fend ararfer ari Gulsaare aa walsdfaqead ixci 
Sanwa ws aT Sane: area: WR: sHadater farfeaat at ise 
ae: wget std qrorest Berg waa SATE eeddtat | aL 1401

* The foremost of Sri Krsna's half-brothers (next to Balarama), who was born of Devaraksita—one of the thirteen wives 
Of Vasudeva and a sister of Devaki—who gave birth to nine sons, the eldest of whom was Gada. (Vide IX. xxiv. 52)

ast qasdat uk akasakacraht | amy UT Mele YAy A cat WAI YR)

sta aa at ara fea araaafaary i aera: cated Fstra PeTasT: 1 42 |

sft streMad AE UAE Aiea qeaeest Yat Yrs A UHacaitenseaa: | we 1

Next the two Brothers went to the house of the florist Sudama. Seeing Them he 
respectfully rose and bowed (to Them) with his head placed on the ground. (43) Fetching 
a seat as well as water to wash Their feet with, he offered worship to Them along 
with Their followers with water to wash Their hands with and other articles of worship 
including garlands, betel-leaves seasoned with catechu, lime and areca-nut parings, 
and sandal-paste. (44) He submitted, “Thanks to Your advent, O Lord, fruitful is our 
birth and hallowed is our race (today)! Indeed the manes, the gods and the Rsis (too) 
are pleased with me (for the same reason). (45) The ultimate Cause of the whole 
universe, You two, | understand, have appeared on this earth by Your own will for 
the protection as well as for the growth of the world. (46) Even though You love him 
(alone) who worships You, Your eye is never discriminating inasmuch as You are 
the disinterested friends,(nay,) the (very) Self of the universe and the same to all created 
beings. (47) As such be pleased to command me (Your servant) both of You what 
service can | render to You. Indeed this constitutes a great boon to a man that he 
is entrusted by You with some service.” (48) Saying so and divining the wishes of 
the Lord, O king of kings, Sudama, whose mind was full of joy, presented (to the 
two Brothers) garlands made of excellent flowers of superb fragrance. (49) Charmingly 
adorned with them along with Their followers and full of delight, Sri Krsna and Balarama, 
the Bestowers of boons, conferred boons on the florist, who stood bent low (with 
reverence) and sought Their protection. (50) He too asked for (the gift of) unflinching 
devotion to Sri Krsna alone, the Self of all, as well as friendship with His devotees 
and supreme (disinterested) compassion for (all) created beings. (51) Having thus 
conferred his desired boon as well as a fortune that would grow in the hands of his 
posterity, (physical) strength, longevity, glory and splendour, the Lord departed (from 
that place) along with Balarama (His elder Brother). (52)

Thus ends the forty-first discourse entitled “Entry (of Sri Krsna and Balarama) into Mathura’, 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31g feacanhtorseara:

Discourse XLII

A description of the amphitheatre for wrestlers (set up by Karmsa) 
aa ast UsMy mee: fad Wdhrgfaersram. 
faclet peat Yad arm wes aii wee waya:! 2 | 
a at middg Met wet a awa ue 4:1 
egladnglactayda HAKAAEA Arne wfaeita! 2 |

2 ] . “ * 2’ J *, . 8 ®; . 5 
Me HAMLIN IIE Bee He See SSSA AYER ATER ERA HERERO eh nc henenneneunen

' $r1 Suka began again : Proceeding further along the main road, Sri Krsna (a scion of 
Madhu), who affords delight liberally to all, Saw a hunchbacked young woman of comely 
appearance passing (that Way) with a vessel full of Sandal-paste (used for smearing one's 
body with) and laughingly questioned her (as follows):—(1) "Hallo! who are you, O 
handsome woman? And for whom is this Sandal-paste intended? (Please) tell us the truth.

(Pray,) give us both the excellent paste; goodwill betide you not long afterwards through this 
(piece of service).” (2)

ART AGT auf | TAAL WalwMasatSsa 1 & | 
Tea EM Seat Pernt cea ae a wash ala aeit wer! « | 
uaa SS RSTO | eye SAHsAIMAge aA: 1 9 | 
a 8 daieeeigt «86 geapforetent | qarceaiai, Wel aya wae cI

The maid-servant replied : "| am a maid-servant, Trivakra* by name, esteemed by 
Karmsa for my art of preparing sandal-pastes, O pretty youth ! Sandal-paste prepared by me 
is much to the taste of Kamsa( the ruler of the Bhojas). Who else other than you two deserves 
(to have) it?" (3) Her mind bewitched by the comeliness and delicacy of form, loving 
disposition, laughter, conversation and penetrating glances of the two Brothers, the 
hunchback gave Them both the thick sandal-paste. (4) Painted (severally) with the pigment 
which shone in contrast with Their complexion and adorned the upper part of Their body, 
They then looked (most) charming. (5) The propitious Lord made up His mind to straighten 
the hunchback—who was curved at three places, though possessed of a charming 
countenance—(thereby) showing (to the world) the (immediate) reward of His sight. (6) 
Pressing the forepart of her feet with His own feet and supporting her chin on the two (viz., 
the index and middle) fingers, raised upwards, of His open (right) hand, Sri Krsna (the 
infallible Lord) straightened up her body. (7) By the (magic) touch of Sri Krsna (the Bestower 
of Liberation) she then turned at once into a most beautiful woman with a straight and

symmetrical body, bulky hips and full breasts. (8) 
ad ~wauiedauat we Hae sara Hat sdtewat | < | 
Ue dk a at a at apiekad | aarafediama: = sete Geet 1 go 
Ua fixer aera: Fal WA VAM: |S ATTA A NeARMGATT E 1k8 
wena A ye qy: darfetansta AULA SSO A: AAMT <a CATT 122 1 
Esa meen aoa ase An ahrada: | Aaa: ATasitsfela: 183 
Teter alfa «fa: | fare nao: 188 
Endowed with the wealth of beauty and good qualities, Trivakra, who had the fire of love 
Kindle in her heart, then smilingly submitted (as follows) to Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of 
Brahma and Lord Siva), pulling the end of His upper garment—(9) "Come, O gallant youth,

let us go home. | am unable to leave you here; (hence,) be gracious to me, whose mind has 
been robbed of its patience by you, O jewel among men 1" (10) Being solicited by the woman

She was curved at three places, viz., the neck, the breast and the waist, hence the name.

ts ws + .s % 
s > coh VA "

7 . 7 
. > wa Vi et SP ’ a &

ics Sis awakidedaaeeensrseeeweweneenearererweawuer Ss. 
f CBr Wr

thus, while Balarama stood looking on, Sri Krsna gazed on the latter's face as well as on that 
of His followers and laughingly replied to her as follows:—(11)"Having accomplished m 
errand | shall call at your house, which assuages the agony of men, O pretty girl; (for) you 
are the last refuge of us shelterless wayfarers." (12) Dismissing her with honeyed words ang 
proceeding (further) along the road, Sri Krsna alongwith Balarama (His elder brother) was 
honoured by those following the trade of a merchant with various presents, betel-leaves 
seasoned with catechu, lime and areca-nut parings, garlands and sandal-paste. (13) Due to 
agitation (of mind) caused by love at His sight, the women (of Mathura) forgot (all about) 
themselves. (Standing spell-bound) with their garments unsettled, bangles slipped off and 
braids loosened, they looked like painted figures. (14)

ad: UNA Gea aque: we: die sfeast at adtaarget i eu 
yedeeentrared UMaRSaL| aaa Al: HPO: Wa Aqted 12a 1 
au aaa aelonad ee a pat fase waa 
jot faer «Wael «ee «= aaTaUS )©=—_ HcqeheoehA: 1201 
Tq WIAA wee: G tert fr: i gama F Fal HeeraqurmAd 126! 
aa: Use: Hla staasa: | elder staged seach 1e¢ 
AA AM, qs, fasted Achaea | Hal GIA Bela Bene AT WA: Rol 
a6 UW hasled eal Wem: | fena aaet ftteq yrame: 1221 
dieieaed dtd fama yaaa: 1 ast: sre wa a A faqetaat 1221 
aalfaeatal: RUMAH a | PORTA Gat Wd: yMadpediaq: 1231 
Ten Ypcfermd fate at stared sweat wegeya i 
Tera GeUMaaat fet { wdwHAsad sit: 12x 
HAT TCH Ya aaa | Sade Ge wis Aral hafeentisay 1241 
Enquiring of the citizens about the place where the bow had been kept (for the purpose 
of a bow-sacrifice), Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) then entered the sacrificial hall and beheld 
(there) the wonderful bow—which resembled the rainbow (in point of size and picturesque- 
ness, studded as it was with jewels of various colours), was guarded by many men, had been 
(duly) worshipped and was attended with a large fortune (in the shape of valuable gold 
ornaments)—and, even though being stopped by the men, He forcibly seized it. (15-16) 
Having strung the bow, which had (already) been playfully lifted (by Him) with His left hand, 
and pulling the String to its utmost capacity, Lord Sri Krsna (of immeasurable prowess) broke 
it in two in the middle in the twinkling of an eye—while the men (guarding the bow) stood 
looking on—{even)as an elephantin rut would snapa sugar-cane. (17) The crash of the bow, 
while it was being broken, filled heaven and earth and the intermediate region as well as the 
(four) quarters. Hearing it Kamsa was seized with consternation. (18) Full of wrath and eage! 
to apprehend the Lord, the custodians of the bow alongwith their followers surrounded Him 
with their bows drawn (in order to kill Him), exclaiming; "Let the intruder be seized, let him 
be bound !" (19) Immediately perceiving them to be of wickedintent, Balarama and Sri Krsna 
(the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord Siva) grew angry and, seizing the two pieces of the 
(broken) bow, made short work of them. (20) Having also destroyed a detachment sent by 
Kamsa the two Brothers came away through the entrance of the amphitheatre and roame

about delighted to witness the wealth of the city. (21) Perceiving such wonderful prowess: 
indomitable spirit, intrepidity and comeliness of the two Brothers, the citizens thought them

rte HARE INE We He We We Fe Vee We We We We We Me We Ke Kee He We We He We We ee Bee WW Kee Ree REE Re eR He Ree Re ee Ree RR Re We We We Bee Ae ee ee ee ie ee eee

to be two foremost gods. (22) While They were (yet) roving at will, the sun set on Them. 
Surrounded by the cowherds, Sri Krsna and Balarama (now) returned to Their carts outside 
the city. (23) In the case of those who gazed in Mathura (the city founded by the demon 
Madhu) on the elegance of the personality of Sri Krsna (the Jewel among men)—whichlo! 
éri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) coveted as Her abode, leaving (all) others who 
sought Her—the predictions that the cowherd women, afflicted at the thought of their 
separation (from Sri Krsna), had made atthe time of departure (from Vraja) of SriKrsnacame 
to be (literally) true. (24) With Their feet duly washed and partaking of rice cooked in milk (with 
sugar), and having come to know what Kamsa intended to do (the next day), the two Brothers 
passed that night happily. (25)

org Tt wy aot wae aiad era wWheremfsated ue!

asm ddt After aft: serasiva yetdleraitt aie

aeiq were: sist a weft saat faa a keer wafer am iec

waa | oSauRgg: Ges fame aeeeneiasenam fra: 1301

arom aa wane wash ai aa ares feat oY a fercar 1321 
Kamsa, on the other hand, felt dismayed to hear of the breaking of the (huge) bow and 
the destruction of its keepers as well as of his own detachment— which was a mere child's 
play on the part of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) and Balarama. Getting no sleep for along 
time, the evil-minded fellow saw both in dream and while awake many an evil portent 
foreboding death and foreshadowing infamy. (26-27) Even though his reflection could be 
seen (in a mirror etc.) the head was not visible. Nay, the luminaries likewise appeared 
duplicated although no other object (such as a finger etc.) intervened (between his eye and 
the luminary). (28) Holes were seen by him in his shadow and the (whizzing) sound which 
is heard inside the ears on closing them was not heard by him. Trees appeared (to him) 
golden (in hue) and he failed to see his footprints (on sands, mud etc.). (29) In dreams he 
was embraced by his deceased relations, rode on a donkey, swallowed poison and went 
about all alone adorned with a wreath of china roses, smeared with oil and having nocovering 
on his body except the quarters. (30) Beholding similar other scenes both in dreams and in 
waking life and terribly afraid of death, Kamsa did not have a wink of sleep in his anxiety. (31)

apa frit wer ga alesa: aufed | SRAM @ chal AewsHlsmelaay 132

arg: ger w qdsda sft i asnaregm: aa: udreretedet: 133

a oUt Ou «6a: | aelosie fafagy wena spare: 13s

ea: ukqaisae wis safari ween eed faq 134!

Tey «Gay AeeMeRy 896A! Aeon: Bega sal: Aloe: Tatlaarsy 136 |

TUR yfsn: He: Wowk Wa Ala wagered aPjareseitid: 1301

wena omar 49: aerastearedt: | Prafedtaraared wanted Fat sila 1321

ofa strat eq URAee Geta AT Yael AeA AA fae: 12 |

When the night passed and the sun rose from the (eastern) waters, O scion of Kuru, 
Karhsa actually had a grand festival of wrestling bouts to be celebrated. (32) The men (of 
amsa) swept the arena, sprinkled it with water and decorated it with flowers and garlands

@tc.; trumpets and tabors were sounded and the galleries (for the spectators) were adorned 
With garlands, flags, tapestries and temporary arches. (33) On them were comfortably

[565] B.M. Part II—38

sy ihe <2 :

rer abit ety *: 
Abate Uy a : 
Pe th a fee

1 thed Baad Pec Pied Piel Bid ick Mid Mie Mic Bi ed ld ee thal cd Bae! ac! Ried Bie hd Med ad Mie Pied Mel Mok Me Mal Mel el) biel Med Med Mk Med Ree ed we We Me We We Wee ie We Re We We ee ee He

seated the people of the city and the country, headed by Brahmanas and Ksatriyas, as wel 
as chiefs and princes on their (respective) thrones. (34) Surrounded by (his) ministers 
Kamsa took his seat on the royal dais in the midst of feudal lords and with a sore achin, 
heart.(35) Amidst a flourish of trumpets, which was drowned (at intervals) by the Clapping of 
+46 wrestlers' arms, proud wrestling champions picturesquely adorned majestically entereg 
the arena alongwith their masters. (36) Feeling greatly cheered by the stirring (music of the)

trumpets and other instruments—Canura, Mustika, Kita, Sala and ToSala too, (all) eminent 
wrestlers, found their way into the arena. (37) Specially invited by Kamsa (the ruler of the 
Bhojas), the aforementioned cowherds headed by Nanda, the chief of the Gopas, who hag 
(just) offered their presents, took their seats on a (separate) dais. (38)

Thus ends the forty-second discourse entitled "A description of the amphitheatre 
for wrestlers (set up by Kamsa)", in the first half of Book Ten of 
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

319 fracathtaniseara:

Discourse XLIII 
The elephant Kuvalayapida killed (by the Lord)

SMe Fara 
aq PUA WAS pagal uM nesses sear spqa: | 2 | 
Yar Wares aes arated saad Haas Hoisapralad | 2 | 
cee uftet ak: aga plese! sara aie aren) Meese | 2 | 
sTagrag ani Al eauenn ot fami al ad Gwent Gel aa anerena | x | 
ta fdiniaisag: afta: arfad mst wear HT Hlrerdnaaan | & | 
Risetaigs 8 SUT | ae | he fetid: aisy Fearafgetad | & | 
APSA AMES: A Hara aya yen a wee fafaeta: 1 | 
Ges Weidas ae: usa fast am art quul sa sical ¢ | 
a wade 8 wenclaudisad: | aur wranM Maeda ale: | eg | 
aaa UUs ARUN WIsaq UAT BRAN: ua we 1gol 
a Med wise Yat Ulsan Peatherd: | ad ea Ulead Hal area iseateertaa 122! 
Glare 8 sided 8 8pecsteniia: | dre ern: wma Fat 122! 
wad = ATC Re: ayer urfer eet oraamara wae 122! 
Uldde UeIssSH Ws ga GieaMiadqener aa efeqarsmeqaie: 12x!

Sri Suka began again : Having finished Their bath etc., the next day, and hearing the 
loud noise of the wrestlers and the din of kettledrums, O chastiser of foes, Sri Krsna 4 
Balarama went to see the tournament. (1) Having duly reached the entrance of the

; Dis. 
€ We We We wy AEM M He He 4,

—————— al

amphitheatre, Sri Krsna Saw Stationed there the elephant Kuvalayapida as directed by its 
ariver. (2) Tightening the cloth round His waist (by way of preparation for an encounter) and 
tying UP His curly locks, Si Krsna (a scion of Sura) challenged the keeper (as follows) in a 
voice deep as the rumbling of clouds:—(3) "O driver, O driver ! allow us passage; clear out 
without delay. If not, | shall presently despatch you alongwith the elephant to the abode of 
Death." (4) Th reatened thus, the driver full of rage goaded the elephant—which had (already) 
been enraged and which looked like Yama (the chastiser of beings subject to the ravages 
of Time)— towards Sri Krsna. (5) Running towards Him, the lordly elephant quickly seized 
é Krsna with its trunk. He (however) slipped off from (the coils of) the trunk and, striking it 
(with His fist), disappeared in the midst of its legs. (6) Failing to perceive Sri Krsna (the Ruler 
even of Brahma and Lord Siva), the infuriated animal, which could discover things through 
scent, caught hold of the Lord with the end of its trunk. He (however) .forcibly escaped from 
its hold. (7) Tightly seizing the mighty elephant by the tail, He (then) violently pulled it by way 
of sport to a distance of twenty-five bows (or a hundred cubits) without pausing even as 
Garuda (possessed of beautiful wings) would drag a cobra. (8) (Keeping hold of its tail all the 
while) the immortal Lord whirled with the elephant, which was being caused to revolve 
contrariwise when it turned either to the left or to the right (in order to catch hold of Sri Krsna), 
even as a boy would with a calf that was (similarly) made to revolve (by him). (9) Then, 
advancing in front of the elephant and striking it with His hand, the Lordin His attempt to throw 
it down ran swiftly (before it) so close that He looked as though being touched by it at every 
step. (10) While running, the Lord sportfully toppled down on the ground and immediately got 
up (and stood aside). Taking Him to be fallen (yet) the angry elephant struck the ground with 
its tusks. (11) Infuriated at its prowess having been frustrated and being urged by its keepers, 
the lordly elephant ran towards Sri Krsna in rage. (12) Approaching the elephant (even) as 
itcame rushing, Lord Sri Krsna (the Slayer of the demon Madhu), caught hold of its trunk with 
His hand and hurled it down to the ground. (13)Treadingon the fallen animal like a lion (the 
king of beasts), and sportfully extracting its tusks Sri Hari killed with it the elephant as well

as its keepers. (14) 
Wate feo | acariur: a 
famceentrenraerraeeal THT 1241 
at ott: 060 afddetaet a fafaag Ws TET R81 
Ream =89|- ARAL: ait = SN TT, 
Tort 4 ~emisaat fafa aren wiat: fry: | 
quiat ureaddt fafa G ": GET: 12191 
= tS apr aaftt gaatichel waeafa aq gerafefast qa Re! 
a wa wm ret = fafeademerrat | 
am ferqanasenftot wa: feast seer Patter 1881 
fier oamadngest set Rafe | ARgeT | WT! 
yeianenfeteort: We Fal Awe IRol 
fra sa uaral feed ga fagart | tard sa AANA Reed sa AeA: 1221 
oq: ua a a ames aergdl! agente Sa URI 
vat qa: margin flaniniega aga amet izes

t- F re _ 
rar © y

4 me , 
"a +: tA ae 
be NAA a WA

wy a fact aaqat wit wee aed aay Wet aged Aayahr ex, 
Gait 9 ld | Ashalayed arta: | Stef Waren: chet dyatsa a ager: 1 By | 
Tra: aici Uda alae: ufathadr: | calferat efaa: ad saya fane: Hd: | Ve | 
MaeHHeet qdishuisat | akardigirraga uRatdt A aWepery 2X01 
Treats 4 firemfecefaatent §9qaq | wat fafaeienraientat Cars Far Rc | 
qed agitsd «sel: «= agiasqa: | feret agit Hert a creed fife: 1 ee) 
sf UR: star Wa: Hace: | Vera Peat Gt acet A aAcnrea: 1 30)

Leaving the dead elephant (where it was), the Lord duly entered the amphitheatre 
tusk in hand. Stained with drops of blood as well as with those of ichor and with a tusk 
resting. against one of His shoulders and His lotus-like face bedecked with drops of 
sweat appearing on it, He looked (most) charming. (15) Surrounded by a few Gopas and 
with the tusks of the elephant for Their excellent weapons, Baladeva and Sri Krsna (who 
is solicited by the people) entered the amphitheatre, O king ! (16) Present in the 
amphitheatre by the side of Balarama (His elder brother), the Lord appeared as a 
thunderbolt to the wrestlers, a jewel among men to the male persons, love incarnate to 
the ladies (other than the elderly ones), a kinsman to the cowherds (of Vraja), a 
chastiser to the vile princes, a (mere) child to His parents, death (personified) to Karhsa 
(the ruler of the Bhojas), as deficient in strength and immature of body to the ignorant, 
the supreme Reality to the Yogis and the highest Divinity to the Vrsnis. (17) Finding (the 
elephant) Kuvalayapida killed and also perceiving the two Brothers difficult to conquer, 
Kamsa, though self-possessed, felt much terrified at that time, O protector of men! (18) 
Decorated in a queer fashion, decked with quaint jewels and garlands and clad in weird 
garments and captivating the mind of the lookers-on with Their brilliance, the two mighty- 
armed Brothers shone in the amphitheatre like a pair of actors dressed in an excellent 
garb. (19) Gazing on the aforesaid foremost Persons, the people of the city as well as 
of the country, who were seated on the galleries, O protector of men, and whose eyes 
and faces were blooming with an outburst of ecstatic joy, drank in the beauty of Their 
countenance with (the cup of) their eyes, but did not feel sated. (20) They seemed to 
drink off (the beauty of) the two Brothers with their eyes, to lick Them with their tongue, 
to inhale Them with their nostrils and to clasp Them with their arms. (21) As though put 
in mind of Their story by (the sight of) Their comeliness of form, excellences, loving 
disposition and intrepidity, the onlookers spoke to one another (as follows) in the light 
of whatever they had actually seen and whatever they had heard (of the two Brothers):—(22) 
“Actually descended through a part of Lord Sri Hari Himself, who has His abode in 
water (in the form of Narayana), these two Brothers have appeared on this earth in 
the house of Vasudeva. (23) This (younger) One (Sri Krsna) was, it is understood, born 
as a matter of fact of Devaki and taken to Gokula (for fear of being killed by Kamsa). 
Dwelling all this time incognito he grew up (to this age) at the residence of Nanda. (24) 
By Him was put to an end Puitana as well as the demon (Trnavarta,) who appeared 
in the form of a whirlwind, the demigod (Sankhactda), the demons Kesi (who came in 
the form of a horse) and Dhenuka* (who lived in the guise of a donkey) and others 
of that class, and the two Arjuna trees uprooted. (25) By this Boy were the cows along 
with their keepers rescued from a forest fire, the snake Kaliya subdued and Indra (the 
ruler of the gods) rid of his pride when Govardhana (the chief of the mountains) was 
borne by Him on one hand for a week and (the land of) Vraja protected from rain, storm 
SY Ee Sn ae a

* Although the demons Vatsa and Baka were slain by Sri Krsna and Dhenuka by Bala, the people of Mathura 
were evidently misinformed that the former two had been killed by Bala and the last-named by Sri Krsna.

pis. 43 ] BOOK TEN 985

and strokes of lightning. (26-27) Beholding with joy His ever-cheerful and smiling face 
enlivened with penetrating glances the cowherd women overcame agonies of various kinds 
without any effort. (28) The wise declare that, protected in everyway by the yonder Boy, this 
race Of Yadu will become very well-known and attain prosperity, renown and glory. (29) And 
here is His elder brother, the glorious Balarama of lotus-like eyes, by whom was slain 
Pralamba as well as the demon who came disguised as a calf* and others of whom Baka was 
the foremost. (30)

sy gay ay Pe a Tt ETE GO are 132 |

@ Taq ¢ WH wort ahead Agee set Ugissedt fear 1321

fra Ua: sepeea: set fea a son: i wae aon aren faadandiszen 1331

Frat safe TUT aoe Aa Beale veodsa wlexgmaha aM: 13x!

dae Ua: fa qi ad a aram @i sah a: weteha adam qa: 13u 
While the people were talking thus and trumpets were loudly sounding, Cantra (the 
foremost of the king's wrestlers) accosted Sri Krsna and Balarama and spoke (to Them) as 
follows:—(31) “O Krsna (Nanda's darling), O Balarama, both of you are esteemed (by the 
people) as heroes ! On hearing of you as skilled in wrestling, you have been invited (to 
participate in the tournament) by the king, who has been eager to see you. (32) Subjects 
doing precisely by thought, word and deed what is agreeable to their king attain to prosperity 
indeed; while those acting otherwise than this meet with contrary results. (33) Itis well-known 
how cowherds, from the time they begin to tend calves, daily pasture their cows with great 
joy in woodlands, diverting themselves with wrestling. (34) Therefore, let yourselves as well

as ourselves, O boys, do what is liked by the king. (If the king is pleased, all) beings will be 
pleased with us; (for) the king is an embodiment of all creatures." (35)

Teesdale HON weetad aa: | Aagareisis aaaMistad a3! 
TT «Mud ad aft atam:iawm fa Ma aa: amaze: 1301 
Tel ad qetae: mise afar wafrs ated: wees AATee: 1321 
Hearing the aforesaid speech (of Canura) and welcoming it, Sri Krsna, who regarded 
wrestling (with him) as something to His liking, gave the following reply, which was 
appropriate to the occasion and place (of the dialogue):—(36) “We too, who dwell in the 
woods, as well as yourselves are the subjects of this king of the Bhojas. Letus (all therefore) 
always do what would please him; through such behaviour his infinite grace will descend on 
US. (37) Youngsters as we are, we shall (however) sport with those who are our equals In 
Stréngth. Let there be a well-matched wrestling bout, so that no sin (of allowing an unequal 
_ Match) may attach to those present in the assembly, O (great) wrestler ! (38)

AI Sara 
Twa a fee aos afeat at: i cieadat at at aeeeraayd 13¢! 
Tene waa afetraeet ARasA G1 aft fawn aia aca ae Yee: Io | 
fa sirarrad Tere URAeeH Sigal aS YSIS Fawatisaet A Pracntanseaa: sy

Canira replied : You are neither a youngster nor a lad; nor is Bala, the foremost of the

* Vide foot-note Dis. 43 Verse 25; Page 284.

a: A ee

73

&

™ he . 
_— a

— y

|

mighty, of such description, by both of whom the elephant (Kuvalayapida), that Possesseq 
the strength of a thousand elephants, was disposed of in (mere) sport. (39) Therefore, you 
both should (unhesitatingly) contend with powerful rivals; there will be no unrighteousness 
involved in your doing so. Show your prowess against me, O scion of Vrsni, and let Mustika 
try his strength with Bala. (40) 3

Thus ends the forty-third discourse entitled "The elephant Kuvalayapida killed (by Sri Krsna),"

in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BWA AqAeahan sear: 
Discourse XLIV 
Kamsa slain (by the Lord) 
SHR Sara 
W ddagger Wes Aad: | sees ay aise wieuitga: 1 2 | 
Cana wales uasada a wed: ifaaedqearsd saa faferiteari 2 | 
ona 2 shia sq aa atifie: «= -_ siteifeaenaieanfisted: | 3 |

Unaraurfasaahesearands: lsceaduneadvisrardt =8=—|- eSRTATALI X 
SOMATA AC: Cae | UTES friterraraagiert: | & |

Sri Suka began again : Challenged thus, Lord Madhustdana of unflinching resolution 
immediately closed with Cantra, and Balarama (son of Rohini) with Mustika. (1) Interlacing 
their hands with the hands and their feet with the feet of their rival, Sri Krsna and Canara (and 
even so Balarama and Mustika) tugged at one another vehemently with intent to overthrow 
their opponent. (2) They struck with their elbows the two elbows, with their knees the knees, 
with their head the head and with their chest the chest of each other. (3) They tried to frustrate 
each other by revolving, pushing, squeezing in their arms, throwing down, and slipping to the 
front or to the rear of their opponent. (4) Eager to score a victory over each other, they hurt the 
body of their adversary by lifting up, carrying, throwing back and even fixing him to a spot. (5)

aq aed Aad: Adalat: | Sq: at We Baw ASM: | € | 
Tea ae WT TTT a aera Unishaesha ead: 1 © | 
m aaaNeaist Heel terxahasti a arfqpanisl feat arqatadt i ¢ | 
maim Ga We yt vadianent: aqhBa Ba aa awl @ | 
4 AAT Sei WF: WATT sige fagaag at: ferfeawgyd 10! 
aed: agate: PUM Aras | deat sary uarenlatrarafy: 122! 
fe A Wad WH Wane aed sit ard eraeesrsfra 122! 
(a ad aye aed Woes: yromest aafeared: |

BOOK TEN 287

TT: Usd teste: Hues aul fawtsarsta frRacrtareta: 1231 
Tre: fear aay eH CIAUTA RATA aa 
gia: Tereyeatad quater aaa: Bra tare ex 
aI aleisaera aaateuieearstated aorataret 
Tard cass en ashe sen: 12@&] 
Wide Aaa SaaS Are WA: Bet wove Freret aap t 
Feta quince: aft yftque: agata aaa aearacitany 126 |

Full of compassion all the ladies (present there) collected in batches and spoke to one 
another about the contest being ill-matched (as going on between strong and feeble rivals), 
O king! (6) “It is gross unrighteousness on the part of the king's courtiers, who countenance 
such a contest alas! between the strong and the weak while the king sits looking on! (7) What 
comparison can there be between the two wrestlers (Canara and Mustika) of adamantine 
frame and closely resembling a pair of two large mountains (on the one hand) and the two 
lads (Balarama and Sri Krsna) of extremely delicate limbs, who have not yet attained their 
youth (on the other)? (8) Forfeiture of religious merit (earned in the past) will surely fall to the 
lot of this assembly. As a matter of fact one should never stay there where unrighteousness 
fully rears its head. (9) Recognizing the faults of those present in an assembly a wise man 
should not (even) enter that assembly; (for) a man keeping silent (even though knowing a 
fact), making a false statement (in order to please those assembled) or pleading ignorance 
(surely) incurs sin. (10) Mark the lotus face—dripping all over with perspiration even like a 
lotus bud sprinkled with water—of Sri Krsna quickly shifting His position about His 
adversary.(11) Don't you see the face of Balarama with reddish eyes, full of wrath as it is for 
Mustika and enlivened by a bellicose spirit accompanied with risibility ? (12) Ah, blessed is 
the soil of Vraja on which treads in a merrily sportful spirit this Most Ancient Person—whose 
feet are adored (even) by Lord Siva (the Guardian of Mount Kailasa) and Rama (the goddess 
of beauty and prosperity)—disguised in a human semblance and adorned with sylvan 
flowers of various kinds, tending cows in the company of Balarama and playing on His flute. 
(13) What austerities did the cowherd women (of Vraja) perform, by virtue of which they 
imbibe with (the cup of) their eyes (the beauty) of His bewitching form—the (very) essence 
of elegance—which is not only unsurpassed but unequalled (too), is not embellished by 
anything external, is eternally new and hard to attain and which is the unfailing abode of 
renown, splendour and divine glory ? (14) Blessed are the women of Vraja, who celebrate 
Him in song while milking their cows, pounding the corn, churning their curds, plastering their 
floor (with cowdung etc.), rocking the cradles, lulling their crying babes, sprinkling and 
Sweeping their houses and attending to other such duties with a mind full of love and their 
throat choked with tears, (nay, all) whose movements are inspired by the thought of Sr. Krsna 
(who is no other than Lord Visnu, who took wide strides while measuring the three worlds 
during His descent as the divine Dwarf). (15) Possessed of endless merit are those women 
who—having heard His music (even) as He sallies forth from Vraja in the morning and 
returns in the evening alongwith the cows playing on the flute—come out hastily on the road 
and behold His smiling countenance enlivened with kind glances." (16)

w weno sty att gfiiad wd FAs aM AH Ie! 
wu: Sin: gar Weeyasdt firamaat ygat semigct 
cet ries rerrerhertetterereeraee qa aueiet ada acuisent 12¢1

is. 44

ee gone ete He He REE TE BEE VORB BOWE BOWE He KEKE Ke We He He HEH, We WW Hr Ke 
*

CORE RROR ROR ORO err wr Rr ee tr Ree We Ge We Wee Wee We eee Se We Ve we Be Ree We Ve We We He He ee ee eee We ee eee eee eee ee ee iu BER Hew, 
Wee,

Ta AeA aT: LSU aA Yoiram F120 
q aaa saa Wins suquliwand aed Hel aatealed 1221 
TSHR «6 MIeved «sali: I MITE AOR see way aft: 122) 
quy waa de afusifad feathers =——|- Sa 123 | 
ada dee: wi wupaftedt aiaowsn safe deaittedt weriexi 
yafad: a SRR Wadisied: |g: oordeoe acted gatefia: 1241 
qd: Hea WA: Yetal At: | Haelesimal Ws Aaw AMAA 1261 
ada f& we: Heemeaaiite: i fer fadutaigeen serait fFaaa: i201 
TUR ib He Ae digo stile: Neaqdect: wel somata: 121 
Wor, ares a: da fagd: (aay a ae STAT 1281

While the women (of Mathura) were thus talking (with one another) in anxious tones as 
aforesaid, Lord Sri Hari, the Master of Yoga (and therefore able to read others' thoughts), 
made up His mind to get rid of His opponent (Canura), O jewel among the Bharatas ! (17) 
Hearing the aforesaid remarks—full of apprenension—of those women, His parents (Vasudeva 
and Devaki), who were unaware of their Son's strength and (consequently) overwhelmed 
with anxiety out of affection for Them, were filled with remorse (at their not having asked 
Akrira to desist from bringing Balarama and Sri Krsna to Mathura).(18) (Even) as Sri Krsna 
(the immortal Lord) and His antagonist (Canura) contended with each other according to the 
various popular modes of wrestling, in that very manner did Balarama and Mustika struggle 
with each other. (19) His limbs being shattered by the hits of the Lord's limbs, which were as 
hard as strokes of lightning, Canura—so the tradition goes—fainted again and again. (20) 
Springing with the swiftness of a hawk and clenching the fingers of both his hands into fists, 
the latter, full of anger, struck Lord Sri Krsna (Son of Vasudeva) on the chest. (21) The Lord 
(however) did not stir (even one inch from His position) under his blow, any more than an 
elephant would when struck with a garland. (On the other hand) Sri Hari caught hold of 
Canura by his arms and, whirling him several times, dashed him to the ground, his life having 
become extinct (even) as a result of his being whirled with vehemence. His ornaments and 
garlands having fallen off and his locks dishevelled, the wrestler fell like a thunderbolt (the 
likeness of which is borne as an emblem on the ensign of Indra). (22-23) Precisely in the 
Same manner was Mustika struck violently with his palm by the mighty Balabhadra, who had 
also been struck with his fist by the latter in the first instance. (24) Violently shaken and sore 
afflicted, and vomiting blood from his mouth, he dropped lifeless on the ground like a tree 
blown down by the wind. (25) Balarama, the foremost of warriors, playfully and scornfully 
slew with his left fist Kata (another reputed wrestler), who came up next (to wrestle). (26) That 
very moment Sala (another of Karnsa's wrestlers) had his head knocked off with Sri Krsnas 
foot, while Tosala (the other wrestler of repute) was split into two (like a blade of grass) and 
both fell down (dead). (27) Canitra, Mustika, Kita,.Sala and Togala, having (thus) been 
despatched, all the remaining wrestlers ran away anxious to save their life. (28) Drawing neat 
them Their cowherd mates and closing with them, the two Brothers sported (in the arena), 
while the trumpets were being sounded, dancing (at intervals) with Their anklets jingling. (29)

SH: Sstey: Ae ato Waeperen: | aad cet fase: Gera: Tel AMfeata 1301 
ey Heoady fag a Mee! waned aquifer are Aqqara z 13%! 
Franad dit agar gmiied wa mori ad adia afer i32!

BOOK TEN 289

ager caie! eadaseana: | sea: «foe aria gt: Uda: 1331 
ud fare a ae sefidisea: iota at Tas Alea 1 3X | 
aqHifaaraarestaet 
| SETS STA | Ate Meare aye alsfereriot 1341 
q Want ferry wa am fume 
warete = gfeugitsttaetet «= areigg: «= Wer 1361 
Tae Baars: uma fasnsra Sada: 13191 
aq wad feed sat aftdes: amd faase: | 
tela RUsq: Wreketanygethea: AasHAes 1321 
a Meagan adiet freq aq at faa SEE 
aaa Unga adele et stam 13el 
With the exception of Karsa all the people (present there) exceedingly rejoiced over the 
achievement of Balarama and Sri Krsna. And pious men, including the foremost of the 
Brahmanas, exclaimed, "Well done ! bravo !!" (30) The chief of the wrestlers having been 
struck down and the rest having fled away, Kamsa (the ruler of the Bhojas) stopped (the 
flourish of) his trumpets and, so the tradition goes, uttered the following injunctions:—(31) 
"Drive out of the city the two ill-behaved sons of Vasudeva; confiscate the wealth of the 
Gopas and put in bonds the wicked Nanda. (32) On the other hand, let Vasudeva of evil 
mind, the vilest of all, be made short work of at once and so also Ugrasena, my father, who 
has sided with my enemy, alongwith his followers." (33) While Kamsa was bragging thus, 
Sri Krsna (the unwearied Lord) flew into a rage and, springing with agility, speedily 
ascended the elevated dais (which Kamsa was occupying). (34) Seeing Sri Krsna 
approaching as his very death, the heroic Kamsa rose at once from his seat and snatched 
up his sword and shield. (35) Sri Krsna (who was possessed of formidable and terrible 
energy) quickly caught hold with a firm hand of Kamsa—who was moving right and left as 
a hawk in the air, sword in hand—(even) as Garuda (son of Kasyapa) would forcibly seize 
a serpent. (36) Grasping him tightly by the hair, his diadem slipping off (even in the course 
of his being caught), and hurling him from the lofty dais to (the floor of) the arena, Lord Sri 
Krsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu with a lotus sprung from His navel), the Support 
of the universe, depending on none other than Himself, jumped down in person upon 
him.(37) (Nay,) He dragged him hard, though fully dead, along the ground, the world 
witnessing it, (even) as a lion would drag an elephant. Very loud cries of "Alas ! Welladay ! 
uttered by all the people, O ruler of men, then arose (and rent the air). (38) Since with a 
mind full of dismay he ever saw (before his mental eyes) that very Lord armed with a discus 
While drinking or speaking, walking to and fro or lying asleep, nay, even while breathing, 
he attained (after death) that very form (so) difficult to attain. (39)

Teast oweissl «mene: | eae WM reateHikur: iso | 
qatar «wa « (Wievitaa: ister, Reger AIM TMG: 1k I 
“geravat ona selaiell fara: |e: fecdet Stet: Wedd: feta: sz! 
ast fad vem wee fam: iaaightere: xtaloagfaeteat: 1631 
TaM akerarat diaries sect: | fog: Get wat fergsret FE Ya: se 
a waa fa ada SRUTITAS | aa ea Fret aa A AEST: 141

is. 44 ] 
ge er Fe 8E Re Re BCR BOWE WE Me SOS Me Ke Kee Ree Ke We Ke eK, ey 
a oem

(2 CRO be op . i

a | % yh

[ Dis 
Bet RR Ret SRC RO A ee We We RR eR. RRR Re MORE Re Re RR Re Re MEE eT BE eS Re ee Be ee Wee We He ew ererermsrm ey

aan fated uve wa ygestaia asd aaa faqulaangen ix) 
SRT @ YAR dam, PSArsoNL! GAT Al aVrt Atel yYeteleg Hl HAA AML vio | 
aaee yams fe sare: ite a deaeaet 4 wfad Gated ivi

Burning all overwith rage, the eight younger brothers of Kamsa—Kanka, Nyagrodha ang 
others—rushed (towards Sri Krsna) in order to get square with their (deceased) brother by 
avenging his death. (40) Taking up a bludgeon Balarama (Rohini's son), however, made 
short work of them (even) as they came fully prepared (for an encounter) with such great 
impetuosity, (just) as a lion (the king of beasts) would kill the cattle. (41) Kettledrums sounded 
in the heavens; full of delight, Brahma (the creator), Lord Siva and other (special) 
manifestations of divine glory extolled the Lord covering Him with (showers of) flowers, and 
celestial women (Apsaras) danced (out of joy). (42) Grieved at the death of their near and 
dear ones, O great king, the widows of the deceased came over to that place, severely and 
repeatedly beating their heads with tears in their eyes. (43) Embracing their husbands lying 
(dead) in the arena (which serves as a most glorious bed for heroes that have laid down their 
lives in an open combat), the women wailed (in the following words) at the pitch of their voice, 
lamenting their lot and repeatedly shedding tears of grief:—(44) “Ah, beloved lord, the 
knower of Dharma (the principles of righteousness) ! O kind-hearted one, fond of the 
helpless ! due to your having been slain, we (too), your own, with our homes and progeny 
have been ruined. (45) Bereft of you, its master, this city (of Mathura),O jewel among men, 
does not look charming any more than we, all its festivities and felicity having ceased. (46) 
You wrought immense harm even to innocent creatures. It is for that reason that you have been 
reduced to this plight, O lord ! What oppressor of living beings can attain happiness 2(47) 
This Sri Krsna indeed is the Source, the End and the Protector of all created beings in this 
universe. Anyone showing disrespect to Him can never prosper. (48)

AYP SAA 
Wsaed «STATA ATaewen Aaa: | aaeetlehet HA wal WAH SS 
Tit fant wa arate ae! HORM aaa feraisswRa Teal: 140! 
cat ages faa widentiqadact ut wend a afsat 142! 
ad AMerad Fe IRAES Beda Tae Yale aaa aa waqsearenseaa: vl

Sri Suka went on : Having comforted the royal ladies the Lord, who is the Protector of 
the universe, caused what they call obsequies to be duly performed with regard to the slain 
for their welfare in the other world. (49) Having then secured the release of Their mother 
(Devaki) and father (Vasudeva) too from bondage (while they were being taken to the gaol 
for being placed behind the bars), Sri Krsna and Balarama bowed to them fully touching thelr 
feet with Their head. (50) Perceiving their sons—who had (just) bowed to them—to be (none 
else than) the Rulers of the universe, Devaki and Vasudeva did not embrace Them, afraid 
as they were (of showing disrespect to Them). (51)

Thus ends the forty-fourth discourse entitled "Kamsa slain (by the Lord)," in the 
first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

wot 2.0 ef Peet f 
PIS BETIS po

WeWe Ke Fe We Ve We We Me Ae wy, 
Gara eae AAA IST f RS RE SRE SRR SEY Be BE BRR Re Br Se re Se tear ir Re be fe Be tree ae tear ere ech eect error te

Discourse XLV

The Lord brings back His preceptor's son (from the abode of Death) 
Hye Saray 
frrrqueenat fafa Gearra: | or watt Fst wrat aa Saar 2 
zara «dfaauaat—Ss a: Aad: | Wataad: Murra arta Mew! 2 1 
wert | Gaeta «= Preatenftedaiteftr | areaubrogdhaint: yarsanereas saa | 3 
a wan cagcaata a Waahaes | at aren: rate fared orferat Fer ¥ | 
aaitesrat cel wfaa: urea aa: 1a aaratfa feet fasta: ararasti & | 
Teas: hed AGA A aa ai gh A cM Fa wa weara fel & | 
/ meat fat ag wat areat qa fran ws fas sua a aetislrwasae Wa: 1 9 | 
alee: Haaatierada: | Areata ater feta anda: 1 ¢ | 
ad arqaeae «UI Uae: | atpdrat yet feeatdect yArT1 < |

Sri Suka began again : Having come to know that His parents (Vasudeva and Devaki) 
had grasped the truth (about the divinity of the two Brothers) prematurely (before they had 
enjoyed the supreme bliss of loving Them as their own sons, which was sure to be marred 
by that knowledge), Sri Krsna (who was no other than the Supreme Person) spread His own 
Maya (enchantment)—which infatuates His own people—so that such knowledge might not 
endure. (1) Approaching His father and mother in the company of His elder brother 
(Balarama) and bowing in humility, the Jewel of the Satvatas spoke respectfully (to them as 
follows), addressing them as "Mama and Papa’ in order to delight them. (2) “Though you 
have been all along full of longing for us, O father, the joys of witnessing the infancy, 
childhood and boyhood of your sons (in us) have never fallen to your lot. (3) Ill-fated as we 
are, the privilege of living by your side could not be attained by us (so far) nor was that joy 
(ever) experienced by us, which children dwelling in their father's house and fondled by their 
Parents do. (4) Even (by serving them) through a life of (full) hundred years a mortal is not 
able to get square with his parents by whom is brought into being and nourished this body 
in which all (the four) objects (of human pursuit) can be realized. (5) The servants of Yama 
actually make that son eat his own flesh on his departing from this world, who, though able- 
bodied, does not with his body and resources maintain them. (6) He is dead (to all intents 
and purposes), though breathing, who, though capable, fails to support his mother, aged 
father, virtuous wife, infant son, preceptor, a Brahmana (depending on him) and one who has 
Sought him for protection.(7) Therefore (all) these days have slipped in vain by us who have 
failed to serve you, helpless as we were, our mind being constantly afraid of Karmsa. (8) Be 
Pleased, O father and mother, to forgive that sin (of omission) on our part, who failed to render 
Service to you, subject as you were (to the will of another) and sore oppressed by that evil-

minded fellow (Kamsa)".(9) 
Hy Sava

sft marae Rife fier atfemaganra URESTTTLT | Ro

Be Be Be Me

fraages: ema agqeti a fefsigag usr arrest fadtfedt tee

Sri Suka continued : Deluded by the foregoing speech of Sri Hari, the Soul of the 
universe, though appearing as a human being through His Maya (enchanting potency), His 
parents experienced supreme felicity as they placed Him on their lap and folded Him in their 
arms. (10) Bathing Him with streams of tears and bound with ties of affection the couple Said 
nothing, O king, bewildered as they were, their throats choked with tears. (11)

wana fetta cael: ae RA THA 122 | 
31e GR FER setsagueta | aatfagnae agaifadet 9 yaTay 1231 
aft ya sada wad faqener:i aie eemarm: faa vue: ex 
PAM MATA: HAMMHPO |: ACTWAATAAYTMEPHUGHA 1 AGI 
ata ware faesnaranfstar| saraad, weg fed: daet faa ieg. 
PUTAS MRMAAA: (TST Wat fag: PORTA: 12001 
aerdisee: wat wEdacimasmi fa safed sited aeafradtem ieci 
TA saris garistacise: | fedseigcea Garage ye: 1291

Having thus comforted His parents Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) presently made 
His maternal grand-uncle, Ugrasena, king of the Yadus and said, "Be pleased to command 
us (your servants) as well as the people (of Mathura), O great king !(As for myself) the Yadus 
ought not to sit on a royal throne because of the curse of Yayati. (Since, however, it is My 
desire to see you on the throne of Mathura no blame will attach to you). (12-13) When | am 
waiting on you as a Servant, (even) the gods and others will bear tribute to you, bent low (with 
submissiveness). What wonder, then, that other rulers of men should do so." (14) Calling 
back from the (various) quarters all His kinsmen and relations—the Yadus, the Vrsnis, the 
Andhakas, the Madhus, the Dasarhas, the Kukuras and others—that had fled through fear 
of Kamsa and had been pulled down on account of their staying abroad—(nay,) consoling 
them fully and highly gratifying them with riches, Sri Krsna (the Maker of the universe) settled 
them in their own houses when they had been (duly) honoured. (15-16) Protected by the (all- 
powerful) arms of Sri Krsna’and Sankarsana and having realized their ambition and 
accomplished their purpose, they lived happily in their homes, (all) their agony having 
disappeared due to (the grace of) Sri Krsna and Balarama. (17) They felt rejoiced to gaze 
everyday on the lotuslike countenance of Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), which was 
ever full of ecstatic joy, charming and enlivened with compassionate and smiling glances.(1 8) 
Drinking now and again with (the cup of) their eyes the nectar-like beauty of the lotus face 
of Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), even the aged there (at Mathura) turned young and 
acquired great strength and energy. (19).

AY Te CAME Wa caatga: ides ws aftgrdanetd: 120! 
faragarsat farensai urfirat eaferdt sari fasteeaterenr siiferrestgrerists fe 1221 
@ fad Mt a set at Guile aura! fra aefecdeMecd: uracerdt 1221 
ad qa as Md ad aA eeg:faar| aii at apnea faena geet GAA 123! 
Wa ara Wa Ae CaS: | aMisegRaeam =—|-_- ATT RY 
saat Ue Ad: wweldeo: 1 GAARA we Weds gat 124!

Meanwhile duly approaching Nanda and embracing him, Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of

pevaki) and Sankarsana, O king of kings, spoke as follows:— (20) "O father, by you two 
mother Yasoda and yourself), full of affection, both of us have been nourished and fondied 
with utmost care. Parents affection for their Progeny is surely more profound than the love 
they cherish for their own self. (21) He is the (real) father and she the mother, who nourish 
like thelr own Offspring the babes cast off by their relations incapable of nourishing and 
protecting them. (22) Return you (now) to Vraja, O dear father ! Having afforded delight to 
our near and dear ones we two Shall follow suit in orderto see you, our kinsmen, disconsolate 
through affection.” (23) Having thus consoled Nanda alongwith the (other) people of Vraja, 
the immortal Lord honou red them with reverence with articles of wearing apparel, ornaments, 
utensils and other (loving) presents. (24) Thus addressed (by Sri Krsna) and overwhelmed 
with affection, Nanda hugged the two Brothers and, filling his eyes with tears, returned to 
Vraja alongwith the (other) cowherds. (25)

aq Wat Wr wal: wera! Guerea sews aera fasrerepfert 126 1 
AeA SeTe_ SAO Weal STATS: Rog: | Boga: WI Haan: atrarfertt: 1291 
a: PUR le vemfa: i asnedeqsa cheaaeddt aa: irc 
dig werent fired sma yadtimmie geqeraale mast aden 1291 
saat ada adit wdetiariaemegr yeart ated: 1301 
aM Who atresdaqumg: | aed ard ama wWardturafaa 1321 
ade dt dat mt gfaamren meamaual St Maen eafsaradt 1321 
TatEstaey: Weulaqara: | start Aqehaer, agua We: 1331 
Mea ade sal Maat | am ardifact faa werifa a vefaeny 13% | 
wa hawt «=i difaensadeticefarer = oat Cs TET B41 
SERA Pat Aad: met: | Teatawrenssanrt Saad 1361 
fared «= feng Sets Ai 
Ua uel a Neva Yd ale WMA arava zFIZV! 
adage neat wh sweat stdin 
aomasea faaited: aut 4 «—- feaifefecareuraretdat: 1321 
THe wae Wea: WAAL | Asaas AA Wel Atehl AgatsoT 138 1 
Vasudeva (the son of Sura), Oking, then duly caused to be performed in accordance with 
the scriptural ordinance by his priest (the sage Garga) and other Brahmanas the purificatory 
rite (of investiture with the sacred thread) conferring the rank of a Dwija (the twice-born) with 
respect to both his sons. (26) Having appropriately worshipped them he gave to them, when 
they were duly adorned, fees for their services as well as cows fully decked with gold 
Necklaces and other ornaments as also with silk wreaths and accompanied by calves. (27) 
Recalling his resolve made at the time of birth of Sri Krsna and Balarama, Vasudeva (who 
Was possessed of a lofty mind) gave away even those cows that had been mentally gifted 
by him (on that occasion) and which had been unlawfully seized by Kamsa. (28) Having gone 
hr Ough the purificatory rite (of investiture with the sacred thread) and (thereby) attained the

fank of a Dwija (the twice-born) the two Brothers of noble vows thereupon embarked on the 
Vow of celibacy* under the instructions of Garga, the preceptor (of Yadu's race).(29)

consists of three vows successively entered into by a religious student belonging to the

" The vow of celibacy actuall 
5 . he name of Gayatra, is of three days’ duration and is undertaken as a

‘Wice-born classes. The first of them, known by t

Concealing by Their actions—which looked (more or less) human—Their unclouded Wisdom 
that had not been acquired through another, and seeking to reside in the house ofa Precepto, 
(with the object of attaining knowledge in order to set an example before the world), the two 
‘Brothers, who were the omniscient Rulers of the universe and the source of all learning, now 
actually sought the presence of a Brahmana of Ujjain, Sandipani (the son of Sandipana) b

name, born in the family of Kasa. (30-31) Having duly approached him the two Brothers 
tamely and reverently waited upon him as a god with devotion, (thereby) teaching (to the 
world) irreproachable behaviour towards one's preceptor. (32) Gratified with Their services 
rendered with genuine devotion, Sandipani (the teacher), the foremost of Brahmanas, taught 
them all the (four) Vedas alongwith the (six) auxiliary branches of learning (viz., Siksa Or 
phonetics, Chanda or prosody, Vyakarana or grammar, Jyotisa or astronomy, Kalpa or the 
science prescribing the ritual and giving rules for ceremonial or sacrificial acts and Nirukta 
or etymology) and the Upanisads (the crowning part of the Veda expounding the secret 
meaning of the Vedas and treating of Brahma) as well as Dhanurveda (the science of 
archery) including its secrets (viz., the knowledge of Mantras by means of which the various 
Astras or mystic missiles are invoked and the deities presiding over them), the Dharmasastras 
(codes of laws such as the Manusmrti) and the various systems of philosophy (such as 
Mimamsa) as wellas the science of logic and the science of politics with its six branches (viz., 
those dealing with peace, warfare, expedition, encampment, exciting dissension or causing 
the separation of allies and depending on one's allies). (83-34) The two Brothers, who were 
jewels amongst the foremost of men and the Originators of all sciences, learnt everything in 
a single lesson, O protector of men ! (85) With their mind fully controlled They mastered in 
the course of sixty-four days and nights as many arts* and (then) persuaded the teacher to

preparation for learning the holy Gayatri-Mantra. This is followed by the second vow, known by the name of Prajapatya, which 
extends to the time of commencing the study of the Vedas; and this is followed by the third, Brahma vow, which lasts till the 
end of the Vedic study.

* The following are the sixty-four arts mentioned in the Saiva Tantras—(1) Singing; (2) playing on various musical 
instruments; (3) dancing; (4) acting and gesticulation, mimicry etc.; (5) drawing and painting as well as calligraphy; (6) painting 
figures of various designs on the various parts of the body with musk-paste and other fragrant substances; (7) preparing for 
use in worship various designs with grains of rice, flowers etc.; (8) preparing a bed of flowers; (9) colouring the teeth and other 
limbs and articles of wearing apparel; (10) paving a floor with precious stones; (11) preparing a bed; (12) using a pot full of water 
as a musical instrument and treading on water; (13) showing miracles of various kinds; (14) preparing chaplets and wreathe 
of flowers; (15) making ornaments of flowers for the ears, braid etc.; (16) modes of beautifying the body with clothes and 
ornaments of various kinds; (17) painting ornamental figures on the ears; (18) making perfumes and cosmetics etc., of various 
kinds; (19) making ornaments of various designs; (20) jugglery; (21) appearing in various guises of one's choice; (22) sleight 
of hand; (23) culinary art; (24) making drinks of various tastes and colours and spirituous liqurs of various kinds; (25) weaving 
and needle-work of various kinds; (26) working puppets by strings; (27) making musical instruments of various kinds; 
(28) solving riddles; (29) capping verses; (30) skill in uttering tongue-twisters; (31) the art of reading manuscripts easily and 
quickly;(32) dramaturgy and story-writing; (33) completion of incomplete verses or part verses; (34) making ligatures, canes, 
arrows etc.; (35) spindle-work; (36) carpentry; (37) architecture; (38) testing valuable metals and precious stones; 
(39) alchemy; (40) colouring precious stones; (41) knowledge of latent minerals; (42) nursing and treating plants; (43) setting 
game rams, cocks and quails‘to fight as sport; (44) teaching parrots and other birds to imitate human speech; (45) making an 
enemy quit his place by means of a charm; (46) cleaning and dressing the hair; (47) reading letters removed from one's sight 
and divining the nature of substances held within one's palm; (48) knowledge of books written in the language of barbarians; 
(49) fluently talking in the different Indian dialects; (50) reading good or bad omens; (51) making diagrams etc., by means of 
letters arranged in different orders as mystical formulae to be worshipped or worn as an amulet; (52) splitting hard substances 
Such as diamonds into two or more pieces of different shapes; (53) reading the thoughts of others and bringing them out in 
a verse; (54) lexicography; (55) knowledge of prosody; (56) increasing the number of an object by various devices; (57) playing 
tricks; (58) showing off one's clothes as made of a superior texture than what they actually are; (59) playing at dice; 
(60) attracting remote objects; (61) playing children's games; (62) the practice of charms; (63) fore knowledge of the party going 
to win in a debate and (64) keeping goblins and vampires under one's control.

E 
.

L211) LER RL

pis. 45 ] BOOK TEN 295°

ask for the preceptor's fee of his liking,O King ! (36) Clearly perceiving such marvellous glory 
of the two Brothers (in the shape of Their having mastered all sciences and the other 
branches of learning without any effort) as well as Their superhuman intelligence, and 
deliberating with his wife, O Pariksit, the aforesaid Brahmana (Sandipani) asked for (as his 
fee the restoration of) their child lost in the ocean at Prabhasa (the modern Prabhaspatan. 
in Saurashtra), so the tradition goes. (37) Saying "So be it !" and mounting Their chariot, the 
two Brothers, who were great car-warriors, of endless powers, presently reached Prabhasa 
and, going near the seashore, squatted there for a moment. Coming to know of Their divine 
character, the god presiding over the ocean brought presents for Them. (38) The Lord said 
to him, "Let My preceptor's son be restored at once—the same child which was swallowed 
up by you in a great wave here." (39) 
WAR Sara

Jareing tat CS: USM AEM saawio;: FN W_SAMISAT: 1¥o |

are ded Pea AL NY: | Weatfaea a gel AMeagetseieny Ive

daguaa Vga TANT | et: GAT ATA aT efearat 21

Teal Set: We Wee Teerge: 1 aghelenenud senda aa: sat

qa: Ata Wedl Ah waueledr | Satadd: HM Wayans |

Samqer @ fawn qaat: wram fear ix 
The god of the ocean replied: "| did not carry away the child, O Lord! There is a great

demon belonging to the Daitya class, Pancajana (by name), wholives under water in the form 
of aconch, O Krsna! The child was surely carried away by him." Hearing it the Lord speedily 
plunged into the water but on killing the demon did not find the child in his bowels. (40-41) 
Taking the conch that formed his body the Lord returned to the chariot. Then, going to the 
beloved city of Yama, Samyamani by name, Sri Krsna (who is solicited by the people), 
accompanied by Balarama (who had a plough for his weapon), blew the (Same) conch. 
Hearing the blast of the conch Yama, the chastiser of the people (transgressing the scriptural 
ordinance), offered to Them both worship ona grand scale, accompanied with devotion, and, 
bendirig low (with humility), addressed (as follows) Sri Krsna, who has His abode in the heart 
of all created beings (as the Inner Controller of all), “"O Visnu (the all-pervading Lord) 
disguised as a human being by way of sport,what can we do for You both ?" (42—44)

MATA Tara 
Teqaterica fropdtaeal AM ENS | eT: 1S41 
aa ada wet wanttiaat wma yet quitsfa aged: ive 
The glorious Lord said : "Impelled by My command, O great ruler, fetch My preceptor's 
Son, who was brought here as a result of his own Karma.” (45) Handing over to Their

Preceptor his son, brought by Yama with the words "So be it!" the two Brothers, the foremost 
of the Yadus, said to him, "(Be pleased to) ask for another boon (of your choice).” (46)

RCA A 
AaeH Wofedt aa Haart Wess: iat az QUI: HAMAR 1s 
Ted way dt aida Wetiodeamamit wakag WA a Isc!

TWeVlaaaat TIAA | BM AT A Usted Ft sel

Cae WS: Mal Gel Waeidtismearal seh ASST Fa hol

sf sitreriad AEM IRAs Sedat ca Yale WRG A Versrealaiiseara: wu

The preceptor replied : "The debt of your preceptor has been fully repaid by you both 
O my child ! Which of the desires of him who has been a preceptor to pupils like you can 
remain unfulfilled as a matter of fact ? (47) Return to your home, O valiant ones ! May your 
glory purify all and let the Vedas (ever) remain fresh (in your memory) here as well as 
hereafter." (48) Thus permitted by Their preceptor, the two Brothers forthwith returned to 
Their city (Mathura), O dear Pariksit, in Their chariot swift as wind and thundering like a 
cloud.(49) All the people (of Mathura) greatly rejoiced to behold Balarama and Sri Krsna 
(whom they had missed for many days) like people who had (once) lost and (then) recovered 
their wealth. (50)

Thus ends the forty-fifth discourse entitled "The Lord brings back His preceptor's son 
(from the abode of Death)," in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Discourse XLVI 
The Lord relieves the agony of Nanda (by despatching Uddhava to Vraja

with a message of endearment) 
MP SAAT

qa Wet dat Hora aad: Wari et qed: aeesal aegana: | gt 
ae War WS Adda wha Veleat ufo ufo sosnfded eit: 1 2 | 
Tela set ara foal wifagimdar afsarnit aceite 3 | 
a Ate Aso ee wendlent: |( ama chad Beara Aaa wa: 1*)

a amore aeef am fase «| 
aft mM: Saat 3S que mMpofea: | wieedise faqeba fahenvsafagen: | & | 
Aeaiipant WS: WO BISA waMMaacsdeoe A aera: | & |

Sri Suka began again : A beloved friend and counsellor of Sri Krsna was Uddhava, the 
most distinguished of the Vrsnis and a direct disciple of the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor 
of the gods) and foremostin intelligence. (1) Clasping his hand with His own ona certain day; 
Lord Sri Hari, who alleviates the suffering of those that flee (for protection) to Him, spoke (as 
follows) to Uddhava, who was most beloved of and exclusively devoted to Him:—(2) 
“Proceed you, gentle Uddhava, to Vraja and (thereby) bring delight to Our parents (Nanda 
and Yasoda) and relieve in particular the agony—caused by separation from Me—of the 
cowherd women through My messages. (8) The latter have not only given their mind to Me 
but their (very) life is centred in Me; (nay,) they have renounced for My sake everything

_ ~The part of the verse placed within brackets has not been commented on by Sridhara.

pis. 46 ] . BOOK TEN 597

connected with their body and have mentally taken refuge in Me alone, their beloved friend, 
the highest object of their affection, their very Self. | stand (through thick and thin) by those 
that have not only given up their interests in this as well as in the other world but have also 
setat naught their moral obligations for my sake. (4) |—the most beloved of (all) their beloved 
objects—being at a distance from them, the women of Vraja, O dear Uddhava, remain 
forgetful of everything (including their own self), thinking (constantly as they do) of me, and 
overwhelmed with intense longing occasioned by separation (from me). (5) With their mind 
absorbed In me the cowherd women are in most cases somehow propping up their life with 
great difficulty on my assurances of coming back (to Vraja)." (6)

Soa 
sae Seat WM Gee ued: ene woe saat aanlee | 
TH Aasst sit Frorafa fase ioaaa: steer Waa | aR: 1c | 
afaaistiqeateated afeafired: | eraniifivs arentinaetent: aan 1 2 
set «= famgietiacfted fad: i ieesegdixd 4 aupt fata aieot 
Treas aah aa aspera: leogahiniiifieitas afer ieet 
sTaenltaterttastaqearetarrad: | qaatasy AICI MATAR 1221 
ada: ogfadat = fasnfepefert| deeeuSaralet: «uarussy afosatL 1231 
Sri Suka continued : Thus instructed (by the Lord) and mounting a chariot Uddhava 
drove to Nanda’'s Gokula (a station of cowherds) carrying the message of his Master (Sri 
Krsna) with (great) reverence. (7) The blessed one reached Nanda's Vraja while the sun was 
(just) setting, his chariot obscured with the dust raised by the hoofs of cattle that were 
entering Vraja (at that very moment). (8) The place was rendered noisy by bulls in rut 
contending with one another for the sake of cows in heat and by cows rushing to meet their 
(respective) calves though oppressed with the weight of their udders. (9) (Nay,) itwas graced 
with white calves capering here and there as well as with the music of flutes and was full of 
noise, on all sides, accompanied with the sound of the milking of cows. (10) Again, it shone 
most resplendent with cowherd women richly adorned and singing the noble deeds of 
Balarama and Sn Krsna, as well as with cowherds. (11) The place ravished the mind with 
its dwellings of cowherds characterized by the worship of sacred fires, the sun-god, 
newcomers, cows, Brahmanas, the manes and gods as well as with frankincense (that was 
being burnt there), and lights and garlands (with which the houses were decorated). (12) It 
aboundedin groves in full blossom on all sides and was rendered noisy with the notes of birds 
and the humming of black bees and was graced with beds of lotuses crowded with swans 
and Karandavas (a species of ducks). (13)

aan «warrant «aire: sila: uftgea arqeaferretad iex 
Wha waa das aft qe! was udgesd aadaleaata: 1241 
nlaeg Wear aa a: erat: | AA HPacaqreelgenl Uh: Teaad: 12S 1 
fear del Fa: WE: ST: BA TST are eedatert agai eS aA: Faq 1X91 
arf BART A: FN ATAL YRS: ANAL MI at TAT et Gare PTT RC 
grararentt TRE: SS THAT! Ae RATA Tea ATA Aeraory 1281 
alalaaictaratel quads fetal: | Suet Wau: PFOA ARIAT 1201 
Sat HerTatatiar ares PTE RTAAL | BRT SITAR AGG eT a: FRrteTO: Fea: 1 I

Re Re Re Re Re RRR ERE RE RR RR RE RE RE ERE Re TE ER eR eR We We We We We We We Ve Me He We We We We We We Wee He He BEEBE SEER Be Be He Be Re Ke ve sew,

S TRSICECIECUCE YPC | SHSTAMAATTAT Hat Aft AAT 122 
wa FU a wi a wales qaeati gem Hela wie qed eT 1231 
a aga uest usaf aaisafest dteda ugha ymin: 1x1 
qeadt weet waleaudelanaca wea aareneee PRT IRU1 
serat «6 qaisheeuradt «6 SeTea: 1 ee: Aad eat Ate Sleat 12e1

Delighted to meet and embrace that beloved servant of Sri Krsna, arrived at his door, 
Nanda showed him (every) regard, looking upon him as Sri Krsna (Himself). (14) When he 
had been (duly) treated to rice boiled in milk with sugar (which has been regarded as the best 
food) and was comfortably seated in a couch and had been relieved of his fatigue by 
kneading his feet and other (such) services (rendered by a servant), Nanda enquired of him 
(as follows):—(15) "Is our friend, Vasudeva (the delight of Sura), O dear Uddhava, doing well, 
O highly blessed one, (now that he is) free (from bondage), united with his sons and others 
(wives and so on) and surrounded by his near and dear ones ? (16) Luckily (enough for us) 
the wicked Kamsa—who always hated the pious Yadus, that are given to (the practice of) 
- virtue—has been killed alongwith his followers (younger brothers) by his own sin. (17) Does 
Krsna remember us and his mother (sitting there), (other relations) and playmates, the 
cowherds (in general), (the people of) Vraja, that looked upon him as its protector, the cows, 
(the woodland of) Vrndavana and the (Govardhana) hill ? (18) Will Sri Krsna (the protector 
of cows) come over (to this place but) once to see his own people ? Then (only) we shall (be 
able to) behold his countenance with a shapely nose and winsome smiles and glances. (19) 
We were protected from forest fire, storm and rain, the demon Arista (who came disguised 
as a bull) and a python (named Sudarsana)—perils that were (so) difficult to overcome—by 
Sri Krsna, who Is exceedingly magnanimous. (20) (Even) as we remember the exploits of 
Sri Krsna, his sportful sidelong looks, laughter and talk, O dear Uddhava, all our activities get 
Slackened. (21) (Nay) our mind gets absorbed in him as we behold the streams, hills and 
woodlands as well as the playgrounds graced by the footprints of Sri Krsna (the Bestower 
of Liberation). (22) | look upon Krsna and Balarama too as the foremost of divinities come 
down here (on this earth) for (accomplishing) some momentous purpose of the gods, as the 
word of Garga indicated. (23) They killed in mere sport Kamsa, who possessed the strength 
of (not less than) ten thousand elephants, and (his) two (principal) wrestlers (Cantra and 
Mustika) as well as Kuvalayapida (the chief of his elephants) (just) as a lion (the king of 
beasts) would kill (a number of) animals. (24) Krsna snapped the most powerful bow (of 
Kamsa) measuring 3 Talas (equivalent to 27 spans*), (even) as a leader of elephants 
would break a sugarcane, and held the (Govardhana) hill with one hand for a (full) week. 
(25) (Nay,) by the two brothers were sportfully slain here (in this land of Vraja) the demons 
Pralamba, Dhenuka, Arista, Trnavarta, Baka and others, who had conquered gods as well

as demons.” (26) 
MP SAA 
ga Wa WA Aa: PONG: |\agqevsisuagei wpraage: 1201 
iat aia We Ad al yoawyvaarenaid eater 2c 
wake wait get waited: deat wel wenreheal er izet

Sri Suka continued : Thus vividly remembering again and again all about the two 
Brothers Nanda, whose mind was full of love for Sri Krsna, kept quiet, seized as he was with

* “crenl Adfadeda:' : so says the lexicographer Devabodha.

Dis. 46 ] BOOK TEN 299

excessive longing and overwhelmed with a flood of love. (27) Hearing of her Son's exploits 
being recounted (as aforesaid), YaSoda too shed tears (of love), her breasts overflowing with

(maternal) affection. (28) Perceiving such Supreme love of Nanda and Yasoda for Lord Sri 
Krsna Uddhava joyfully spoke to Nanda (as follows). (29)

SEA SATA

Gat wreart eerie agi anenishaet aaa afadtigait 130 1

wt f fr a sive wit uae: yes: se!

aaa yy freee ESS eS aru 1381

ats: sifearrere at wanasr «wat faxret |

mea amare af out «ft sematschant: 1321

de wadafeermedt anet anomeindf i

wea fat fat veer fe ares gaat: anei33i 
arate = le TATE: | frat feared fletsitarm area ofa: 13x! 
ea wa Was wild adaKaa| sale a: GAMA HM: Aa Hilla da i3al 
a fae HeTarit sear: HM i sre A waa whfafaafa ise 
aq genket fa: afsearrar ara: | anrat area arf aarrearanisi at 1301 
a are a frat ae a arat A Wale: | aren A arena a tel ST Wa a 13BCI

qa ae ad a ale aaaraseniag | miter: aisit area aaron Head 1381 
Ga wea sit werd Felt qo wtsadtdtsr ql: geareatt eet: 1vol 
aq owaftcrepa wradia ndladifad wd date adarefee yd: 1¥2! 
qa¢ra Aarne war eft: | adarncast een fad Ara a Sat: 1X2! 
eS At wa aoe ee a I 
mt A at W@W wa Ba aise: 1%3!

Uddhava said : Indeed you two (Yasoda and Nanda) are the most praiseworthy of (all) 
embodied beings here (on this earth), O bestower of honour (on us all, of being the servants 
of the Lord, who has been made available to us only through you), in that such (unique) love 
has been conceived by you for Sri Krsna (who is no other than Lord Narayana), the Father 
and.Controller of all. (30) Indeed Balarama and Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation)— They 
are (both) the material and the efficient cause of the universe; They are also the Purusa 
(individual soul) and Pradhana (primordial Matter). (Nay,) entering into the (various) living 
Organisms They control the various types of consciousness (in the form of the individual soul 
conditioned by those organisms), eternal (beginningless) as They are. (31) Focussing (even) 
One's impure mind on Sri Krsna (merely) for an instant at the time of death one speedily 
attains the supreme goal, burning the store of Karma and becoming one with Brahma (the 
Absolute) and attaining a form consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas. (32) You 
cherish (such) great devotion to that Supreme Spirit, Lord Narayana, the Soul as well as the 
Source of all, who has assumed a human semblance for some purpose. What meritorious 
act remains to be done by you two (under the circumstances)? (33) At no distant date will 
the divine Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), the Protector of the Yadus, come (back) to Vraja and

bring delight to (you) His parents. (34) Sri Krsna will make good what He told you* on coming

* Vide verse 23 of Discourse XLV above.

back after killing Karmsa, the enemy of the Yadus, in the midst of an (open) assembly. (35) 
Grieve not, O highly blessed ones; you will (at no distant date) find Sri Krsna by your Side. 
He dwells in the heart of (all) created beings (even) as fire (is latent) in wood. (36) Indeeq | 
none is dear or unwelcome to Him, whois notidentified with a (particular) body. Noris anyone | 
superior or inferior nor even unequal in His eyes, He being the same (to all). (37) He has 
neither father nor mother, neither wife nor sons etc.; none is His own or alien to Him; nor can

a body, much less birth or action be attributed to Him. Even as such He descends in high,

low and mixed species (of life) in the world for the sake of pastime with a view to protecting

the virtuous. (38-39) Though untouched by the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), He 
assumes the qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, and, sporting with them, though (really) 
transcending them, the birthless Lord evolves, maintains and absorbs the universe by 
means of these Gunas here (in the realm of Prakrti). (40) (Just) as when looked at with a 
revolving eye (by a revolving person) the earth is seen rotating or while the mind (alone) is

the doer, the soul is recognized as such due to its identification with the mind, so is God held

to be responsible for the creation etc., of the universe, although, as a matter of fact, the same

is being done by the Gunas. (41) He, the divine Sri Krsna (the alleviator of the distress of all)

is certainly not only your son; for He is the Son, the (very) Self, the Father, the Mother, (Nay,)

the Ruler of all. (42) (Nay,) nothing which is seen or heard of, has gone by or is (still) existent

or which is (yet) to come, which is immobile or mobile, big or small, is really worth naming 
(when considered) apart from God; for He alone is everything, He alone is true. (43)

w Fa aM gadeldia Aaa PONG We! 
We: aq Fea daa ae aaa aie xy! 
at aadtqaiirtatas Talldendagsrna gure: | 
; IS& I 
SHadarantaeerada Ase feanegaia tata: |

qag 0 Ptieateditiadt «=o tet a feITTgEL «EI

The night slipped past Nanda and Uddhava (Sri Krsna's servant) while they were thus 
chatting, O king ! Quitting their bed (towards the close of night), kindling their lights and duly 
worshipping (on the threshold etc.), the deities presiding over their house the cowherdesses 
(of Vraja) began to churn their curds. (44) With rows of bangles round their wrists pulling the 
cords (that revolved the churning-staff), their cheeks shining with (bright) ear-rings (that 
rocked with the motion of their arms), and their faces painted with red saffron (a product of 
the Balkh territory), the Gopis looked very charming with gems (in their girdle etc.), 
brightened by the lights, their hips, breasts and necklaces shaking (all the time). (45) (Now) 
rose to the heavens the music of the women of Vraja, who were celebrating at the pitch of 
their voice the exploits of Sri Krsna (the lotus-eyed Lord), blended with the (gurgling) noise

produced by the churning of curds, both of which combined to drive away the evil forces 
operating in the (four) quarters. (46)

Wadied gl wagt asine: 1 eet wt aaa meat aaa vol 
WR Bid: fH al a: Hata: | aa Att aga Hen: aacle: Ic! 
fe mereaentadd: Serer Preapfer sft eter aexitaragalste ratfes: 1% | 
eit Area A Teen Sedat eae Vole eahaTaey A veaahcasea: («|

Seeing a chariot plated with gold at the portals of Nanda, now that the glorious sun-god

pis. 47 ] BOOK TEN ane

had appeared (atthe horizon), the (unsophisticated) women of Vraja (who had no knowledge 
of the outside world, Sri Krsna being their solitary concern), inquired (of one another) as to 
whose chariot It was, and suggested as follows:—(47) "May it be that Akrara—by whom the 
lotus-eyed Sri Krsna was taken away to Mathura (the city founded by and named after the 
demon Madhu), and who (thus) accomplished the purpose of Karnsa (his master)—has 
turned up (once more). (48) Is he (now) going to offer oblations to (the spirit of) his deceased 
master with our bodies (flesh)?" While the women were talking in this strain, Uddhava

returned (to Nanda’'s residence from the bank of the holy Yamuna) having finished his daily 
routine (of bath and devotions). (49)

Thus ends the forty-sixth discourse entitled "Sri Krsna dispels the agony of Nanda," 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

et P.xcek t= = 
DTS OID

Dialogue between Uddhava and the Gopis and ode to a black bee 
MIA SAA 
aq diet emqet asia: senaeg qaaetoraa | 
Great = eed 0S Rat UT HUSSL | ° | 
Qfafeat: cmisaadhaeda: pas melreqqaayenr: | 
st CT: Reels | 2 | 
a sso: ach Usiseraaurgaaars: | 
WUT quasars faqra Uealat Trad: | 3 | 
wriaeat aeud: use BAUM! dae Sa: fatter Pafaatdar 1 x | 
TIM Wat A BU A asi aes aA WARY Yass: 1 & | 
sige 8 at «= araaeifasrarrn| yf: eity qe Gar Gaafeaa Feu: |G A 
freq weha uftrent ated Fafa sem: 1 sreitafaen strendykast anafamri © | 
WM aces Gat aa TAA RAI ST PMTAANLOS SIT aT Tell Rete | 
sft went fe mae Waa: | Fenga Asi aa Tad Aetienent: 1 < | 
Tree: franuifit wes wdlea: de dae Gaye at Sees: 1201 
calfernerent page famed gd mealacdeseit 122! 
SriSuka ae on the aforesaid nantes Sri Krsna with unusually long 
arms, eyes resembling a pair of fresh-blown lotuses anda bright lotus-like countenance, clad 
in yellow (silk) and wearing a garland of lotuses and adorned with ear-rings brilliant with

gems, all the women of Vraja with bright smiles eagerly surrounded Uddhava, who had taken 
shelter under the lotus-feet of Sri Krsna (the illustrious Lord), wondering who he was with

-(such) a handsome appearance and dressed and adorned in the style of that immortal Lorg 
whence he had come and whose son (or servant) he was. (1-2) Concluding him to be a 
messenger from Sri Krsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu, the Spouse of Goddess 
Rama), the Gopis, bent low with modesty, enquired of him in private (as follows) when he haq 
been duly greeted with bashful smiles and glances and kind words etc., and had squatteg 
on a seat:—(8) "We know you to be a companion of Sri Krsna (the Lord of the Yadus), duly 
arrived in our midst. You have been despatched here by your master with intent to Dring 
delight to His parents. (4) Otherwise we do not find anything worth remembering for Him in 
Vraja, a (mere) pasture-land for cows. Ties of affection for one's relations are most difficult 
to disregard even for a hermit. (5) Friendship with others (who are not bound by ties of 
blood)—like that cultivated by lovers with their sweethearts or by black bees with flowers— 
actuated as itis by self-interest, lasts (only) till one’s interests continue to be served (by them) 
and is (at best) a travesty of love. (6) Harlots forsake a destitute (lover); the people, an 
incapable ruler; students who have learnt what they wanted to learn, their teacher; the priests 
officiating at a sacrifice, the sacrificer who has paid the sacrificial fees (at the end of the 
sacrifice); the birds, a tree from which fruits have disappeared; strangers, a dwelling (which 
afforded shelter to them) after finishing their meal; animals, a burnt forest and a paramour, 
a women attached to him (even though unsated), the moment he has enjoyed her." (7-8) In 
this way, when Uddhava, the messenger of Sri Krsna, arrived in Vraja, the cowherd women, ~ 
whose speech, body and mind were undoubtedly devoted to Sri Krsna, (the Protector of 
cows) cast to the winds (all) worldly etiquette. (9) Recalling again and again the exploits of 
Sri Krsna (their beloved Lord), that pertained to His boyhood and infancy they celebrated 
them in song and wept, (all) sense of shame having taken leave of them. (10) Musing over - 
her (past) union with Sri Krsna and (presently) perceiving a black bee (before her), a certain 
Gopi (presumably Sri Radha Herself, the foremost and the beloved of all Gopis, some of 
whom loved Her even more than they loved Sri Krsna) fancied it to be a messenger 
despatched by Sri Krsna (her Darling) and spoke” as follows. (11)

Aen fadaeent a Waa wen: Gaagiotnop_AAA: | 
qeq Auta sete agua fasst ge adeatiiem 1221 
APARAN Bi Ate weatta Ta sa PaaS Wales | 
@ e SI 
Unetit mae daeus gq ue ala ad gael saeclensicd: 1231 
fate ag Yseh Tafa a aeamiemfaayeonasd A: GTO 
rset Maat des: aides caecaritefirsr: iexl 
fafa Yfa a tara an: faetguar: qucefererayfaserear at: @: | 
FURS Set Tea Yt ar si a gous gaged: 1241 
5 e a 
fags anfe we age agendas atebiq 
* Authoritative Vaisnava commentators like Sanatana Goswami, who are believed to have actually witnessed these Lilas 
of Sri Krsna and His beloved Gopis by the special grace of the Lord, have traced the following utterances to Sri Radha, on the 
basis of the Agni-Purana as well as on the strength of their own transcendent vision. Again, these utterances are believed to 
have escaped from the lips of Sri Radha in a state of divine ecstasy (Divyonmada), which has no parallel anywhere and is the 
Special monopoly of Sri Radha, a unique personification of Mahabhava, the highest and purest form of divine Love. Thesé

utterances have also been classified under various heads such as Citrajalpa, which have been clearly defined in standard works 
on poetics like the Ujjvala-nilamani of Rupa Goswami.

pis. 47 ] | BOOK TEN 303

aed Fe Qe agen: fe q watanferties 
Waa ats feet qari fae feat eft: ara 
ateaty stemraraga Saga AeA STATA: 1219 | 
aeqahelmrenutii ya feargerpactaegregerat fae: | 
wale ees daa det aga ge fees faaeat aha ieci 
aaqdta genet seem: opfeeredtarn: HOTA Ba: | 
Sepa AGA aE SOA TOA AAaTA 128 t 
freee GRIT: seen Sita: fee aw feet arias Ase 
Tare Hartera gees waaga ata sitely: aa 120 | 
ama sa Haqaiargaiserisset Sit Tiger aha west a |

erate A He a: fag quit ysEER yearend wel F122!

The Gopi said : O black bee (lit., the sucker of honey), O friend of Sri Krsna (a 
treacherous lover), (pray) do not touch our feet (by way of supplication) with your (moustache- 
like) tentacles tinged (red) with the saffron of the garland (of Sri Krsna) pressed against the 
breasts (painted with saffron) of our rivals (at Mathura). Let Sri Krsna (the Chief of the 
Madhus), whose messenger you are—you who are distinguished by such characteristics (as 
have been depicted just now)—bear (on His garland etc.), the token of favour (in the shape 
of marks of saffron etc.), of those proud ladies (of Mathura), which would be an object of 
ridicule for the court of the Yadus. (What will you gain by conciliating us rustic women of 
Vraja?) (12) Having allowed us to drink the entrancing nectar of His lips (but) once, He 
deserted us, innocent women, all of a sudden (even) as a black bee like you would leave the 
(guileless) flowers. | wonder how Laksmi (who is reputed to be very clever and discerning) 
continues to serve His lotus-feet (which She would not if She came to know of His infidelity 
and ungratefulness) ? Presumably Sne does so (only) because She has Her mind captivated 
alas ! by the honeyed words of our illustrious Lord (We for our part have grown too wise to 
be deceived any more by His false promises). (13) Why do you, O six-legged one, glorify 
before us homeless people here at (such) length Sri Krsna (now the Lord of the Yadus), the 
(most) Ancient One (and therefore to well-known to us to need any introduction) ? Let His 
Stories be (profitably) sung in the presence of the (blessed) lady companions of Sri Krsna 
(who is shortly going to be nicknamed as Arjuna's Friend). They will (in return for Your 
Service) confer on you the object of your desire, beloved as they are of Him and have the 
agony of their heart soothed (by His loving embraces). (14) What women are there on earth, 
in heaven or in the subterranean regions, who are hard to win for the playful movements of 
His eyebrows accompanied by His cunning and winsome smiles ? Of what account are we 
in His eyes, whose dust of feet (even) Laksmi (the goddess of fortune) worships? 
Nevertheless (tell Him that) the epithet of Uttamasloka (one enjoying excellent fame), as a 
matter of fact, applies to him who espouses the cause of the forlorn (like) us. (15) Leave my 
foot, on which you have placed your head, acquainted as | am with you, who know how to 
win over others with blandishments and messages (of love), having learnt this art from Sri 
Krsna (who is a past master in such artifices). (Ah,) He left here us, who had for His own sake 
renounced our children, husband and (even happiness in) the other world (obtainable 
through virtuous conduct alone), fickle-minded as He is. What, then, is to be gained by 
coming to terms with Him ? (16) Hard-hearted by nature, He (in His previous descent as sri 
Rama) hit (with an arrow) Vali (the lord of the monkeys) like a hunter (without giving him any

Sere tet Sette Sea Set teeter gt sete oe Ree OM Res Se Ne SEE We We We We We We We Be We We We We SRE RE RSE RR RR He Beer 
i... tT a. ae

notice or challenging him to an open combat according to the established canons of warfare) 
and, domineered over by His Consort (Sita), deformed a woman (Strpanakha),who had 
approached Him with lust (in her heart). (Nay,) having accepted (as the divine Dwarf) Bali's 
_ worship (in the form of a gift of land measuring three strides) He bound him (even) as a crow 
would (in conjunction with other crows) surround (and plague) its feeder after eating the food 
offered by the latter. Therefore, enough of friendship with those possessed of a dark hue. 
(Yet) the treasure in the form of His story is difficult to forgo. (17) With (all) their natura 
propensities (in the form of likes and dislikes etc.), existing as pairs of opposites uprooted 
by tasting but once even a small bit of His supremely delightful stories, which fall as nectar 
on their ears, and (thus) completely ruined (in the eyes of the world), and leaving all of a 
sudden their home and family in a wretched condition, many men here lead a life of 
mendicants, deprived of (all) enjoyment, like so many birds. (18) Believing as true the (false) 
professions (of love) on the part of that Cheat, (even) as she-deer, the foolish companions 
of a black antelope, would put faith in the (deceptive) music of a hunter and suffer the torment 
of being hit with a shaft, we ignorant sweethearts of Sri Krsna have repeatedly suffered this 
fate, having been subjected to smarting pangs of love occasioned by the (loving) touch of 
His nails. (Therefore,) O messenger, let any other topic be discussed (and talk no more of 
Sri Krsna, whose very mention awakens memories that accentuate our agony of separation 
from Him). (19) O friend of our beloved Lord ! sent (back) by our Darling (though stung with 
Our pungent words), have you come (fo us) again ? (If so,) ask what you would (of us); (for) 
you are worthy of honour to me, O dear one! How will you take us—who are here—to His 
side, whose companionship is difficult to forgo (once it is had) ? (For) His (divine) Spouse, 
Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity), O gentle one, ever remains with Him on His very 
bosom (in the form a golden streak). (20) Ah, is my Darling lit., son of one's father-in-law“ 
now at Mathura (has returned from the house of His preceptor after completing His studies 
there)? Does He remember, O gentle one, his paternal house (the house of His godfather, 
Nanda) as well as His relations and (other) cowherds? Does He ever make any references 
to us His maid-servants ? Oh, when will He (return to Vraja and) place His arm, more 
fragrant (even) than aloe-wood, on our head (by way of consolation)? (21)

My SATA. 
_ aerea Peed qamesderoa: | aea fraacenifiifierard 1221 
sri Suka resumed: On hearing this (unprecedented) effusion of love, Uddhava forthwith

spoke as follows to the cowherd women—who had been pining for a sight of Sri Krsna— 
comforting them with messages (of love) from their beloved Lord. (22)

SEA Sad 
He Fa A Wat wal etnuiet: bara wat arenfreafid aa: 1231 
CMAs aaa aT: | Hartafefatara: Heat ain aead 12x!

TAG MARC ch Fada | ake: seattat fest qatarafa qa 1241 
(eal Var Uc Cer SSM, Me St | feearquite Yat Ge POMEL Ged aa 12s! 
Pace stead Maca ast | AKT. ASTIN Aer AsqAE: a: 120! 
Jan Bart adit Wea: | waar Wat ste sd Went: 1261

* It is forbidden in our Sastras to utter one's own name or that of one's preceptor and other elders (including one's parents

and grandparents, husband and his parents and so on), that of an abject miser or of one's eldest son or wedded wife even while

dying: — 2TH TA APIA 1 WASH 4 eo VARGA: IN (Karmalocana)

. if 
pis. 4 ] BOOK TEN 305

eae SS SS

BOW WER eRe We Me Ree He He eH Wet, We Or ore, 
tr tr 
mt 8 CMERERE RE WE He eMe Be He Mee Me Be Me Re eM RH RE Meee He Ree ee ee eee ee ee uJ

Uddhava said : Oh, you (Gopis) have (all) your objects accomplished indeed and are 
the adored of (all) the worlds In that your mind is so (fully and exclusively) absorbed in Lord 
vasudeva. (23) Devotion to Sri Krsna indeed is sought to be attained through charitable gifts 
fasting, austerities pouring oblations into the sacred fire, muttering prayers, study of the 
Vedas, self-control and various other virtuous practices. (24) It is a matter for congratulation 
that the ideal of Supreme devotion to the divine Lord of excellent renown—which is hard to 
attain even for Sages—has been set up by you. (25) It is (further) gratifying (to note) that you 
(all) have sought the Supreme Person under the name of SH Krsna neglecting (your) 
children , husbands and other relations, dwellings, nay, (your very) bodies. (26) Due to (your) 
separation (from the Lord) you have developed exclusive devotion to Sri Krsna (which has 
enabled you to behold Him in all that meets the eye). (Nay,) you have conferreda (great) boon 
on me (by thus affording me an opportunity to witness your unprecedented love with my own 
eyes), O highly blessed ones ! (27) (Now) listen to the message of your Darling (Sri Krsna), 
which (I am sure) will bring joy to you and carrying which |, who execute His ‘secret 
commissions, have come (to you), O good ladies ! (28)

MTT ATA 
vada frat a 2 fe wafer wf am anh say a aRafaic at 1 
AMS A AAMUIYAraATONSA: 12e | 
WAAaAISSA GA waded | seamed WArAANAT 130 | 
SN AMAA: Bal Stlahentsqoraa: | qafParssasAlarghsattad 1321 
ars wed WNT wWNadled: i diaeenieksarar fats: weaweld 1321 
Uden: Waa art: Bret Aton! GATE eA: Aa AAsra Fa: 1331

The glorious Lord says : Your separation from Me, the material cause of all (and 
therefore present in all as their very Self), is not possible under any circumstance. (Just) as 
the (five gross) elements—(viz.,) ether, the air, fire,;water and earth—are present in (all) 
created beings (as their constituents), so am I, underlying as | do the mind, the vital airs, the 
elements, the Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action) and the 
(three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti). (29) In Myself (as the ground) do | create, maintain and 
(then) dissolve Myself (in the form of the cosmos) by dint of My own Maya (creative energy) 
by Myself in the form of the elements, the Indriyas and the Gunas. (30) The Spirit is all 
knowledge, transcendent, unconnected with the (three) Gunas and (absolutely) pure 
(untainted by Maya). It is experienced through the (various) states of the mind (viz., 
wakefulness, the dream state and deep sleep), brought about by Maya. (31) Remaining 
vigilant (all the time), one should (therefore endeavour to) control that mind through which 
one conceives the (various) objects of sense (viz., sound, touch, sight, taste and smell), 
though unreal—like one who, when awake, recalls the objects seenina dream—and seizes 
the senses. (32) In the eyes of the wise, (the teachings of) the Vedas, the (eightfold) path of 
Yoga, the Sankhya system of philosophy (which differentiates Matter from the Spirit), 
renunciation, suffering hardships for the sake of one's faith, subjugation of one's senses and 
truthfulness have their goal in mind-control even as rivers terminate in the ocean. (33)

aa wade & A ad fea Aare: afaestel Aaya ax! 
am aart 38 wa sila ada | aint a A dat Ad: Uappsiarirart 1341 
nerdsa wa: ae faqaegit ai agercet oat eafeawragrera 1341 
Al HAT HSA VAT SASHA TST STITT: SERA: HAVA AissHslatterdar 1319 1

SRR ORE RE Re Ar RR Re RRR Re Ree ee A A RE We Br We We We Ve Be Me We We We Me Me Ae Vee ee ee eee eee ee wenawaeet 
We we

Itis only with intent to focus your thought constantly on Me in order to ensure your mental 
proximity with Me that I, your Darling, am actually staying (so) far from your eyes. (34) The 
mind of women as well as of others does not get so absorbed in the thought of their most 
beloved one living close by and open to their view as in that of one staying at a distance. (35) 
Incessantly thinking of Me (as you do), having devoted to Me your whole (undivided) ming 
which has completely shed all (other) thoughts, you will come to Me before long. (36) Those 
blessed (cowherd) women who (having been held back by their husbands and others) stayed 
away in Vraja and could not (therefore) get an opportunity to sport with Me while | diverted 
myself in the woodland (of Vrndavana) one night attained to Me through contemplation on

My exploits. (37) 
ARIA SAA 
wa ffacnfesmrencd =o awelita: iol eee | ieee: 1301 
Sri Suka continued : Delighted to hear the message of Sri Krsna (their most beloved 
Lord), the aforesaid women of Vraja spoke to Uddhava (as follows), their memories of Sri 
Krsna having been awakened by His message. (38) 
MA] HZ: 
fesaifed! Sd: Hal Aeat Bsa! fesassuserate: PacaRASAAISAAT 139 | 
ide Wels: Ara milla wratfeanti sift a: fereradteeratenenfea: vot 
wa vafasss: fas avarfear aaa delaafeswaasrquiistd: 1¥e 
aifa wit A: ret Tae: seqa afar Mesa yeu wre: eHurd 1X2! 
a: fe fen: ea arg dat frenfteceat HyeHpeaenss | 
WW AUR SeStaasha: «= half 13 | 
saree aed: Whda Bei usiaat 7 al Masel aaaage: 1xx 
Hed HV Feaa WAM fed: \AtaHa sala wid: Adaeaad: v4

feneniidarifacatiat 89 vera: | sitaerqerrer «= fepatenef: §« peeta: 161 
Ut ane fe qed ahvaene figer detadmt a: Hel aM eteM IX

eS sHed 9 wepatHdiaa sheds aa seta wad wld 1¥e! 
aserien Mat ape gli agdvesa errata: wit vei 
: OF: Brat wenugd adi sitttenderaenider Aa zg: i4ol 
TAT Cladatenedetetaete: | areca fini eaters: met qd faerrae 142! 
2 Ta ¢ Wa asenhiae | wager Mee Mes ghar ihe!

The Gopis said : By good-luck Karnsa, the (sworn) enemy and persecutor of the Yadus, 
has been killed alongwith his followers. It is a matter for (further) gratification that Sri Krsna 
(the immortal Lord) is now doing well with His relations, who have attained all their objects 
(through Him). (39) (Others said), Does Sri Krsna (elder Brother of Gada), who was (till the 
other day) greeted (by us) with our loving and pleasing glances accompanied by bashful 
smiles, bring delight to the women of the city (of Mathura), O gentle one? (40) (Still others 
said,) How can He, an expert in love-making and (hence) beloved of charming women, help 
being won over (by them) when greeted with their (sweet) words and amorous gestures 2(41) 
(Some more said,) Does Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows), O pious one, remember us, rustic

is, 47 ] ; BOOK TE 
We Fr Fr

women, in any context in the course of an unreserved talkin an assembly of the ladies of the 
city ? (42) (Others said,) Does He (ever) recall those nights, during that period (of His stay 
in Vraja), when He sported with (us) His sweethearts in (the woodland of) Vrndavana, 
charming with lilies and JasmiInes as well as with a full moon (bearing a spot resembling the 
figure of a hare) in the ring of the Rasa dance accompanied by the sound of jingling anklets, 
in the course of which His delightful stories were sung (by us)? (43) Will Sri Krsna (a scion 
of Dasarha) ever come over here to infuse new life into us—tormented (as we are) with grief 
occasioned by (separation from) Him—by (the soothing touch of) His (delightful) limbs even 
as Indra (the god of rain) would refresh a forest (scorched with summer heat) by (Sending) 
clouds (of rain)? (44) (Still others said,) Wherefore should Sri Krsna come here now that He 
has slain His enemies and attained sovereignty and, surrounded by all His kinsmen (the 
Yadus), will feel (extremely) delighted when He has married (so many) princesses? (45) 
(Some more wisely said,) What purpose of the high-souled Sri Krsna (the Spouse of Sri), who 
has (all) His desires fulfilled and is (ever) perfect in His (own) Self, could be served by us, 
dwelling in a forest, or (even) by other ladies (of royal descent)? (46) Even Pingala, a wanton 
woman (of the legend), (once) spoke of hopelessness as the only road to supreme 
happiness. Though we know (all) that, our hope to meet Sri Krsna is nevertheless hard to 
overcome. (47) Who can dare withdraw his mind from the confidential talk of Sri Krsna (who 
is extolled by the most high, nay,) from whose person (bosom) Sri (the goddess of beauty 
and prosperity) never gets down even though He does not long for Her ? (48) Alas! the river 
(Yamuna), the mountain (Govardhana) and the forest lands (of Vrndavana), the cows and 
the notes of flutes over there, hallowed (as they are) by Sri Krsna coupled with Sankarsana 
(through association with Them), O mighty Uddhava, awaken again and again the memory 
of Sri Krsna (the Son of Nanda, the cowherd chief) through His footprints, the abodes of (all) 
charm and prosperity. Surely we cannot (therefore) forget Him. (49-50) How can we forget 
Him—O Uddhava, we, whose mind has been captivated by His charming gait, pleasing 
laughter and playful glances as well as by His honeyed words? (51) O Lord, O Spouse of 
Rama, O Saviour of Vraja, O Reliever of (our) agony, O Protector of cows, lift (the village of) 
Gokula out of the ocean of suffering, in which it lies plunged. (52) 
Meh SATA

ae: POAC SAAASAT: | SA TATRA TST, 143 |

afteatthaoidie paar, AM! Pet Pemaq W eta ASNT 14 |

Sri Suka went on: The Gopis, whose agony of separation (from the Lord) was (now) 
gone to a large extent, thanks to the messages received from Sri Krsna, (duly) worshipped 
Uddhava, recognizing him to be Sri Krsna Himself (who is above sense-perception) and 
(therefore) their very Self. (53) He stayed for some months (there) in order to drive away the 
Qrief of the cowherd women. (Nay,) celebrating in song the story of the pastimes of Sri Krsna, 
he brought delight to (the entire village of) Gokula. (54) As long as the aforesaid Uddhava 
lived in Nanda's Vraja the days passed like (so many) moments with the people of Vraja in 
talks about Sri Krsna. (55) Eagerly observing the river, the woodlands and the dales as well 
as the trees in blossom and vividly reminding the inhabitants of Vraja of Sri Krsna (by 
questioning them about the pastimes connected with the various spots), Uddhava (the

Servant of Sri Krsna) spent his time in delight. (56)

adam owidint | qemaerefagan see: Teiite AEtTAR SRT 149 |

Udi: Ut Taya Ya Meaed Mere Ua Ahaems Bera: | 
aera ae vata qa ad a fh saa INaTa 1421 
a: fat araieiftenes: Het w ae aaah weuta: | 
TAMUSTUAASSAGS «—- TARTAN PTT || SANTA: 148 | 
aa Braise 3 Hara: Wale: Galeat AfereraeAl HeitsAT: 
TAA YAUSTEHVSosMaal A sake Asawa | Go | 
saat SRURUTAE Et Gerad feeafe geneity | 
TT gest eeaaad a fear Aagrauet afahattyrary 1 et 
a & fraticnntigeatant aera water 
POT dq waded Ae way faste: UR AMI GR | 
at acaelu weudlens: i art ekteeatgtad gata yaaa ica

Supremely delighted to perceive the anguish of mind—as depicted before* and of an 
allied nature—of the Gopis, occasioned by their absorbing thought of Sri Krsna, and bowing 
to them (in reverence), Uddhava sang as follows :—(57) "These cowherd women alone on. 
earth have justified their possessing a human body in that they have developed supreme love 
exclusively for Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows), the Soul of the universe—(a love) which not 
only strivers afraid of metempsychosis but sages (emancipated souls), nay, (even) we 
(devotees of the Lord) aspire for ? What (else) is there to be gained through (three kinds of) f 
births as a Brahmana by him who has developed a taste for the stories of Sri Krsna (the 
deathless Lord)? (Or what is to be gained through repeated births as Brahma by him who 
has not been able to develop a zest for such stories ?+ (58) The two are quite out of keeping 
with one another—these women (impure by their very sex), roaming about in woods and 
polluted (in the eyes of adverse critics) through infidelity to their (worldly) husbands, (on the 
one hand) and surpassing (unflinching) love for Sri Krsna, the Supreme Spirit, as depicted 
above (on the other)! Surely the almighty Lord, directly and liberally confers (final) beatitude 
on him who constantly remembers Him, though not knowing His reality, (just) as nectar (the 
sovereign of all medicines) does good (to an ailing person) when used (even unknowingly).(59) 
Oh, the grace which descended on the cowherdesses of Vraja—who attained the object of 
their desire in the form of having their necks encircled by His stout arms during the Rasa 
festival—did not fall to the lot of celestial damsels (nymphs) possessing the fragrance and 
splendour of a lotus, or (even) of Sri, whois exclusively attached to His person (bosom); how 
(then) could others expect such favour (from Him) ? (60) Oh, let me be (incarnated as) 
anyone of the shrubs, creepers or herbs in (the woodlands of) Vrndavana, catching the dust 
of feet of these (blessed ladies), who (successfully) trod the path (of Devotion) leading to Sri 
Krsna—(the path) which is (still) to be strenuously sought for (even) by the Upanisads$— 
oe Se ae ae aa eae Rapes.

" Vide verses 4 to 21 and 39 to 52 Supra.

T The three kinds of birth as a Brahmana are :—(1) physical birth from Brahmana parents, (2) investiture with the sacred 
thread and initiation in the holy Gayatri-Mantra, which is regarded as a second birth and (3) consecration befitting one for the 
performance of a sacrifice, which is looked upon as a third incarnation.

# The compound word °A+<huicaey, can be split up in two ways—firstly as 3ti-q + qe + Taq and secondly asi 
+ Hal + 441. The word ‘Brahma’ too admits of a double meaning. The alternative interpretation of the last quarater of the verse 
according to the latter way of splitting the compound has been shown within brackets.

SThis evidently refers to the Upanishadic text ‘adt arat Fada Sa1 AAAI Ae ’which tells us that “words (scriptural texts) 
fail to reach Brahma and return (unsuccessful) alongwith the mind:" :

a 
. 
~ 
- 
. 
- 
= 
. 
=

~

.

Dis. 47] BOOK TEN - 309

neglecting their own people as well as the path trodden by the virtuous, (both of) which are 
(so) difficult to abandon (for a chaste woman). (61) (Nay,) these Gopis completely shook off 
their agony (of separation from the Lord), embracing (as they did) those lotus-feet of the 
divine Sri Krsna which are actually fondled by Goddess Sri and mentally adored by (great 
gods like) Brahma and others, sages that have (all) their desires fulfilled (and are therefore 
free from all cravings), (nay,) even by masters of Yoga (like Siva, Sanaka and Narada), and 
which were (lovingly) placed (by the Lord) on their bosom in the gathering (of women) on the 
occasion of the Rasa dance! (62) | repeatedly salute the dust of feet of the (blessed) women 
of Nanda's Vraja, whose loud singing of the stories of Sri Krsna (who captivates all) purifies 
the three worlds.” (63)

MYA SAA 
ay MRT sel +weta WiMomMmsa aan aremrese WHLIEx! 
ao felt aaa arora: | +eledisarint Waray: 1&4 | 
Ta Gada A: |: HMmrergensen: | arsenate cHredereunieg 1661 
edu at milatsaringerdiide weed: qe atic 
a ait we: Horan aaissa: GREG Herofearigel 
pura sfoaeMe Tash ala aga WT Ue AGTeAe 1691 
Sid Arad ASN URASS Sedat CAA Valet Seats PARAMS: wl

Sri Suka proceeded further : Seeking the permission of the cowherd women as well 
as of Yasoda and Nanda, and taking leave of the cowherds, Uddhava (a scion of Dasarha), 
now ready to depart (for Mathura) mounted the chariot. (64) Duly approaching him, when he 
had (just) stepped out (of Nanda’s mansion), with various presents (intended for Sri Krsna 
and Balarama) in their hands, Nanda and others lovingly addressed him in feeling terms (as 
follows) with tears in their eyes:—(65) "Let (all) the activities of our mind (ever) hinge on the 
lotus-feet of Sri Krsna. Let our speech utter His names (alone) and let our body remain 
engaged in bending before Him and so on. (66) Being tossed by our (past) actions coupled 
with the will of Providence (as guided by those actions) wherever (in whatever species of life) 
we may be, let our delight be (ever) found in the almighty Sri Krsna as a result of our virtuous 
actions and charitable gifts (that may have been performed by usin our pastlives)." (67) Thus 
honoured by the cowherds out of devotion to Sri Krsna, O ruler of men, Uddhava came back 
to Mathura (which was now) protected by (the same Lord) Sri Krsna. (68) Falling prostrate 
before Sri Krsna he spoke (to Him) of the plenitude of devotion (to His feet) of the people of 
Vraja and handed over the presents (sent by Nanda) to Him as well as to Vasudeva, 
Balarama and the king (Ugrasena). (69)

Thus ends the forty-seventh discourse, bearing on the return of Uddhava (to Mathura), 
in the first half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PITTS ry

- Py py: (

ae 
ere

‘ey 4.

“=

STATIAa aN Sea:

Discourse XLVIII 
The Lord pays a visit to Kubja (the hunchbacked woman) and Akrira at

their respective places 
Hyp Sara 
ag fasta war water adeaia: | dese: sacar: Pattee sat 1 2 
aeletaenres CIB IEC OO R ROM CIC UPC CIRC SILC E E | 
qa: giaiudu: aan afte! 2 1

Te daria assed we: Ades fe waar |

area «86 aif = Tareas UTM: 1 3

aed: ae datfagisiat ~wAleqeainfasa = area

sist qi Wa Hele fader cleleitdtetqad: | x |

a TSMIodgHayureanrendrageqaredaara: |

aed art Aaaguiga faafsat mguryfad atl

77 8060s eafeaea TC ss WAS ATMUTGQUaaaT I &

eat SAT ORR HMAanidasteleidctearar | © | 
Ha Haess at WM gaan! SeserTdoel gunenarad | ¢ | 
STEEN oS font afafrrariwea aed ap as aseqeeeti ¢< 
qa Bal cal aMfaal A ae: | Uelead Adel: weranmefayq i2ol

gamed ware fasy ada a quilt ade HAteTat 122!

Sri Suka began again : Perceiving what was in the mind of Trivakra (the erstwhile maid- 
Servant of Kamsaj, smitten (as she was) with (pangs of) love (for Sri Krsna), and seeking her 
gratification, the all-seeing Lord, the Soul of the universe, then called at her house, (which 
was) equipped with costly articles of household use and supplemented by devices stimulating 
passion (such as erotic pictures), nay, embellished with strings of pearls and flags, canopies, 
beds and seats as well as with fragrantincenses, lights, wreaths and perfumes.(1-2) Seized with 
aflurry,asa matter of fact, to perceive Him coming to her house, she stood up at once from 
ar ae and, meeting Him with due ceremony alongwith her female companions, honoured 
a rsna (the unfailing Lord) by offering Him a good seat and other articles of worship. (3)

é y honoured by her in a like manner, Uddhava squatted on the floor touching the seat 
ff ered by her) with his head. Following the practices of the worldly-minded, Sri Krsna, for 
is part, quickly settled down on the costly bed (already placed there).(4) Duly preparing 
herself with a bath, pigments, fine linen, jewellery, garlands, perfumes, betel-leaves chewed

with catechu, lime and areca-nut parings etc., nectar-like beverage and so on, she 
approached Sri Krsna (a scion of Madhu) with shy looks accompanied by sportful smiles and

—_—

18 BE |

ini

Dis. 48 ] BOOK TEN 311

amorous gestures. (5) Calling (to His side) the lovely damsel, timid (as she was) through 
bashfulness occasioned by her (very) first meeting (witha lover), and seizing her by the hand, 
adorned with a bracelet, the Lord set her on the bed and dallied with the charming girl, her 
only merit (entitling her to this rare privilege and honour) being that she had (willingly) offered 
(to Him) sandal-paste (which was meant for Karhsa, her master, who had a special liking for 
it). (6) Enjoying the (transcendent) smell of His feet and brushing off the suffering of her 
breasts, bosom and eyes—tormented (as they were) with pangs of love—by the (soothing 
and thrilling) touch of the feet of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), she folded in her arms the all- 
blissful Darling, who (now) rested on her bosom, and (thereby) got rid of her agony (of 
separation from Him) of very long standing. (7) Alas ! having thus secured by offering pigment 
the presence of Sri Krsna, the almighty Lord, the Bestower of final beatitude, (who is) so 
difficult to attain, the hapless woman (unlike the blessed Gopis, who dedicated their all to Him 
and sought nothing in return) asked (of Him) the following (viz., the gratification of her carnal 
desire, although her physical contact alone with the all-blissful and all-powerful Lord was 
enough to ensure for her the highest blessing in the form of final beatitude). (8) She said, "(Be 
pleased to) stay here (in my house) for a few days and make merry with me, my most 
beloved friend, (for) | dare not forgo your company, O lotus-eyed one !" (9) Granting her 
the desired boon (in the shape of a promise to revel with her again) and honouring her (with 
suitable presents and polite words and thereby acknowledging her service), Sri Krsna (the 
Ruler of all), wno respects (the wishes of) all, returned with Uddhava to His own abode 
(Vasudeva's house), (which was) full of prosperity.) (10) He who, having duly propitiated 
Sri Krsna (the all-pervading Lord), the Ruler (even) of universal lords (Brahma, Siva and 
others), who is so hard to please (except through exclusive Devotion), asks for that which 
is acceptable (agreeable) to the mind is of perverted understanding because of his 
pettiness. (11)

Betat AN: Aewdiea: wy: | fefefsnttay, srmepdsanraar iz 
a de AAAS aed Barta | Wea «Aled: «= UR geasearad 1231 
7a HOt we a a aafvarted: igre = fafsaq 9 areaaiser ies! 
Tlelaats Ray asec Aa l sevnatceterayauid: 1QuI 
aificar fIRAISSHA UleTaSATA YS! Near SeHt: FORMAT 12k | 
fest Ut et: HA: AGN ae HOA WaAAgeId Hage Grdls TAIT 191 
gat yeragest Sea ST | Sarasa a fet fetes tara RCI 
strergsfae 4 famrafaer wae: gad age Ae AaNAariacL 123!

an fe way wry wae ay wht AMT.

WW Wan an siaatgenssmaat age fauiit iyo

ara «oaafa ufa fag THAT: «| RT AeHART:

1 wea daquedmeat weaeae w A Feed: 122!

tarot Wal A Mata Melssea: Eid! 
aid a serea aa Ae: wet femme. atsfade: 1221

eeifedisa ost fea set at aque: | QR: | 
aad urqueaseetcl wae aa = fanid i231 
Qa wis aaeayesadil: RM anager ya: 1

ee 
a ah 
5) ke

i a ee 
Cae’ y ts

re 
boy |

salsa WMA A Hoe aa faraqiexs 
seat Al aada: wa wkurn a: adeataquaqeaqc: | 
qaeadios Berd att A a Waertast at: sew: 1241 
&: Uftedeaaat aot wate sreGengdeR: Yea: Hage | 
aa ait Gel TesaMMMAAgQuaaeat A ATE! 
fsa sada vale a: Seidl ame gaat: ger: | 
fea -: WdhortMaMeciatea vader 121

Wishing to get Akrira do some errand (of His) and (also) with intent to oblige him Lord

Sri Krsna, accompanied by Balarama and Uddhava, visited in state the residence of 
Akrira.(12) Overjoyed to perceive from a distance the aforesaid jewels among the best of 
men, (who were) his own relations, and rising (from his seat) to receive them, he (went up 
to,) embraced and welcomed them. (13) (Nay, recalling Their divinity) he bowed to Sri Krsna 
and Balarama (in spite of Their young age) and, greeted by Them too (in return), duly 
worshipped Them, who had (now) taken Their seat. (14) Sprinkling over his head in every 
direction the water with which he had washed Their feet, O protector of men, and honouring 
Them with (various) articles of worship, as well as with exquisite robes, sandal-paste, 
garlands and excellent jewels, Akrira, who was (already) bentlow with humility, bowed down 
to Them with his head (inclined) and, kneading Their feet, that rested on his lap, spoke to Sri 
Krsna and Balarama (as follows):—(15-16) "Luckily (enough) by You two the sinful Kamsa 
has been slain alongwith his followers and this race of Yours not only saved from a calamity 
which-was hard to get over but made to prosper (too). (17) You two are Prakrti (primordial 
Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit), the (material and efficient) causes (respectively) of the 
universe and one with the universe (too). Therein neither any cause nor any effect apart from 
You two. (18) Entering after its creation (as its Inner Controller) this universe, evolved by 
Yourself through the instrumentality of Your own potencies (in the shape of Rajoguna etc.), 
O Krsna (the supreme Lord), You are perceived in various forms within the range of hearing 
and sight. (19) Evenas the (five) elements (earth etc.), appear in various forms in (the diverse 
orders of) created beings, (both) mobile and immobile, the media of their manifestation, So 
do You, the absolute Self, (entirely) self-dependent, appear in numberless forms in the 
various worlds (the fields of Your manifestation). (20) Through the instrumentality of Your 
own potencies in the shape of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti)—Rajas, Sattva and 
Tamas—You (severally) evolve, then protect (preserve) and (ultimately) reabsorb the 
universe. You are (however) not bound by those Gunas or (even) by those actions (in the 
form of creation, protection and reabsorption of the universe). Under no circumstance 
_whatsoever can ignorance (the cause of bondage) be attributed to You, who are Consciousness 
itself. (21) A body and other adjuncts (that are supposed to limit the Self or Consciousness) 
‘being unascertained (through metaphysical investigation), birth and differences (following 
it) cannot be directly ascribed to the Spirit (much less to You, the Supreme Spirit). Hence 
there can be neither bondage nor liberation for You. What appears as bondage or liberation 
in You is (only superimposed by) our ignorance about You anda reflection of our (own) mind. 
(22) Each time this dateless path of the Vedas taught by You for the good of the world is 
obstructed by false creeds of a heretical type, You assume (for the vindication of the Vedic 
path) a form consisting of Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas). (23) As such, OLord, You 
are born this time in the house of Vasudeva here (on this planet) with Your own part 
manifestation (Balarama) in order to remove the earth's burden by destroying hundreds of 
Aksauhinis of kings who are partial incarnations of demons and in order to spread the glory

Dis. 48 ] BOOK TEN - B49

of this race (the race of the Yadus). (24) Highly blessed indeed are our dwellings today, that 
You, O Lord who are above sense-perception, have visited—You, the well-known Father 
and Preceptor of the universe, manifested in the form of all the gods, manes, spirits and kings 
(the rulers of men)—the waters washing whose feet (under the name of the Ganga) sanctify 
(all) the three worlds. (25) What wise man would seek as his protector anyone other than You, 
who are (SO) truthful of speech, friendly, grateful and loving to Your votaries, and who grant 
all the desires of a pure-hearted devotee, nay, bestow on him Your very Self, to which neither 
growth nor decay can be attributed. (26) Luckily enough (for us), O Lord who are supplicated 
by (al!) men, You have been perceived by us here (at our very house)—You, whose ways 
cannot be easily comprehended even by masters of Yoga (like Sanaka) and rulers of gods 
(like Indra). (Pray,) dispel atonce Your Maya (enchantment) in the shape of ties of attachment 
to our children, wife, wealth, relations, houses, body and so on." (27)

Sen Sara 
sated: UIs Wha War et: 1 set afer oe wi: amireaha ect

Sri Suka continued : Thus honoured and glorified by His devotee, Lord Sri Hari smilingly 
replied to Akrura (as follows), enchanting him as it were by His (sweet and polite) words. (28)

a awe: fiqers zoreant ays Feel | aad gq (ea: VEN Ste: Ss fe a: 1221

vafge Herm fee sidada: | daeHadVta car: lat A Alaa: 1301

a aman daft a ea geome: ia Greener aaitica area: 1321

@ Var Weal a a: Aaweafseatdar | Sarak wesarMi Tse a WsTS™AA 132!

faadaxrd sie: ae AA We:fad: | aia: Wat Wa Aad gia WA 1331

a Usitanmt wg dae: 1 aa A add FA quAaRMiseiaw 13x1

TS Welle dequaya areaarey ari fagra dq faerenat aan St Yeal Aad 134

Sumit owned aM «afte: 1asdulgaral a ad: Had gat igct

sfa steerrad AI GRASS Secret SAH Fates SSAA: 1S I

The glorious Lord said : You are our preceptor (counsellor) and uncle, nay, our 
praiseworthy friend. We ever deserve to be protected, nourished and treated with compassion 
by you, as a matter of fact, since we are your children. (29) Highly blessed and most worthy 
souls like you deserve constantly to be adored (more than gods) by men seeking blessed- 
ness. Gods are (after all) actuated by self-interest (and are pleased with those alone who 
offer oblations to them through the sacred fire); (but) not so the pious (who habitually do good 
to others without expecting any return from them). (30) It is not that there are no purifying 
agencies (in the shape of rivers, lakes etc.), consisting of water and no deities (with a body) 
made of clay and stone. They (however) exert a purifying influence through a long process 
of time, whereas pious souls do so through their very sight. (81) As such you are the foremost 
of our friends. Therefore, with intent to do a good turn to (my cousins) Yudhisthira and others 
(the sons of Pandu) proceed you to Hastinapura (the capital of the Kauravas, named after 
its founder, King Hasti) for making enquiries about them. (32) Brought (back from the forest 
Where King Pandu lived) to his capital by the (blind) king (Dhrtarastra, their elder uncle, who

had ascended the throne on the plea of his being the reversionary heir of Pandu), their father 
having died (the other day), the boys are living ina most miserable condition with their mother

[565] B.M. Part II—39

ee he Bd Pa Peed Pack cd Piel ict Pic Ried Bic) MeL ied Bi Ml Mic Ml Bcd Bel ROO ROR Rote Rete ee Re eee Me RR ROR He RO ee We We We We We He We We We We We We We We We Ke We We Dis. « 
; We Ve

(Kunti, my aunt): so we have heard. (33) Sure enough, the feeble-minded King Dhrtarastra 
(the son of Ambika), who is (at the same time) blind and follows the will of his vile Son 
(Duryodhana), does not behave impartially towards his nephews. (34) Go (therefore) ang 
ascertain his behaviour (towards them) now—whether it is good or bad. Having definitely 
known it, we shall so arrange that the welfare of our relations (the Pandavas) may be 
ensured." (35) Having thus duly instructed Akrura, the almighty Lord Sri Krsna (who 
alleviates the suffering of His devotees) then returned direct to His own residence alongwith 
Sankarsana (Balarama) and Uddhava. (36)

Thus ends the forty-eighth discourse in the first half of Book Ten 
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Discourse XLIX

Akrura’'s visit to Hastinapura

Mah SATA

a Tel wlergt undsaaissan cast data uvitet faet gem 2 t

We A gi ARES AMAA! Hi alert stfot uresar qeclsar | 2 |

amare a SYR Peta: | TUSK: Yeeldi Wa agwecta! 3 |

sara calito, Us qdlafacta | asa = ered: | X |

ws Sis ae ala stadia AI Tat ueig a deleatsrentfiler 1 & |

eine arisad eMart adda yer fat wa aI & | 
: Sri suka began again : Going to Hastinapura, marked with the glory of the kings of 
Puru's race, Akrura saw there Dhrtarastra (the son of Ambika) accompanied by Bhisma, 
(nay,) Vidura, Prtha (the mother of the Pandava brothers), Bahlika (uncle of Bhisma) 
alongwith his son (Somadatta), Drona (the son of Bharadwaja), accompanied by Krpa (a 
scion of sage Gotama), (as well as) Karna, Suyodhana (Duryodhana), ASwatthama (the son 
of Drona), Yudhisthira and his four brothers (the sons of Pandu) and other friends. (1-2) 
Meeting his relatives in an appropriate manner, Akrira (the son of Gandini) was duly 
questioned by them about the welfare of their relatives (at Mathura), and himself enquired 
about their well-being (in return). (3) He stayed there for some months with intent to ascertain 
the conduct (towards the sons of Pandu) of the king (Dhrtarastra), who had vile sons andilittle 
moral strength and followed the will of the wicked (his brother-in-law Sakuni, Karna and 
others). (4) Prtha as well as Vidura* (another half-brother of Dhrtarastra and a true friend and 
benefactor of the Pandavas) told him (Akrura) of all the evil—in the shape of administering 
poison etc—that had (already) been done and was (further) sought to be done by 
Duryodhana and others (the sons of Dhrtarastra), who were envious of the majesty, military 
a en

* For the story of Vidura see Book III. |

pis. 49 ] BOOK TEN 315

skill, bodily strength, prowess, modesty and other excellent qualities of Prtha's sons as well 
as of the love which the people bore for them. (5-6)

af era a: are feet ures a1 aie waqurs ama: wel wa a ct

WAM WE PM: Wa we: aggdar, wf Wrsmaeeawt: 1 e |

aera aie qe eftuitftra 1 aieafeeafa at aed: faq@iaisy aTeErL 120 |

Pe POT Aah fase faa i seat ule were Rrepfrsradiedt 122 |

Tada Versi weet sRut yori frat «=—-qeagharerctarcenaafitenrel 122

7: PUTT Wet HM aA ata arma ame aol wWari23!

Approaching her cousin, Akrira, whowas (quite) athand, and recollecting her birth-place 
(Mathura) Prtha for her part spoke to him with tear-drops in her eyes (as follows): —(7) “Do 
my parents (SUrasena and Marisa) and brothers* (Vasudeva etc.), sisters (Srutadeva and 
so on) and nephews (Sri Krsna, Balarama and others), ladies of the household (Devaki, 
Rohini and others) as well as my female friends remember me? (8) Does my nephew, Lord 
Sri Krsna, who is fit to protect all and is (so) fond of His devotees, as well as the lotus-eyed 
Balarama, remember Yudhisthira and others (the sons of His father's sister, i.e., myself)? (9) 
Will He (ever care to) console with His (comforting) words me—grieving (as | do) in the midst 
of enemies (even) as a she-deer would do in the midst of wolves—as well as these fatherless 
boys (of mine)? (10) O Krsna, O Enchanter of all, O great Yogi (Wielder of mystic powers), 
O Soul of the universe, O Saviour of all, O Deliverer of cows, protect me, that have sought 
You (as my refuge) and am suffering with my infants. (11) Formen afraid of death and (future) 
birth | find no asylum other than Your lotus-feet, which are capable of conferring Liberation 
(on their worshippers), almighty that You are. (12) Hail to You, the Enchanter of all, the all- 
pure Brahma (the Absolute), the Supreme Spirit, the Master of Yoga (mystic powers), (nay,) 
Yoga (wisdom) personified ! | have sought You as my refuge." (13) 
yeh SAA

SAA SG HO aA widlaa wecg Gfad Use Aadt wae eet

WAS: GASH fagtsy Agata: | Aaararad: rat acgarcabied (st: 12&]

TR Uae fad GAA! saad Aeal Ae sels: Atechiadsy 121

Sri Suka continued : Remembering thus her own kinsfolk and (particularly) Sri Krsna,

the Lord of the universe, O king, your great grandmother (Kunti) wept bitterly, afflicted as 
She was. (14) Akrira, to whom joy and sorrow made no difference, and the highly 
renowned Vidura comforted Kunti by reminding her of those responsible for the birth of her 
Sons (viz., Dharma, Vayu, Indra and the two Aswins). (15) Approaching the king 
(Dhrtarastra)—who differentiated between his own sons and nephews and was (particularly) 
fond of the former—while about to return (to Mathura), Akrira repeated in the midst of his 
kinsmen what was communicated (to the king) out of goodwill by his relations (Sri Krsna, 
Balarama and others). (16)

sg Sara 
a at aed a Het atta t sada CUSTaIAISSHAATRAA: 1291

* For the names of Priha's brothers, sisters, nephews and the ladies of her parental home vide verse 28-29, 30-31,

46—55, 22-23 and 45 of Discourse XXIV of Book Nine.

‘ a) Aes

EARS bhi i 
ean

i

5

eur Wiedad sei: Wed Well adam: aa: Wy sa: alftiaarcaa iec 
SINT Wraeel Wed! AAA A: | Ae AAA ade uMsagramy wiee 
Wg Ueda: chlefad Safad, Ge | Use ale ees fag SrareeTfetsz: 120) 
UA: Sead ste wa Nola! Urlsqya Hk Ul a gee 
saiafad «6 fad eee: | asisiaecebionia = =8=—- Feteha: 122) 
Ud AA Masa AAUftsac | aspaes swevara WOT Wa: Wales: 1231 
wa fafeasmea aa aretetfac: 1 sift fageari wenifaqeaan: ix 
AAeelhaAa West MNATAAN | Sea ISSH GG: BAA Wa TA 126)

Akrura said : O son of Vicitravirya, O enhancer of the glory of the Kurus, your (younger) 
brother, Pandu, having demised, you have now ascended the throne (of Hastinapura). (17) 
Ruling over the earth with piety, gratifying the people with your good conduct and behaving 
impartially towards your own people (viz., your sons and the sons of Pandu) you will attain 
prosperity and renown. (18) Acting otherwise, you will be censured in the world (during your 
lifetime) and go (down) to hell (after your death). Therefore, behave impartially towards the 
sons of Pandu and your own. (19) And there is no (possibility of one's) living together 
perpetually with anyone anywhere in this world—even with one’s own body, O king; how, 
then, could one expect to live eternally with one's wife, children and so on? (20) A creature 
is born alone and dies all by itself. Alone it enjoys the fruit of its good deeds and alone does 
it reap the consequences of its misdeeds. (21) Others going by the names of son etc., (that 
deserve to_be nourished) drain the unrighteously accumulated wealth of the foolish one 
(even) as the brood of an aquatic animal share its waters (which constitute its very life as it 
were). (22) Life, riches and sons etc., that a man nourishes through unrighteousness under 
the (false) notion that they are his own (ultimately) forsake the stupid fellow for good (even) 
when he (feels thathe) has notyetaccomplished his purpose (the enjoyment of pleasures).(23) 
Deserted by them (even) when his object has not (yet) been achieved, and carrying (with him) 
his (load of) sins a man who is ignorant of his own (real) interest and (therefore) has his face 
turned away from his own duty himself descends (after death) into the dismal hell. (24) 
Therefore, realizing this world, O king, tobe a (mere) dream, illusion or fancy, and controlling 
your mind with your reason, be composed and impartial (to all), O lord ! (25)

IRIE SAF 
aM aalt Heao ara aad Mar | AMAA A Gea wel: eT aT 1 RE | 
dat gia ara we a waa weiuaaiaea fe dere ae 12V1 
gael fafa at J faepieraa qari ywntaaanr atsadiuit aa: qe ize! 
a gidiueiage fomrade get yor faa aequias: | 
Tet aval Qaaliaend Aaa TAMA 128 | 
Dhrtarastrareplied : (Even) as you tender this salutary advice, O prince among the charitable, 
|donotfeel sated with itany more than a mortal would on securing nectar. (26) Still your wholesome 
and agreeable counsel, O gental one, does not stick into my fickle mind—biassed (as itis) through 
attachment to my sons—any more than (a flash of) lightning does (into acloud). (27) What man can 
possibly set aside (even) indirectly the decree of the almighty Lord, who (I am told) has appeare

in the race of Yadu for removing the earth's burden ? (28) Hail to that supreme Lord who, having 
evolved this creation (consisting among others of numberless living organisms) by His own creative

BOOK TEN 317

energy (Known by ve name of Prakrti—whose ways cannot be easily conceived—and entered 
it afterwards (as its nner Controller), apportions (to them diverse) duties and their rewards, and 
whose pastime SO) difficult to comprehend—is mainly responsible for the movementof the wheel 
of transmigration. (29)

Nh Sarq

Ey TERT RH Aaa: aah: | Wage: «= Greig 1301 
RA WAPVWA sipladieaq | usar sia Her qed Maat: VL 132 | 
CUA YAS CHATSRTAISEATA: 1S |

Sri Suka went on: Having thus come to know the mind of Dhrtarastra, and duly permitted 
by his relatives (the Kurus and the sons of Pandu), the aforesaid Akrura (a scion of Yadu) 
returned to Mathura (the capital of the Yadus). (30) (Reaching Mathura) he reported to 
Balarama and Sri Krsna the conduct in particular of Dhrtarastra towards Yudhisthira and 
others (the sons of Pandu), for which purpose, O Pariksit (a scion of Kuru), he had been 
personally sent (by Them). (31)

Thus ends the forty-ninth discourse, in the first half of Book Ten of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa- 
Samhita, a collection of eighteen thousand Slokas 
composed by the sage Vedavyasa.

DIS ey

3% stqaiea Aa:

TA ErTadsterqrony, 
aula: thee: 
(Sartel: )

3IY UAMraarseanea:

Discourse L 
The Lord ensconces Himself in a fortress (built by Him in the western sea

under the name of Dwaraka)

MH SAA 
aft: wits mae ufeet aeadsiga wd aad gaq: w fate 2 | 
fa mena ware gfadidqaeed: ada! 2 | 
a daciamenvd aermdad waisted! adi mq ah WHAT! 3 | 
sateutiateasen fagentt daa: aaa age seu, addtfesnti x |

Sri Suka began again : Their husband being dead, Asti and Prapti, the two wives of 
Kamsa, O Pariksit (the foremost of the Bharatas), went away stricken with sorrow to the 
house of their father: so the tradition goes. (1) Seized with agony they made known to their 
father, Jarasandha, the ruler of the Magadhas, all that had contributed to their widowhood. (2) 
Full of grief and indignation of hear that unpleasant story, O protector of men, Jarasandha 
put forth a supreme endeavour to rid the earth of the Yadavas. (3) Protected by three and 
twenty Aksauhinis* he besieged Mathura, the capital of the Yadus, on all sides. (4)

Mier de per seta aT aa wt dest ESM A WHOA! & | 
fata Ta, a: | HROTATAU: | AeaeHTOTATOT Naa | & | 
een as Ode Yfa at aoe area BAMld azar Baws! © | 
sae: wend § werarepent: | UTE A Sea YA: Ghat AeA C | 
Weaisadist = | UREA I RATT ae Heist aera a1 | 
sraista edzerd ¢e: dftad vari faunereente: are suad: wierd 120!

; qanee a full view of his army, which resembled an ocean that had overflowed its banks, 
or rs Own city besieged by it and of His people (near and dear ones) stricken with fear, Sri

* The strength of an Aksauhini has been specified as follows :—

Weta: | G@-queenacae Sa AMM Tan say 1 
os GATT SERN FaMAeon Sze It 
age er words, an Aksauhini consists of 1,09,350 infantry, 65,610 horse, 21,870 elephants and an equal number of

Krsna—who was no other than Lord Sri Hari (Visnu) appearing ina human semblance from 
some motive (viz., for removing the burden of the earth), pondered over (reviewed) the 
urpose Of His descent (on this earthly plane) as well as on what was equal to the time and 
lace in question. (5-6) (He took no time in arriving at a decision and said to Himself,) "I shall 
certainly destroy this army ofall dependent chiefs, brought together by Jarasandha (the ruler 
of the Magadhas), reckoned as many Aksauhinis strong and consisting of foot soldiers, 
cavalry, chariots and elephants—a concentrated burden on the earth (and therefore easy 
tO dispose Of). Jarasandha, however, is notto be killed (at once) as (inthe event of his being 
let off) he is expected to put forth renewed efforts to mobilize an army (so that | shall be 
spared the trouble of hunting up evil-doers). (7-8) This present descent of Mine is directed 
towards this very end, viz., removing the earth's burden, protecting the virtuous and wiping 
out the vile. (9) (why this alone,) other (divine) forms too (such as those of a boar and a man- 
lion) are duly assumed by Me (from time to time) for the vindication of righteousness as well 
as for putting a stop to (the mad career of) unrighteousness gaining ascendancy during 
certain periods.” (10) : :

wd eet Mere stemmed glace i wrquherdt Ge: wat wufreet i221 
argent a fen guna aqeariepr af wilha: asdumensdi 22! 
Ug SA WT Aaal Gladl NMI UA A WA stent cadena a 1231 
GAA Weld SAM, SH WHat | Une fe at seat again aap iex 
AA faareattenet YNAAATHS | Ua UMA claret cfarat Wet Guar 12kt 
Frimg: aaielt seniedtaissad ag eat fafria eftatenarda: 1961 
adisya usa ee faaadug: idee armen diet 2 He Geared ize 
a aa agent seth asta Ter fe ae We A atest ale Seer RC! 
wa wa ae sa ger adage! fear a tethon te walle a afe 128!

_ While Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) was thus contemplating, there presently alighted 
from the heavens two chariots, possessing the effulgence of the sun and (each) accompanied 
by acharioteer and fitted with (necessary) appurtenances (such as armour and ensign). (11) 
There also appeared of their own accord eternal divine weapons (of the Lord). Perceiving 
them, Sri Krsna (the Controller of the senses) immediately spoke to Sankarsana (as 
follows):—(12) "See, noble Brother, the calamity that has come upon the Yadus, of whom 
You are the Guardian, O Lord! Here is Your chariot come, as well as Your favourite weapons 
(the plough, pestle and so on), (13) Mounting the vehicle, sweep off this army and completely 
deliver Your people (thereby) from the disaster (that stares them in the face). Surely to this 
end is directed Our descent, which brings happiness to the virtuous, O Lord ! (14) Remove 
the earth's burden going by the name of the twenty-three Aksauhinis." Having thus fully 
deliberated, Balarama and Sri Krsna (the two Scions of Dasarha) rode out of the city in their 
respective chariots, clad in armour and armed with Their own weapons and surrounded by 
a Very small detachment. Coming out of the city into the open land, Sri Hari, who had Daruka 
for His charioteer, blew His conch (thereby challenging the enemy to encounter Them). (15-16) 
From that followed a shivering occasioned by terrorinthe heart of the enemy's ranks. Looking 
intently at the two (divine) Brothers, Jarasandha (the ruler of the Magadhas) said to Them, 
"O Krsna, the vilest among men, for very shame | do not wish to fight with you, a youngster, 
(Especially) when you are alone. (No,) !amnot going to have an encounter with you, O stupid 
fellow, who remained concealed (so long); (therefore), get away, O slayer of your (own) 
Maternal uncle ! (17-18) If there is an itching in you (for a combat), O Balarama, offer battle

. ” 
o > = 
rr es 
*

to me and have patience (to see the result). Casting off your body torn with my shafts, (either 
ascend to heaven or slay me (if you can). (19)

aa qu fame alata desqia yet at usergee aaa: i201 
The glorious Lord replied : The valiant never brag; they only exhibit their manliness 
We do not (however) take your words to heart, O knig, full of grief as you are (over the death 
of your son-in-law, Kamsa) and about to die. (20) 
yh Sava

sgaenaga «=a Ss Tae) IS TENISSqUTeL | 
Ta aA eae staat qaiact aT RATARTAST: 122 | 
quulareeastfatadt TAMAS AAA Sharada | 
faa: Welemezingt anise: dqqe: Wetidat: 1221 
ek: 9 Utiecalqet «=e: RITA ravradifedq | 
AAT Uergquifad APU SATAAAa | 23 | 
Tet Pager wars fap qahedampr | 
Met 8 | Oakey OGRE Agee XI 
Piiapen: aot agwensisa wWaqaeHe: | 
tal Saag Aaa: UeIdaeoayseheant: 1241 
Aiseariguevathsade aa: WAM STANT: |

aa mie adeddraitdstisd caartdlert: « aire 
Riser Yara 8: wits: «wet | 
4 da far wate velar auda zo!

Sri Suka continued : Marching towards Balarama and Sri Krsna (the two Scions of 
Madhu), Jarasandha (the foster-son of the demoness Jara*, who had joined the two halves 
of his body into one) surrounded Them, including Their troops, vehicles, flags, horses and 
charioteers, with a very powerful and huge multitude of troops even as a tempest would 
envelop the sun and a fire with clouds and particles of dust respectively. (21) Stricken with 
grief not to perceive on the battle-field the chariots of Sri Krsna and Balarama, distinguishe 
with ensigns bearing the emblems severally of Garuda (the king of birds, the carrier of Lor 
Visnu) and a palmyra tree, the women (of Mathura), who had climbed up to the attics (on the 
fort) and (tops of) mansions and gates of the city, fell into a swoon. (22) Seeing His own 
(small) force oppressed with the formidable shower of shafts repeatedly discharged by

*Vide verses 7-8 of Discourse XXII of Book Nine.

pis. 50 J BOOK TEN |

clouds Denton troops, Sri Hari twanged His excellent Sarnga bow, esteemed 
by the got ! (alike). (23) Taking arrows out of His quiver and fitting them (to the 
bow), pulling the string (of the bow) at full length and discharging volleys of sharp arrows and 
striking down chariots, elephants, horses and foot-soldiers (on all sides) without interval, the 
Lord in a We fire-brand. (24) Elephants fell dead with the frontal globes on their 
forehea pil ge ear (too) dropped dead in large numbers with their necks cut off with 
shafts; C ae S sai ed down with their horses, ensigns, charioteers and masters struck 
down, and foot-soldiers fell prostrate with their arms, thighs and necks severed. (25) On the 
field of battle were set flowing in hundreds streams of blood issued from the bodies of foot- 
soldiers, elephants and horses that were being mowed down—streams in which arms (of 
fallen soldiers) floated like (aquatic) serpents, the heads of men like tortoises, their hands 
and thighs like fishes, the locks of men like duck-weeds and their excellent and big gems and 
ornaments like gravel and stones. The streams were thick with shoals in the shape of killed 
elephants and alligators in the shape of slain horses; (nay,) they were full of waves in the 
shape of bows and bushes in the shape of (other) weapons, and looked terrible with eddies 
in the shape of shields (or wheels). They brought terror to cowards and encouragement to 
the valiant of one army to give battle to the other. By Sankarsana (Balarama) of immeasurable 
prowess, even as He was (busy) annihilating the vainglorious enemies with His pestle,was 
brought to destruction (the remnant of) that force, led by Jarasandha (the king of the 
Magadhas), (even) though it was hard to cross and fearful like the ocean and unfathomable 
(in prowess) and endless (in extent) O dear Pariksit! That was (however) a mere amusing 
play on the part of Sri Krsna and Balarama (the two sons of Vasudeva), the Rulers of the 
universe. (26—29) The (aforesaid) discomfiture of the enemy's forces is no wonder on the 
part of the Lord who carries on the (processes of) creation, preservation and annihilation of 
(all) the three worlds by way of His (divine) sport, endowed as He is with endless attributes. 
Still the story is (being) told (at some length) as of Him who imitates the ways of mortals (and 
fought like two Ksatriya) youths though capable of destroying any army whatsoever in a 
twinkling by mere will). (80) 
sare faret wat Seer? FeIsen| ecriterafeerd «fete: feeftatsrar 1321 
ae 420 waif SafeurTgs: baneara fered) hreifarenifar 1321 
a Yat Meta asd diese: baad erga aria: ah Ts: 1331 
art: ufsereiattad: lemcefa i eendeaengisa §«agitet Taa: 1261 
aTéeaetel | Safa TAM AT «SHAT Aa 1341 
(Even) as a lion would seize another with force, Balarama caught hold of Jarasandha, 
who though very powertul, had lost his chariot and was left (alone) with his life, his (entire) 
force having been wiped out. (31) With intent to accomplish His (own) work (of concentrating 
all undesirable elements) through him Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) prevented his being 
bound (by Balarama) with the cords of Varuna as well as with human ropes, although he had 
(himself) killed (numberless redoubtable) foes (in the past). (32) Let go by Sri Krsna and 
Balarama (the two Lords of the universe) and (therefore) abashed, Jarasandha (who was 
honoured by the valiant) resolved upon austerities but was stopped on the way by (other) 
kings (such as his friend and associate Sisupala, the ruler of the Cedis and another sworn 
enemy of Sri Krsna, though related to Him by blood) by means of expressions consisting of 
words bearing sacred import and even worldly counsels saying This discomfiture at the 
hands of the Yadus has been sustained by you through the binding nature of your own (past) 
actions." (33-34) Ignored by the Lord on all his battalions having been wiped out, King

-Jarasandha (son of Brhadratha) withdrew dispirited to the Magadh territory (his own *

dominions). (35) 
Farelsmardacst fredturitaersta: | facntearcr: Surkaakaaer: 13 | 
meas AA fasatiiqaiafa: | swaitaamfasa: 89 - qaameatefz: i301 
agers AgWiiqaivetea: i dtonaqyeeth gt feat sit igci 
fara gamit UMaine Pest wera aiqaraadomy 1391 
frataar an Rraietaeaaragse: | Prteraor: Wee Siacnfedara: lSo | 
sated 20 faded UTI age, ATTN Serene: xe

Meeting the citizens of Mathura, that had now been rid of (all) agony, and felt delighteq 
at heart (and had now come out to greet and felicitate their Saviours), Lord Sri Krsna (the 
Bestower of Liberation) too returned—Sri Krsna, whose army remained. (completely) 
unscathed and who was applauded by the gods and was (also) being covered with flowers 
in that He had crossed without any effort the ocean of the enemy's forces, nay, whose victory 
was being celebrated by Sutas (heralds), Magadhas (bards) and Vandis (panegyrists). (36-37) 
Conchs and drums, kettledrums and clarionets as well as lutes, flutes and clay tomtoms 
sounded (of themselves) while the Lord was entering the city, whose road had been sprinkled 
(with water), (nay) which was full of merry men, was decorated with flags and resonant 
with the chanting of Veda and which had ornamental arches erected all round by way of 
festivity. (88-39) Being strewn by women with flowers, curds unbroken grains of rice and 
sprouts, and lovingly regarded with eyes dilated through joy, the Lord presented to King 
Ugrasena (the ruler of the Yadus) all the untold wealth (found) lying on the field of battle and 
the jewellery of (killed) warriors, that had been brought by Him. (40-41)

Ud TAeIpeMaaaneniaes: | Fax APTA Wet Aah: qeorarferd: iz 
sieve aad GUA: HOTA say Wydichy Wenlsarehsa: 1x3! 
aera TTA 0 aT ARN «=a ae: «9 eR IS 
eta aga ferghtrriepentieh: | qetes arsiicterat GeatisgearssoraaT 1S |

Followed (each time) by an army consisting of the same number of (viz., twenty-three) 
Aksauhinis, King Jarasandha (the ruler of Magadha) fought in this way (as many-as) 
seventeen times with the Yadus, who were protected by Sri Krsna (and were therefore 
invincible). (42) Endowed (however) with the (inexhaustible and unequalled) might of Sri 
Krsna, the Vrsnis annihilated his entire force. Let off by the Yadus (his enemies) on his troops 
having been killed, the monarch withdrew (to his capital). (43) While the eighteenth 
encounter was yet to come, Kalayavana (a Yavana hero), despatched by the sage Narada, 
appeared (on the scene) during the interval. (44) Having heard (from the mouth of Narada,” 
of whom he had enquired the names of foremost warriors on the earth's su rface) of the Yadus 
as being his equals (in prowess), Kalayavana, who had no rival among men, came and 
besieged Mathura with thirty millions of Mlecchas (non-Aryans or barbarians). (45)

aq gihadtad qn: Agivraeaar| Stet Aeat afer oT gua ed iss! 
serie Preeiserrel «| aera@rares: | apreliscrer at Bt aT Ua aIssTAAEAAT Iv | 
STH | ASTM | TA: | EL afer et wut aot vt 
wee fare gt fresiaqiaa adi aaa aad orem xe!

* Vide Visnu-Purana V.xxiii. 6.

eRe eae, emigrate: aprfeenrgreitat: 1421 
TATE: aisengeneg: | VaHerfeglerend wee: 1431 
arederdtat A Wedesitfirgy ita | aradvesaratet Ageayelerad, | 4X | 
qt wisi a us: mf: iar mafed veil uefent Sead 1&4 I 
TaeHSU TV CASTE, Alaa | art aferahe: Sra AeA AAR GE | 
aq ae Wie ana afeetiad setae afd ariel 
aa attra heat ade eft: ieenaea Wao aren: Agata: | 
Paste OER WeTaTO RTA: 142 | 
eo aSMad FE Ae Sedat ea sae SHAR AT TSTRTANSEATA: 140 | 
Seeing him, Sri Krsna, who enjoyed the companionship of Sankarsana (Balarama), 
thought (as follows): "Oh, a great calamity has surely overtaken the Yadus from both sides 
(viz, Kalayavana and Jarasandha). This Yavana, who is followed by a huge army, has 
certainly invested us today. (And) Jarasandha (the ruler of Magadha) will also come either 
today or tomorrow or the day after (at the latest). (46-47) If Jarasandha (the foster-son of 
Jara, the demoness) comes while We are both (engaged in) contending with this fellow, the 
mighty Jarasandha will (either) make short work of our relations or take them away (as 
captives) to his own capital. (48) Therefore, we shall this (very) day construct a citadel which 
will be difficult of access to men (lit., bipeds) and, having ensconced our relations there, shall 
(return and) have the Yavana killed (by strategem)."* (49) Having deliberated thus, the Lord 
caused a fortress to be built in the (western) sea (by Viswakarma, the architect of the gods) 
as well as a city (inside the fortress), extending over (an area of) twelve Yojanas (96 miles) 
and containing all wonderful things—a city in which expert knowledge of architecture (a 
science attributed to Twasta, the architect of the gods) as well as (unique) masonic skill stood 
revealed, and which was specially constructed with roads, streets and quadrangles (strictly) 
conforming to the site (assigned to them in standard works on architecture). (50-51) It was 
(duly) provided with gardens consisting of celestial trees and creepers as well as with 
wonderful groves and was built (according to a definite plan) with attics and gateways of 
crystal touching the (very) heavens with their domes of gold, barns of silver and brass 
adorned with gold pitchers, houses of gold with tops of jewels and floors of emerald, temples 
dedicated to the deities presiding over the foundation of houses and home-steads etc., and 
wooden sheds on the roofs of houses. The city was crowded with men belonging to the four 
Orders of society and shone forth with palaces belonging to the rulers of the Yadus (Ugrasena 
and Vasudeva, Balarama and Sri Krsna). (52—54) The great Indra sent down (from heaven 
as a present) for Sri Krsna (his famous assembly hall known by the name of) Sudharma as 
Wellas the Parijata tree (one of the five well-known species of celestial trees), stationed under 
the shade of which a mortal does not remain tied down to the characteristics of mortals (viz., 
hunger and thirst, old age and death, grief and infatuation). (55) Varuna (the god of water) 
Sent down (milk-) white horses with one dark ear and swift as thought; Kubera (the lord of 
treasures), the eight treasures; and the guardians of (other) spheres, the riches peculiar to

ad been gotas a boon from Lord Siva, who had further

* The Lord did not kill the Yavana Himself obviously because he h AS

Ordained that the boy would prove a terror to the Yadus. (Vide Visnu-Purana V.xxiil.

themselves. (56) Sri Hari Himself having come down to the earth (in the form of Sri Krsna) 
O protector of men, others (such as the Siddhas too) returned (to Him) in toto whatever 
lordship had been granted (in their favour) by the Lord for the (successful) execution of their 
charge. (57) Transferring all the people (of Mathura) to that retreat by dint of Yoga (His 
supernatural power), and having duly conferred with Balarama, who was looking after (the 
rest of) the people (at Mathura), Sri Krsna, the Dispeller of the agony of His devotees, issueq 
out of the city gate, wearing a garland of lotuses and unarmed. (58)

Thus ends the fiftieth discourse entitled "The Lord ensconces Himself 
in a fortress", in the latter half of Book Ten of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SINHA Sea:

Discourse LI 
(Kalayavana gets burnt and) King Mucukunda glorifies the Lord 
Mee SATA

q facea faftenrafeertatgan asta sad |= didentalaaraa 2

aay wee uamHe | qydthagqate AaHASTNAVT | 2 |

Femdiet sine zaafari qed faut apederuee| 3

aed gata questacdesed: | aqysista-can aanieaitarat: |X |

MAUNA waged | Pruaraqesaierd Aasat AAS Prager: 1 &

git Piga deat: Sse Weta! sramateyaet qaoa alfrari & |

SMa «EROS ACC laa Sea! 99 I

Wit dep wide da Afaaqish fauaqrat A sroreqraqy: | ¢ |

ta faisit amar sifaae fire dist sia a at ALI 8 |

Tam Harla wat Ate Ayadisht ward yest ual audiSead igo!

a sora fat qe: atediea oraa | fean faotna uret anatefeatera 128

a Were Tee GSU 8 UN | Cerf ae WaTATeNad AOI 1 221 
Si Suka began again : The Yavana (Kalayavana) beheld Sri Krsna fully emerged (from 
the city gate) like the rising moon—most charming to look at, dark brown (of hue), clad in 
yellow Silk, with a white curl of hair (known by the name of Srivatsa) on His bosom and His 
neck adorned with the brilliant Kaustubha gem, endowed with four massive and long arms 
and eyes ruddy asa fresh-blown lotus, and wearing a lotus-like face, ever full of excessive 
joy, with beautiful and splendid cheeks and a bright smile and adorned with brilliant alligator- 
shaped ear-rings. (1—3) Concluding from the characteristics pointed out by Narada that this

most handsome man with four arms and lotus-like e istingui f 
Hs > yes and distinguished with the mark © 
Srivatsa and adorned with a garland of sylvan flowers must be Sri Krsna (son of Vasudeva)

and none else, and resolving that since He was armless and was goin must 
encounter Him unarmed (and unmounted), the Yavana puretiodl Eran GT fea 
Him while He was running fastwith His back turned against him although Heis not within easy 
reach even of those adeptin Yoga. (4—6) The Yavana chief was lured far away toa mountain 
cave by Sn Krsna, who showed Himself at every step as though within grasp. (7) Though 
(still) at His heels, reproaching Him in the words "It does not become you, born (as you are) 
in the race of Yadu, to run away (before an adversary)", he could not get at Him, his evil 
destiny (that prevented him from touching the Lord's sacred person) having not (yet) been 
exhausted. (8) Even though censured in this way, the Lord entered deep into the mountain 
cave. Having penetrated it himself, the Yavana found another man lying asleep there. (9) 
"Surely, having brought me (so) far away, the fellow is lying here like an innocent man !" 
Saying thus to himself and taking him to be Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), the stupid fellow 
struck him freely with his foot. (10) Waking up and slowly opening his eyes, the man, who 
had been long asleep, gazed all roundand beheld the Yavana standing by his side. (11) Burnt 
by the fire produced out of the Yavana's (own) body even as the look of the lying man—who 
felt enraged (on his having been awakened so rudely and abruptly)—fell on him, he was 
reduced to ashes in an instant, O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata)! (12)

Usara 
al A UT OAM Se Hel feat wa a | Hee Wel Wa: rea feds saad: 1231

The king said : What was that man called, who killed the Yavana (thus), O holy 
Brahmana, and to whose race did he belong ? What (kind of) prowess did he possess in 
reality ? Wherefore did he go to sleep in the (said) cave and whose seed was he ? (13)

sy Sara

Qa geile Wal Adda Ae | dase Sit Vl Aga: Aage: 121

@ afea: qenifeseanenti sre: uftaetesat aisnthae 124!

Ue WE A Bus Papanaaad! Use faa Hage Vara: ARAL 1 kK |

eae ues wee freanvent | sear Tedd ak Hand da Shs: 1291

Gal AS Vaal AMASATAAPAT: | TSA Tea ALA Gira ater: 1 Re 1

at quig we a mA Hae alu Wade war faye: io!

wa: a & damfiea vere iofas celeste eaqrar Rl

aM ad aq wel aedkaadd: 1a Aa WA THAT AAT 12M 
Sri Suka replied : Born in the race of Ikswaku and an eminentson of Mandhata, he was 
known as Mucukunda and was not only (supremely) devoted to the Brahmanas but true to 
his promise (too). (14) He was entreated for their protection by the hosts of gods led by Indra, 
who were terribly afraid of the demons; and (accordingly) he ensured their safety for a long 
time. (15) Having found in Guha (the younger son of Lord Siva), a guardian of heaven, they 
Now said to Mucukunda, "O king, cease you (now) from the uphill task of protecting us on all 
Sides. (4 6) Since you ‘have been (busy) protecting us (all along), having completely 
renounced your kingdom on the mortal plane—which had (all) its enemies wiped out (by

d wives and (other) 
you)—all your enioyments have ceased. (17) Nay,) your sons an ) 
relations, Tainisters aie counsellors, and even the people of your time survive no more

ee 
2 << “ae 
©. at 7 
: Mee, sack 
"= é wa i=, 
as > #.

having been swept away (by the cruel hand of Death). (18) The Time-Spirit is mightier than 
the mighty; (nay,) itis the almighty and immortal Lord (Himself). Like a herdsman driving a 
herd it sweeps away created beings in (mere) sport. (19) May good betide you, ask of us 
today any boon other than Liberation; (for) the imperishable Lord Visnu is the sole authority 
capable of granting it." (20) Thus addressed (by them), King Mucukunda of great renown 
respectfully saluted the gods and, entering deep into the (aforesaid) cave”, and overpowered 
by (a very long spell of) sleep, vouchsafed by the gods (in response to his prayer); lay down 
to repose (there). (21) (The gods further said to him,) “Let him, however, who thoughtlessly 
awakens you, when fallen into sleep, in the middle, be instantly reduced to mere ashes when:

but seen by you." (22) 
aaa Way Badd: stead ala Yaa stad 1231 
qe 4UaSaT dlaisaree slawaed « wistenteaa faa ex 
ast waa ate BA Alea | aesdaaad CHCA THUS 124 | 
Jat Jolhea Aaeifedaor sutra AAA HaNfeaHaAA 1 2E | 
qa 9 afd: 1 fsa: AA UT geefta asta 121 
On the Yavana having (thus) been converted into ashes, Lord Sri Krsna (the foremost 
of the Yadus) showed Himself to the wise Mucukunda. (23) Beholding the Lord—dark- 
brown as a cloud, clad in yellow silk, bearing the mark of Srivatsa on His breast, irradiated 
with the brilliant Kaustubha gem, endowed with four arms, splendid with a garland of sylvan 
flowers, wearing a lovely and cheerful countenance, and adorned with a pair of shining 
alligator-shaped ear-rings, captivating to the sight of human beings, enlivened witha loving 
smile and endearing glances, possessed of a charming youth, walking with the charming 
gait of a proud lion, and formidable as it were by His glory—and overwhelmed by His lustre, 
the king who was possessed of a great wisdom, was filled with awe and slowly inquired of 
Him (as follows). (24—27) 
Tdp<aq sald 
at aie aware fater fiferetiaesat usaenemat feacenuedh 12¢! 
fafadsifaat ast waar at fanrag: | gad: arat west ar Slmoretsaast ar 1221 
Wai ai eacamt wat yeas aa aera Wgeard wela: Ww BMT 1301

AAAS Aa ich Aged | st Hd MA al weaat afe wea 132! 
aa ¢@ Wesen Vedio: aAaeda: | Gage sla Sen atlases: wat 132! 
facies fsataedhse: | aster fast art sareqenfaatseaar 133 |

ast weil FAIA UAT sat Vasa, ofadishiraneaa: 12%! 
cst asia Ye SB A Wea: | edhe AEM areiasfa fear 134! 
Va asad Wa War YAM: | Seas Wee awa Aeensiivar 136!

Mucukunda submitted : Who may you be, arrived in the mountain cave, and how is it 
that you roam about in this forest abounding in thorns with your feet tender as the petals of 
a lotus ? (28) Are you the effulgence (incarnate) of the effulgent, or the glorious fire-god, the 
sun-god, the moon-god or the mighty Indra (the ruler of paradise) or any other Lokapala 
(guardian of a particular sphere) ? (29) | consider You to be (no other than) Lord Visnu, the 
Supreme Person) out of the three rulers of gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) as (is clear from 
ee

* The cave is located to the south of Mathura near Dholpur in the State of Rajasthan.

the fact that) You are dispelling the darkness of this cave (as well as the darkness of 
ignorance enveloping my mind) by Your (very) effulgence even as a lamp. (30) May You 
oO Jewel among men, tell US—who are sincerely eager to hear—about your birth (pedigree), 
doings Or family name, if it pleases you. (31) We, for our part, O Tiger among men are 
Ksatriyas by caste and belong to the race of Ikswaku. (Personally) | am sprung from the 
loins of Mandhata (son of Yuvanaswa), and called by the name of Mucukunda, O Lord. (32) 
Wearied with vigil extending over long ages (while engaged in protecting the gods against 
the onslaughts of the demons) and with my senses overpowered by sleepiness, | had lain 
asleep in this lonely cave undisturbed till | was aroused (just) now by someone (not known 
to me). (33) He too has been reduced to ashes surely by his own sin. Immediately 
afterwards was noticed (by me) Your glorious Self, the Destroyer of foes. (34) Dazzled 
by Your unbearable effulgence, we are unable to look at You for a long time, O highly 
blessed One! (All the same we can easily perceive that) You deserve to be honoured by 
(all) embodied souls. (35) Respectfully addressed in these words by the king, the Lord, 
who is the Protector of (all) created beings, heartily laughed and replied (as follows) in a 
voice deep as the rumbling of clouds. (36)

MATA TAA 
TARA ATEA Ura sg Wea: 14 WerISTSdtaearaaa fF 391 
qdtaq wita faaa ufsarqecaa: | qurenaifterit a A sant afefad 3c 1

aaa sataniftt A zisheadt Aart wea umeda:13e1 
CMeItas Ae Nad wnifamiaat fakeat qs wd 
WAT MAMVTAAAI AATAT Al Yo | 
aad Apel Je AMHgdy:| ded arqeaia aqdaad fe AMI xe 
aicifted: cha: Werateya Palsy: | Aa A Gad aret Usted famaaqe4ri zi 
WSE darren TeMagqarta: | WI: Wat Ya Aas What: | v3! 
Ay quite usted Pall Hr cat at AWN se: AivaHt yatsetet Mifagq7q | ve | 
The glorious Lord said: My descents, exploits and appellations, O beloved one, 
number thousands and cannot actually be counted even by Me (omniscient as | am) 
because of their being infinite (in number). (37) Someone might have at any time (in the 
past) been able through many lives to count the particles of dust on the earth; but one could 
never reckon My excellences, exploits and names or (even) My descents. (38) The 
greatest sages (like Narada and Sanaka) cannot reach the end of My descents and doings 
relating to the past, present and future if they (try to) enumerate them in order. (39) 
Nevertheless, O beloved monarch, hear from Me, as | tell you, of those relating to 
the present day. Prayed to of yore by Brahma (the creator) for the vindication of virtue 
and the extermination of the demons that were proving a (veritable) burden to the earth, 
| have appeared in the house of Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva) in the race of Yadu. They 
call Me by the name of Vasudeva because of My being the most distinguished son 
Of Vasudeva (although | have been known by this name even before ina different sense 
Of course). (40-41) (As regards My exploits) the demon Kalanemi, born as Kamsa, 
has been killed (by Me), as well as Pralamba and other enemies of the righteous. And this 
Yavana has been burnt to death (by Me), O king, through your fiery eyes. (42) Having been 
repeatedly entreated by you before, | the said Vasudeva, have come to this cave (but) for 
the purpose of showering My grace on you, fond as | am of My devotees. (43) Ask 
boons of your choice (of Me), O royal sage; ! shall confer on you all your desired objects. 
No body who has sought Me for protection will have cause to grieve any more. (44)

Sh SAT 
Sara Ue Yea Yalhad i wet A ea wlan isu

Sri Suka continued : Recollecting the prediction* of sage Garga (the elder) and realizing 
Sri Krsna to be (non else than) Lord Narayana, when addressed in these words (by the Lord) 
Mucukunda bowed low to Him and, full of joy, spoke (as follows). (45)

TIPS SAAT 
fanfadsa wa Sa aaa ada al A aedag | 
qa eaagy Ge ee «geass afSra: Ive 
wea wal 4 geNat Ae 8 mMiseqeetaadise | 
Wend A waeaijerpa uafadt at aq: Ive 
Tae omelistia fenet mat wUeafetgnee oe: | 
Aaa: Arenas Sefer 1X C1 
moms denen fecamt aca seer 
aa TAMA Tee udéeartre eta: ixet 
THtakhinatada swageld fasag 9 ILI 
aaa: aera AeCSaMAIseRaRgAAAH: 14o | 
qa ASAI. aagatat eae igi: | 
@ W wed ae a aoa faeqfrarerdina: 1421 
Rite feecenyafeert amen: amatad: | 
Tey Aqageg afiat stem: yes ge aa 14a 
atid crit anaisa ffaqavrredetert ear 
Wis ware «aust sgensf a Gam aca 143! 
Ramet wad | set Meee gfe «| TTA: 1 
aaga ae ada Aedt uate af wea xfs: uxt 
Ta WARE ga a gi WaT aes | 
a met Meine at fafaahecausyfad: uu 
1 wast da wededeerseinne at fat 
amiea eat Mg A Quit ora aReTTERET 14 | 
eG, faqennies = Sal Ade RTT GaMT: | 
Pent fim aw af wit ust ameeqiuol 
farite Alor AAA SaaTa aq aas Hat SmaI: muta | 
Wg AY IAEA «= ofS ssuareitar 14c1

3 Mucukunda nes told by ihe Sage Vrddha Garga (the elder or senior Garga) that the Lord Himself would appear in the 
ouse of Vasudeva he byeptyetabth round of Dwapara Yugain the course of the present Manvantara and that the king would 
have the rare and unique privilege of beholding Him and talking to Him.

Bee oie patee aie meee by Your Maya (enchanting potency) and blind to the 
hest) ; ste) Bes rselt), O Lord, this creature (man)—appearing (now) as male and 
ow as) fe €S not worship You, but remains attached to the home, which is a

(prolific) source of misery (alone), in search of happiness, of which (however) it is (ever) 
deprived. (46) Having somehow (by grace of God) secured without (a i i 
ifficult to attain—in thi : ny) effort birth—which 
is (SO) Cl n this land (of Bharatavarsa) as ah 
nd (and therefore fit for devotions). 0 « >a) aS a Numan being sound of body and 
mind (¢ fd being Sanaa ns), O sinless Lord, mandoes nottake refuge in Your lotus- 
feet, his ete g Fc hs e pleasures of sense (which are unreal), and remains sunk in 
househo : e Abe : a beast fallen into a well overgrown with grass (and is unable to get 
out of it). (47) (All) this life of mine, O invincible Lord, has slipped in vain in endless anxiety, 
a ruler of the earth as | was with my pride puffed up by a royal fortune, viewing this mortal 
frame as my Own self and remaining attached to children, wives, treasury and lands. (48) 
With the feeling about this body—which is as much apart from me as a jar or a wall—being 
my own self and a ruler of men, deeply rooted (in my mind), nay, traversing the earth in all 
directions, surrounded by generals commanding regiments of chariots, elephants, horses 
and foot-soldiers, and forgetting You (the Time-Spirit), | had grown very haughty. (49) Alert 
as the serpent that grabs a rat, licking the ends of its lips through hunger, You (appearing) 
as Death suddenly overtake the embodied soul that is utterly forgetful (of You), engrossed 
asitis in the thought of its (worldly) projects, and notonly hankers after the pleasures of sense 
(even though its aspirations are thwarted at every step) but finds its thirst (for enjoyment) 
immensely aggravated (even as its aspirations are realized). (50) The same body which was 
formerly—while moving about in chariots adorned with gold ornaments or on (the back of) 
young elephants—bore the title of a ruler of men, (eventually) passes by the name of 
excrement (if left exposed and devoured by dogs, jackals or vultures and crows etc.) of 
worms (if interred) and of ashes (if cremated) when seized by You disguised as death, which 
is (So) hard to escape. (51) Having fully conquered all the (four) quarters, with all possibility 
of (a future) conflict precluded, and occupying a high seat (the exalted throne of a universal 
monarch) and hailed by monarchs that were (once) his equals, the man, O Lord, is led (hither 
and thither) as a toy-deer of young women in (the precincts of) the home, which offers (no 
other charm than) sexual pleasures. (52) Devoted heart and soul to austerities with all 
enjoyments ceased, and making gifts in the hope of (securing) such enjoyments (hereafter), 
he performs (virtuous) actions (in his present life) in order that he may be reborn as Indra (or 
aS a universal monarch even in the life to come). He (however) whose thirst (for enjoyment) 
is (thus) fully developed is never able to enjoy (any) happiness (whatsoever). (53) When ee 
€nd of (the cycle of) birth and death in the case of a soul undergoing rans mlgrateD is in sight, 
then (alone) his meeting with some saint takes place, O immortal Lord ! (And) when ee 
is fellowship with a saint, then alone is engendered (a feeling of) devotion to You, me Boe 
Of saints and the Ruler of the high and the low. (54) | conclude thata Ore aaa apres 
done tome by You, O Lord, in that the shackles of sovereignty have fallen off my feet w! oD 
(any) effort rt)—a consummation which is devoutly sought for by wise kings ruling 
OV f con ny be ‘nq to retire into the woods with a vow to live (all) alone. (55) 
mee enlire:giobe alg nee z service to Your (Sacred) feet—which is the highest 
igs hee Seve ALY nee) pate ae of those who have nothing to call their own, O almighty 
BAe vale seabeabee pee the Bestower of Liberation, O Hari, what wise man would 
‘FOr, Naving propitiate , ; ? (56) Therefore, 
88k (of You) a hee peer is (only) calculated to bind the soul (further) ? (56)

lities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas 
'electi sings associated with the qua f Sa 
ante eh O Lord, all wi aedalg prosperity and the extermination of foes), | run i 
Bette Nioton eee preme Person, who are pure consciousness free from (the taint of)

(hig

: Was 6 , 
we ' 
inten inny Ce Fenda g ng a 
Ss ae Se : 
‘i +1 ve m= a>

oN

Maya, (nay,) above the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and one withouta second. (57) Lon 
afflicted in this world with the fruits of actions and being tormented with the impressions left 
on the mind by those actions, nay, with my six (internal) foes (in the shape of the five Senses 
of perception and the mind) not (yet) free from thirst and having (therefore) not (so far) been 
able to secure peace (of mind), | have somehow duly reached, O Bestower of Knowleg @ 
concerning Yourself, Your lotus Feet, which are divorced from fear and grief and which are 
all truth, O Supreme Spirit. (Pray,) protect me, O Lord, distressed as | am. (58)

aaa went af faaalari at: setae a adie aa: ue)

yelad atau fakg adia dtdietesremmnittttad feds go)

DIB IGS ES DOG soTarafahada: | statlurarad Us, saad GrShera 19 |

fat wa amt vende: | sreea faa qa viedo ie

aa Wd Aaetdrarfefs: 1: aaa wee Agusta: 1631

SHR ULC A TET: | aT. fea A TUT hae ex

sf steered AEM URS Seal eH See PaaS eA: 142 |

The glorious Lord replied : O great king, O ruler of the entire globe, your mind is free 
from (all) impurities (in the shape of attachment, greed etc.) and powerful (capable of 
perceiving the highest truth) in that it could not be lured by (offers of) enjoyments, even 
though you were tempted with boons of your choice. (59) Know that it was to show (to the 
world) your vigilance (in the matter of choosing the right thing and rejecting the false) that you 
were tempted with boons. The judgment of those who are exclusively devoted to Me can never 
be perverted by (offers of) sensuous enjoyments) (which are coveted by the world). (60) The 
mind of those other than devotees, even though they try to curb it through breath-control etc., 
is seen (to get) riotous again, its craving for enjoyment having not (yet) ceased (which is 
possible only through Devotion), O king ! (61) With your mind set on Me, wander the earth 
at pleasure. May your devotion to Me continue uninterrupted for ever as a matter of course. 
(62) Devoted to the duties of a Ksatriya (viz., the protection of your subjects), you killed game 
(of various kinds) through hunting etc.; (therefore) looking upon Me as your asylum and 
collected (in mind), get rid of the sinful tendency (acquired through such practices) by 
recourse to asceticism. (63) Being reborn as a Brahmana (the formost of the twice-born),

most friendly to all created beings, in your (very) next incarnation, O Mucukunda, you will 
surely attain to Me, the Absolute. (64)

Thus ends the fifty-first discourse, entitled "Mucukunda's Eulogy (of the Lord),” 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS ry

BErtir were, T

4

3a USAR Sear:

Discourse LII . 
Sri Krsna's withdrawal to Dwaraka; Balarama's marriage; Rukmini sends a

Brahmana with a message to Sri Krsna

MYH SAA 
sa AST ess «= PW eaeeten: 1d ums wae Asm Wea! @ | 
a aad Aemers AA AI atest | Hea Afeeat sq sma fearqar 2 | 
qs at Pagt ameter: | Garena wa: Het snfasre wee! 3 | 
aaa aAATATa TARUNTSA | Aaesee: «—«- AAT TSS |S 
Wear GN Wi aaqdisarti wat wae Fra ade gat G1 & | 
faa aT fareqcatfed: gases (Gs TT fester: 1 € I 
fasta armed figqee meatinqeerat Wr sade! OI 
faca fad osarasitat «= itesiiqadi uesat camera «| Ogee ¢ | 
USTaat at apt AM: Weal acti staMad Wiileniigearofad < 1 
TE at Met dgureedt fia sadorel unam freer aa adie igo 
frat fielarengra aera uve yaleae fafaetie: aaamefaapr ee! 
qt 8S ARC MIATA Tat I eaimaliemitgetiadaqeent afa 1221 
seem fq ay aertiwat yr aaah 7713! 
aistt annfaft Wel Gar aocaal | aoa BAe Areal aat ex!

Sri Suka began again: Thus blessed, O dear Pariksit, by SriKrsna, Mucukunda, a scion 
of Ikswaku, went round Him (clockwise as a mark of respect) and, bowing low to Him, came 
out (into the open country) through the mouth of the cave. (1) Observing diminutive men, 
beasts, plants and trees and concluding the age of Kali to have set in, he proceeded in a 
northerly direction.(2) Full of faith in austerities, self-possessed, free from attachment, and 
concentrating his mind on Sri Krsna, Mucukunda, who had (all) his doubts cleared, entered 
deep into the forest on Mount Gandhamadana. (3) Reaching Badarikasrama (so called 
because of its grove of jujube trees), containing the abode of (the divine sages) Nara and 
Narayana, he sought the favour of Sri Hari through asceticism, enduring all pairs of opposites 
(such as heat and cold) and remaining tranquil (at all times). (4) Going back to the city (of 
Mathura), which continued to be beleaguered by the Yavanas, and wiping out the barbarian 
host, the Lord took away their wealth to Dwaraka. (5) While the treasure was (thus) being 
Carried away on (the back of) oxen and men directed by Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), 
Jarasandha appeared (on the scene) leading an army consisting (as usual) of twenty-three 
Aksauhinis. (6) Observing the impetuosity of the onrush of the enemys host, Balarama and 
Sri Krsna (the two Scions of Madhu), who had adopted the ways of human beings, took to 
Their heels at once. (7) Leaving the immense spoils (uncared for), the two Brothers covered 
many a mile with Their feet, resembling lotus petals, as though terribly afraid, though 
(absolutely) fearless. (8) Laughing heartily to see Them flying (like cowards), the powerful 
Jarasandha (the ruler of Magadha) pursued Them with the hosts of chariots, not knowing the

gr tr HRCA SE AES Wee Ke Ke ee Ke Ke He He He He Be He He He He Ke Ke Hr He He He He He We He We Ke He We He Gr Be Ke Ke Hr He Ke He Hr Ke Hee He He Wr Hr Hee Be He He Be Ke Ke Hee Be Br Ke Be Ge Ke He Sr Be He BEST AT Ae

am 
Pav 4 ae

oa Ws Wk. 
re oi t

att; A

a a LA

greatness of the two almighty Brothers. (9) Having run fast for along distance and (therefore 
apparently) fully exhausted, They (nevertheless) climbed up a lofty mountain bearing the 
(significant) name of Pravarsana, where the glorious Indra (the god of rain) perpetually 
rains.(10) Concluding Them to have hidden (somewhere) on the mountain and not knowing 
the (exact) place (of. Their concealment), O protector of men, Jarasandha set the (whole 
mountain ablaze with the help of piles of wood (with which the mountain was girt on all Sides), 
strewing fire all round. (11) Then, springing up with (great) impetuosity from the mountain- 
peak, which was ten and one Yojanas (or eighty-eight miles) high and whose SIdes were (all) 
burning, They descended on the plains (across the area occupied by the besieging army). (12) 
Not being perceived by the enemy (Jarasandha) and his followers, Sri Krsna and Balarama 
(the two jewels of Yadu's race) came back to Their own city (Dwaraka), which had the sea 
for its moat, O protector of men! (13) Falsely taking Balarama and Sri Krsna (the Ruler even 
of Brahma and Lord Siva) as burnt (to death), the aforesaid Jarasandha (the Ruler of 
Magadha) too returned to Magadha taking (back with him) the very large army (brought by 
him to rout Sri Krsna). (14)

BAe: star tact tadi Aa seo alfea: sree aorafa quien 124! 
Ward Wace saad qpesci aed diamaqa frat apt waar ies 
TAA Ma Ua: Meadisauen| wad adele maga: genfta ie

Urged by Brahma (the creator), the glorious Kakudmi (son of Revata), the suzerain lord 
of the Anartas (the modern Kathiawad or Saurashtra), gave away his daughter, Revaiti, to 
Balarama: this has already been narrated (by me in Book IX)* . (15) Having vanquished by 
dint of prowess the kings ranged on the side of Sigupala (the ruler of Cedi—a rival suitor of 
Rukmini) the foremost of whom was Salva, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) too, O jewel 
among the Kurus, espoused in a choice-marriage Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbnha—the 
modern Berar), the daughter of Bhismaka (the ruler of Vidarbha) and a part manifestation 
of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity, the principal Spouse of Lord Visnu)—(even) as 
Garuda (son of Tarksa, a nickname of the sage Kasyapa) carried away (the jar containing) 
nectar—while all people stood gazing. (16-17)

War dada serut vei uae fama saan sf wyaieci 
MTS Area POAC: | AAT APTANA, Steal. HATAUTSLL, 12S | 
FAL POSM: oar metetareme: | Al 7 Tad Ya: wag Meda: 120!

The king (Pariksit) said : The Lord espoused Rukmini, the daughter of Bhismaka, of 
lovely countenance, according to (what is known as) the Raksasa mode of marriage (SO- 
called because it is principally in vogue among the Raksasas or ogres); so it is heard. (18) 
O divine sage, | long to hear (in detail) the story of Sri Krsna of unlimited energy—how He 
Snatched away the girl, having conquered Jarasandha (the ruler of Magadha), Salva and 
others. (19) O holy Brahmana, what man who is capable of understanding and appreciating 
what he has heard would feel sated as a matter of fact while hearing the stories of Sri Krsna.

which are not only delightful (to hear) and ever interesting but bring a great reward (to the 
listener) and wipe out the sins of mankind ? (20)

* Vide verses 27 to 36 of Discourse III.

MyH Sara 
Tasseie dts a fareuifeatetar| TA GSE UI: HAleHt A AMAT 1221 
Sa «=| - SAHA GEMSTAR: | SAMS SaATOH SaaS GAT Tat 1221 
aay eee wera: | Jermifaaed «AA Gest ofr 1231 
ai Aegnaviereagierunseary | FN Aaa wal aqelé Al el 12v1 
_ Sepa ad PVE Yt zoiad fad pase seit Bera 1241 
Sri Suka continued : There was a great king, Bhismaka by name, (who was) the 
suzerain lord of Vidarbha (which is generally identified with the modern Berar). Five sons 
and one daughter of charming countenance were born to him. (21) The eldest (of them) 
was Rukmi, Rukmaratha the next, and then followed (in order of sequence) Rukmabahu, 
Rukmakesa and Rukmamali. Rukmini was (the name of) their virtuous sister. (22) Having 
closely heard about the comeliness, valour, excellences and affluence of Sri Krsna (the 
Bestower of Liberation) as being celebrated by visitors to her house, she began to look 
upon Him as her befitting husband. (23) Sri Krsna too made up His mind to marry her in 
an appropriate manner, knowing her (from similar sources) to be an embodiment of 
intelligence, (auspicious) bodily characteristics, generosity, physical charm, amiability and 
other virtues and (therefore) a worthy consort. (24) Rukmi (the eldest prince), who hated 
Sri Krsna, proposed Sisupala (the ruler of Cedi), deterring his retations (parents and 
brothers)—who intended to give away Rukmini (his sister) to Sri Krsna, O protector of 
men—from that course. (25)

dedenfadaet aadf aiar ert faferend fei afar sree gay 12 |

arnt @ waa sie: safe: | smear yeaa cesar i201

a 40 N@Uadaeael «= sea | Sudeadarsih sessed featena: 1261

qd amad fasraqama aa ata: afore 89-1281

afe fara ate qaamaiadd atfiqesor Aqeate: el 130!

Gast afé ada stent a4 safe! stem: arena GelhaonMeay 1321

STS SAeenchrarsarara Gan: | afesrist dgqs: aa aalgfacar: 1321

fr MOTI A, YAMedA! Regier: Brae, AAS Raa 133 |

He a: HAs AL Usd Tel fe Set: | Fa aera fast wea: GA Ha: 13!

aaah «=o gt |= (eitde 96 afewat ad At ae Ad fH Het Gram a 134

Ti wgsams mem: uwaaiciemdidcet det aAaraviad 136! 
Greatly troubled in mind to learn this and pondering (awhile), the beautiful Rukmini (the 
princess of Vidarbha) speedily despatched a trusted Brahmana to bring Sri Krsna (to her 
father's capital). (26) Having duly reached Dwaraka, and having been ushered (into the 
Lord's presence) by the porters, he beheld Sri Krsna (the most ancient Person) seated on 
a throne of gold. (27) Seeing him (from a distance), Sri Krsna (a devotee of the Brahmanas, 
though Himself adored by all) got down from His throne and, having seated him (there), 
honoured him in the same way as the gods (lit.,the denizens of heaven) honoured Him 
(whenever He went to their abode). (28) Approaching him, when he had taken his meal and 
rested (awhile), and gently kneading his feet with His hand Sri Krsna (the Goal of the 
righteous) coolly inquired of him (as follows) -—(29) "| hope, O jewel among the foremost of

Brahmanas, your religious observances, approved by the elders, are going on without much 
difficulty, and | hope your mind is ever complacent. (30) When a Brahmana remains

¢ % a% ¥ 
, y “Fe ae 
5

Wi Jas CR, 
Whe > c Tae

contented with whatever is obtained (without any endeavour), never swerving from hi 
sacred duty, such contentment (alone) actually yields to him all his desired blessings. (31) 
A discontented Indra (the ruler of gods) too only migrates one after another to the higher 
worlds (and knows,no rest); while a contented soul, even though destitute, enjoys a sound ° 
sleep, with all his limbs (including his mind) free from anguish. (32) | salute again and again 
with My head (bent low) pious and placid Brahmanas contented with whatever is ot 
unasked and most friendly to (all) created beings, yet free from egotism. (33) Are you (all) 
enjoying security, O Brahmana, at the hands of your king ? Indeed he is dear to Me, in whose 
dominion the people, protected by him, live happily. (34) If not secret, (pray,) tell us 
everything—whence and seeking what you have come to this place crossing the sea (which 
is So difficult to cross). What work of yours can we do ?" (35) Politely asked (all) these relevant 
questions by Sri Krsna the Supreme Ruler of the universe)—who had assumed an embodied 
form for the sake of (mere) fun—the Brahmana told Him everything (how the parents of 
Rukmini planned to give her away to Sri Krsna and how their plans were being thwarted by 
her eldest brother, Rukmi, who was in favour of marrying her to Sisupala, the ruler of Cedi, 
and had sent formal invitation to him). (86) (He then delivered to Sri Krsna the following 
message either orally or in the form of a letter written by the princess herself).

wFAUYaTa 
TA WI YG Wadi a Afdea uifaatewiseaay | 
ea cat caaantaediom aergniaatt farmad 4 1301 
al al dad edt Homemafaaaaatavrenmaiadea_ | 
ak Uff Hoadt A quid Hea ales Aas AtHlHaAAISATA 1361 
TH WAM UG Fa: UikeNrs Aeararentasy vadisa fast faerfe 
am dakar da site mMaganaddiomastar 139 | 
YA san areca as [ate aa lates STAT ORR: | 
AMI Ae Wels Wa av Wem A A aAaleqaieaissl ixol 
amar aatsidteer facut Wa: ada yaarafaty: aia: | 
Friea cermersas See at wera fates didaearixe 
aa Miethed aieadee mutate saergquai 
Wert Aedt gedcan wet afetaaehiterqdand 1x2 
TASES |= eM «| asengafaharcranisaedl | 
_ aghgsnat 4 OWA HATS TOA ATH MSHA: Ae, 13 | 
Rukmini says:—Having heard, O immortal Lord, most handsome in all the (three) 
worlds, of Your excellences—which, entering deep into the heart through the apertures of 
the ears, dispel the agony of the hearts, O beloved one—as well as of Your charming 
appearance, which vouchsafes to those that have eyes all the blessings sought for by thelt 
eyes, my mind has been set on You, (all) shame having fled away from it. (37) What noble; 
firm and high-born maiden, O Bestower of Liberation, will, noton her coming of age elect You 
as her husband—You, O Lion among men, who are Your own compeer in point of pedigre®: 
good disposition, comeliness of form, learning, youthfulness, opulence and glory and ravish 
the mind of (all) mankind ? (38) Hence you have indeed been elected by me as my husband,

O Darling, and this body has been bestowed on You. (Pray,) take me to wife here (at MY 
father's home). Let not Sisupala forthwith touch this share of a hero like a jackal defiling the

a 
Dis. 52 J BOOK TEN 335

quarry of a lion, O lotus-eyed Lord ! (39) If the almighty Lord (Narayana), the Supreme Ruler 
(of the universe), has thoroughly been propitiated (by me) through works of public utility (such 
as the digging of wells and tanks, construction of temples, laying out gardens and distribution 
of foodgrains), sacrificial performances, charitable gifts, religious observances (such as 
taking a dip in holy waters), fasting, offering worship to gods, the Brahmanas, elders and so 
on, may Sri Krsna (the elder Brother of Gada) and not others such as Sigupala (the son of 
Damaghosa) come and espouse me. (40) Duly reaching (all alone) the territory of Vidarbha 
(the city of Kundinapura, the capital of the rulers of Vidarbha) incognito at a time when the 
marriage is going to take place the following day, O invincible Lord ! and (then), surrounded 
by the generals of Your army and completely crushing the (combined) forces of SiSupala (the

ruler of Cedi) and Jarasandha (the king of Magadha), marry me perforce according to the

system prevalent among the Raksasas’, winning me as a prize of valour. (41) If You urge 
(in protest), “How can | marry you without killing your relations (who are sure to resist any 
attempt on My part to take you by force), living as you do within the four walls of the 
gynaeceum (and therefore under the tutelage of your gurdians)?", | (hereby) tell You 
beforehand the means (of securing me without spilling the blood of my relations). On the eve 
of marriage a grand procession will be taken out to (the shrine of) Goddess Ambika (our 
family deity), in which the young bride has to go out (of the palace) to see Goddess Parvati 
(the Daughter of Himavan, the king of mountains). (42) If (however).1 do not secure Your 
grace, O lotus-eyed Lord—a bath in the dust of whose lotus-feet great souls like Lord Siva 
(the Spouse of Uma) seek to obtain for dispelling their darkness (of ignorance)—| shall lay 
down my life, (already) withered through fasting, (each time | am reborn) in the hope that the 
grace may be secured (even) through (say) a hundred births. (43)

MAT Sara 
saad gece aeda vatssedt: i fagea amd ae fadt dard iex! 
sfa saierrad AEM URAee Blea eae Se eeageseda fEISTAISeA: 142 | 
The Brahmana concluded : These are the secret messages brought by me (and 
delivered to You), O Sri Krsna (the adored of the Yadus) ! Considering them, whatever is

* Our scriptures have recognized as many as eight different types of marriage. They are :-—

1. The Arsa type, in which the bridegroom has to presenta pair of cows to the bride's father before marriage- sreraraeq 7171544" 
(Yajnavalkya-Smrti 1.59; cf. Manusmrti Ill. 53).

2. The Asura type, in which the bride's father accepts large sums of money from the bridegroom as a price for the girl—

‘arg sfauneria’ (vide Y. S., |. 61; cf. M. S. Ill. 31) 
3. The Brahma type, in which the bride's father gives away the girl after duly adorning her according to his means— alent

faare sea dad ected (Y.S., 1.58; cf. M.S. Ill. 27). 
4.The Paigaca type, in which the girl is ravished while asleep, intoxicated or deranged— al Ae WAM A tei Sas

. (M.S., Ill. (34).

9. The Daiva a in which a girl is given away to a priest officiating at a sacrificial performance— 4a acs ca: "(Y. S. 1. 59).

6. The Gandharva type, in which a pair is allowed to marry by mutual consent alone without ceremonies and without 
consulting relatives— Tua: Arata: (Ibid., 1.61).

7. The Raksasa type, in which a girlis taken away by force after vanquishing formidable opponents—‘asai qaermry (1 bid.).

8. The Prajapatya type, in which a girl is given away, without receiving any present from the bridegroom, on the express 
understanding that the two will practise virtue together— ‘Sela Aen WAAid Ara Are | | HAMGH..........0- "(M. S., IIL.

30; cf. Y.S.,1. 60).

. % ie . 
Bic

Cie, , 
ot mt, , as

ee aoe 
rit aM, 
i

a ern caccsattnckantaxsccnsewneecesnnnwsnnwe wwe: 03

Re Be Ve We VS Fe

worth doing in this connection may be done without delay. (44)

Thus ends the fifty-second discourse, bearing on the subject of Rukmini's wedding, 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31a FUSaRAa Sea:

Discourse LIII

Sri Krsna carries away Rukmini

HRyh SATA | 
anai: ad qd eet Para aerer: sya afr oft seafarers ¢ |

Sri Suka began again : Hearing the message of Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha), the 
said Sri Krsna ( a Scion of Yadu), however, heartily laughed and, warmly clasping the 
Brahmana’'s hand by His own, spoke (to him) as follows. (1)

MMA TAAT 
dameata daa fist a a on ffi acre sfanon garcatemel fara: 1 21

wana Sq Weta, Wa | AeTaAaengmerstarerentta 13

The glorious Lord said : My mindis likewise set on her and | getno sleep at night. | know 
my marriage‘(with her) has been stopped by Rukmi out of (personal) grudge (against Me).(2) 
Having routed in battle the vile kings (that will be assembled at Kundinapura), | shall bring 
(to Dwaraka) that princess of faultless limbs, (so) devoted to Me, even as one would capture 
a flame out of firewood. (3)

MIP SAA

Saree a fay sfaroat neged: 1 ta: Wasa cremate Aner! X |

a We: emiiataqaaeed: 1a waurta dei self: 1 & |

ee eet uteri gut: | ermaigaeor facia: | & | 
Des continued - Having come to know definitely. (through the Brahmana) about the 
eee ation under which the wedding of Rukmini was going to take place (on the third day 
f pnee), Sri Krsna (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) said to His charioteer, "Let the chariot 
2 is r ee once, O Daruka !" (4) Having brought the chariot drawn by (four) horses— 
5 ya, ougriva, Meghapuspa and Balahaka—Daruka too stood before the Lord with joined 
EE Wace oe als ag picking up the Brahmana (too), Sri Krsna (Grandson of 
om Anarta to the Vidarbha territory i ingle ni ith the

Rlb ef ieee eulttnorass. (6) ritory in the course of a single night wit

ey a giteit: reteset aa: | awe wi ara crerenatvanrad,| 9 | 
Or AHeMearearaaay | fees: «=| RAL S|

a

Dis. 53 ] BOOK TEN 337

34

a “WT 
} LPR a ee 
’

ae 
y

: 
Wate is

a NAB) - 
r a - eT

‘

Ai 
eo 
Rack

®, 4 
rm

and all their mounts. (17—19) aed 
sada. WaT, Ua fauefaqaterr pet aah Td ed HA Hoewfsa: 1201 
aeq ve wat wedge: | aha: Set seme asteaaahy: 129) 
Hearing of this (collective military) effort on the part of kings belonging to the Opposite 
party, and of Sri Krsna having gone all by Himself (presumably) to take away the princesg 
Lord Balarama apprehended strife. Overwhelmed with fraternal affection (therefore), he 
proceeded post haste to Kundinapura accompanied by a huge army consisting of elephants. 
horse, chariots and foot-soldiers. (20-21)

qe Ae AIT et: | Taha fesrertfercteartet 1221 
svt «= framaraha «oSelel Ascauete: artical Ae AQAA AUT | 
asta araddsenta Acareatett fest: 1231

ay maaan apt fHfsreiitaa aanrftrrent ya arafa fe qatem: 12x

aime a A Me Amel Heat: | sat ar fae wt eanont Pr at 1241

wa frat ae Wessel iaiedd Hem AAT UagHoTHe 1261

Wa ae: ude Weaemd qaiam sedst Armen Pease: 1201

AI PMlamies: A wa feeds: isrcurt eat weet at 812!

a da weeandemeamnd adlisimed sauna aAgesatataa 1291

wand aaa act BAMaA wad sea fraqaaas arise ..

Yearning for the arrival of Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) and not seeing the Brahmana return, the

beautiful daughter of Bhisma thereupon thought (within herself) as follows:—(22) "Ah, my 
wedding, unlucky as | am, comes off (only) after the interval of a night. The lotus-eyed Lord 
(however) has not (yet) turned up. | do not know the reason for it. Even the Brahmana who 
bore my message has not returned till this moment. (23) Perhaps having found (later on) 
something disgusting in me, the Lord (who is faultless in character) is surely not coming (to 
Kundinapura now) to marry me, though prepared (to leave Dwaraka in the first instance). 
(That is why the Brahmana too, whom the Lord would have otherwise brought with Him, has 
not been able to reach Kundinapura in time, coming as he is on foot disappointed and 
disheartened. (24) Neither Brahma (the ordainer of events and the dispenser of fruit of one's 
good or evil actions) nor Siva (the supreme Lord) is propitious to me. And Goddess Gauri, 
the Daughter of Himalaya (the king of mountains) and the virtuous Spouse of Lord Siva (too) 
is unfavourable to me.” (25)Pondering thus, the young maiden, whose mind had been 
ravished by Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) and who knew that the time was not suitable 
for shedding tears (which is considered inauspicious on festive occasions), closed her eyes; 
bedimmed (as they were) with tear-drops. (26) (Meanwhile) the left thigh, arm and eye of the 
bride, who had thus been awaiting the arrival of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows), throbbed, 
auguring delightful news, O king ! (27) Specially instructed by Sri Krsna (to report His arrival), 
the Same Sunanda (the foremost of Brahmanas)—so the tradition goes—forthwith saw the 
princess, who dwelt in the gynaeceum and shone brightly (with joy born of her meeting with 
- Sri Krsna in contemplation). (28) Full of bright smiles to find him wearing a cheerful 
countenance and unfaltering of gait (which bespoke the success of his mission), the said 
virtuous maiden—who could read what was in the mind of another from the latter's facial 
expression and other indications—made detailed inquiries of him (about Sri Krsna). (29) He

Dis. 53 ] BOOK TEN 339

apprised her of Sri Krsna (a scion of Yadu) having come, and (further) conveyed to her the 
unfailing assurance” given (by the Lord) about taking her (to His home at Dwaraka. (30) 
Delighted at heart to know for certain the fact of His having arrived (at Kundinapura) and 
seeing no other boon worth conferring on the Brahmana (in return for his unique service in 
the form of bringing Sri Krsna to her), the said Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha) bowed to 
him (and thereby expressed her lasting indebtedness to him, which automatically entitled 
him to infinitely more than the wealth of the entire universe, She being no other than Laksmi, 
the goddess of wealth and prosperity). (31) |

wat |= AT agfeqearederoteaat | arereregitor cet «| aaddt: 1321 
aeeaia oataifa faeifae a: iscearsih fafeaq args i33t 
ware sitganea emia: 1 ada: aaranifaed faek aan axl 
Wa Ua Wat amet aeraa: | amnee aerfed ad: am: aad 13h! 
POTANTAATH Tas faqiqzantas: | airreat AaTatfea: cass 136 | 
sea wat afad efaenvada A seraemaenen Hea: aged: aft: 1201 
feet dat asiacthai sae Geld aevat: uonforeqa: 131

Hearing of Balarama and Sri Krsna having arrived (in Kundinapura) eager to witness the 
wedding of his daughter, Bhismaka went forth to meet Them with a flourish of trumpets and 
excellent articles of worship. (32) Offering Madhuparkaf (a delicious and refreshing 
preparation made of curds and honey and offered to an esteemed guest or the bridegroom 
on the latter's arrival at the door of the bride's father), immaculate garments and welcome 
presents (of various kinds), he duly worshipped Them in accordance with the scriptural 
ordinance. (33) Assigning Them alongwith Their troops and retinue an abode equipped with 
(all) luxuries and amenities, the highly intelligent monarch (who could easily perceive in no 
time that Sri Krsna had arrived with the intention of marrying Rukmini) offered hospitality (to 
all) in a befitting manner. (34) He likewise duly entertained (all) the assembled kings by 
supplying them with all the objects of their desire with due regard to the prowess, age, might 
and financial status of each. (35) Hearing of Sri Krsna having arrived (there), the residents 
of Kundinapura (the capital of Vidarbha) came (out of their houses to see Him) and enjoyed 
(to their heart's content) the beauty of His lotus-like countenance with both their eyes 
together (even) as one would quaff honey with the hollow of one's joined palms. (36) (They 
said to one another,) "Rukmini alone and no other girl deserves to be his consort andhe alone 
of faultless limbs is the most worthy match for Rukmini (the daughter of Bhisma). (37) 
Pleased with whatever meritorious deed has been performed by us (in this or any previous 
existence), may God (the Maker of the three worlds) show His grace (to us) and let SriKrsna 
and none else marry the princess of Vidarbha (through such grace).° (38)

ug Sucre! aaha MW Whe: | SAM VA GU TeMe edb 138 |

aang: ae wath: uftarfeari ger werwe: Bt: Aaegeeldrae: 
Wega avranrqaTnasy Say 1s |

“Vide verse 3 above. 
tayseh a Bais afte wad AAatH: |

By offering Madhuparka to Sri Krsna Bhismaka indirectly expressed his willingness to give away his daughter to Him.

= MR 8 Hey,

aMENate sateen: CEE: | ATTA: | AMAT: 1x2 
Teas Wats Wael aoe: aka ay wy: gaara: iva) 
sae Aetae | MAUTGcHING aT | SaERa fa: Ara Haran ey | 
ai a yaaa aet faféqn fasted: 1 vari acaeigdauet verre ivy) 
Te Mikasa Gamage Rar yard wis Ta, Pwrtaq aay 1s | 
atfgatenerdeaaia: SAIPAN: lA: stores: yer ix) 
fashaa: afd od: Page| HaUTgUdracHSgamHcarf: VSol 
ae feet: Seg: Bet Basse: | areal eel Aas WaT A TS ay: xe 
qhama wea fesmifcerei ay oft yet agent iyo!

Thus spoke the citizens (to one another), bound as they were by ties of intense love (to 
Rukmini). And, guarded by soldiers, the maiden (Rukmini) drove out of the gynaeceum tothe 
shrine of Goddess Ambika (Parvati). (9) Deeply contemplating on the lotus-feet of SriKrsna 
(the Bestower of Liberation) with her speech (duly) controlled, (nay,) Surrounded by her 
female companions and protected by gallant soldiers of the king's personal guard, who were 
(all) clad in armour and marched with uplifted weapons, she sallied out (of her chariot at the 
outermost entrance of the temple) on foot alongwith her mother and other elderly ladies to 
behold the feet—tender like soft leaves—of Goddess Parvati (the Consort of Lord Siva). Clay 
tomtoms, conchs and large drums as well as clarionets and kettle-drums were sounded (as 
she walked). (40-41) Surrounding the (royal) bride walked (with her) the foremost of dancing 
girls in thousands with a variety of offerings and (other) articles of worship, Brahmana’'s wives 
well adorned with garlands, sandal-paste, costumes and jewels, songsters singing songs 
and (other) musicians, playing on musical instruments, as well as SUtas (those versed in ancient 
legends), Magadhas (bards) and Vandis (panegyrists), who glorified her (all along). (42-43) 
Having washed her lotus-like hands and feet and sipped water on reaching the main shrine 
of the goddess and, (thus) purified and tranquil of mind, she entered into the presence of 
Goddess Ambika (the Divine Mother). (44) Elderly Brahmana ladies, conversant with the 
ritual, helped the girl to extol Goddess Parvati, the Consort of Lord Siva, alongwith Siva (as 
(follows):—(45) "I repeatedly bow to You, the Consort of Lord Siva, alongwith your children 
(Lord GaneSa and God Kartikeya). Let Lord Sri Krsna be my husband and may You give 
countenance to it." (46) She (then) duly worshipped severally the Goddess as well as Her 
family with water (for washing the hands and feet of the Goddess with and other such 
purposes), sandal-paste, unbroken grains of rice, varieties of incense, raiment (of various 
description),garlands, necklaces and other ornaments, edibles and other articles of worship 
of various kinds and rows of lights (to be waved round the Goddess) and likewise worshipped 
with due ceremony Brahmana matrons whose husbands were alive with the same articles 
as well as with seasoned small round cakes of flour or meal, betel leaves (accompanied with 
areca-nut parings, lime, catechu and cardamoms etc.), auspicious coloured thread for the 
neck, fruits (of diverse kinds) and sugarcanes. (47-48) The aforesaid (Brahmana) ladies 
gave her a part of the offerings made to the Goddess (as a token of Her grace) and added 
their own blessings. The bride (for her part) bowed to them as well as to the Goddess and 
accepted the offerings made. (49) Then, terminating her vow of silence, she came out of the 
(main) shrine of Goddess Ambika (the Divine Mother), holding tightly by the hand a maid- 
servant with her own hand brilliant with jewelled rings. (50)

a camera 8 cietett great §=« qusenftearar|

pis. 53 ] BOOK TEN 344

Ge Be Be BBE BOS EL A AAR AARNE HARA ORERARERRHHEEREARORE 
areata forrarch oT aeL ANU festa | 
Val Werit |= eeerfeedi «= feerenerrqgeenaaitfivar 1 
feretea | ant We Far aaihkaretmaeasatied: 1421 
a ate a FudeegEResistactaetcdaa figtaren: | 
ai fat Teena feat carseat wasted? waa 143 | 
Ha WAM Assent MM del Wiad: waster 1 
sued ae GRoMaS: Sa, fede Far. eaaisead AT 1G 
wT West wares wet pent feaat arta 
W@W wants qaieai wet uw mea: 144 
addt zat Tanya: aa: Gmeaarenied UNTeage: IGE I 
aq Ua: wilted aged ut wtesam a afer 
aa fra. at ote Td «aio ata iu 
Sit MASA ASM TRAC Alecia GAH SATS VATS ATA FATSTAMTAISeA: 143 | 
Smitten with love kindled (in their breast) by her, the illustrious warriors assembled 
(there) felt bewildered to behold the princess, who was possessed of a shapely (slender) 
waist and had not yet attained puberty, and who had a girdle of jewels thrown about her hips 
and in whom signs of womanhood were (just) manifesting themselves, whose (charming) 
countenance was graced with ear-rings and whose eyes were moving as though afraid of 
her curly locks (that overhung her face), who had a bright smile playing on her lips and whose 
teeth—white as jasmine buds—looked red due to the lustre of her lips, cherry as a ripe Bimba 
fruit (being transferred to them when she smiled), who possessed the gait of a female swan 
and was walking with her feet shining by the splendour of brilliant jingling anklets and who 
cast her spell (even) on heroes as though she were the very Maya (enchanting potency) of 
the Lord. (51-52) Stupefied to perceive Rukmini, who under the pretext of going out in a 
procession (to the temple) had (all the time) been offering her loveliness to Sri Krsna, the 
aforesaid kings—whose mind was captivated by her winsome smiles and bashful glances 
and who had (unconsciously) dropped their weapons—(themselves) fell to the ground, 
mounted as they were on elephants and horses as well as in chariots. (53) Eagerly looking 
forward to the arrival of the Lord at that time and therefore slowly moving as aforesaid her 
feet, that resembled a pair of mobile lotus buds, and removing her (flowing) locks (off her 
eyes) with her left hand fingers, the princess coyly looked with the corners of her eyes at the 
kings arrived (on the occasion) and (while doing so) espied Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord). (54) 
Sti Krsna snatched away the princess even as she sought to mount her chariot, unmindful 
Of His adversaries (Sigupala, Jarasandha and others), who stood gazing, and, having 
comfortably seated herin His (own) chariot bearing the emblem of Garuda (the carrier of Lord 
Visnu), and setting at naught the whole host of Ksatriyas (present there), Sri Krsna (the 
Spouse of Laksmi) then slowly departed (to Dwaraka) alongwith others headed by Balarama, 
even as a lion would carry off its game from the midst of jackals. (55-56) His proud 
adversaries, who were (all) under the domination of Jarasandha, did not brook that

discomfiture (of theirs) and (consequent) loss of reputation. (They said to one another), "Fie 
upon us in that our glory, although we continued to wield our bow and were as good as lions,

Soe acer erect acd SCEC AO SCE eC AC OC RCIC EER EERE CTO RRR etree fete etree tee eis srereem ee Re RHR ey tS 
has been snatched away by cowherds, who are no better than deer." (57)

Thus ends the fifty-third discourse, entitled "The Lord carries away Rukmini", 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Discourse LIV 
Discomfiture of Sisupala's allies and Rukmi and the Espousal of Rukmini

by Sri Krsna solemnized 
MP SAA 
Sq add Waren alee fart: | a: ae: Ucar srdtaefacnrdent: 1 2 
aeamdd 8 Mielet 9 AeaMiHya: | qe Usiaeped weds 1 2 | 
ays Users wow a alfa: 1 qq: waar Aer srfeqat aes 3 | 
Ugse Wea set AAA | Usitenansct TaAQOAAT |X | 
TE wWiaee A wW Aalawlea | faqaeraeyddd dach: Wad Aq! & | 
ast diet «aT Measured: | sIgeron Ss aes, «WAL! § | 
tq: firifa wearer afi yfai aqusefadeh aroiert a atfes: 1 9 | 
SM: Aaya: HA FalsaHa: | SAMA aTMaanifa Gio 
eaaraerie gestae: ius faqger smyskraegtad: |e |

Sri Suka began again : Riding on their mounts and surrounded each by his own troops, 
all the (aforesaid) kings, full of rage, ran with the foregoing words in (hot) pursuit (of Sri 
Krsna), wielding their bows and clad in armour. (1) Seeing them rushing (after them), the 
celebrated generals of the Yadava army stood facing them, O king, twanging their bows. (2) 
Like clouds pouring showers on mountains, the adversaries—who were (all) skilled soldiers, 
and rode on horseback, the shoulders of elephants and in their seat on the chariots— 
discharged volleys of shafts on the Yadava warriors. (3) Perceiving the army of her Spouse 
screened by showers of arrows, Rukmini (who had a slender waist) bashfully looked at His 
face with eyes confounded through fear. (4) Laughing heartily the Lord said (to her), "DO not 
be afraid, O fair-eyed one ! The yonder army of the enemies will be destroyed just now with 
the help of your (own) troops." (5) Intolerant of the aforementioned prowess of the enemies, 
Gada, Sankarsana (Balarama) and other heroes (of the Yadava army) proceeded to strike 
with Naracas (a particular type of arrows) the horses and elephants as well as the chariots 
(of the hostile army). (6) There fell to the ground in tens of millions heads, adorned with eal- 
rings, diadems and turbans, hands—bearing swords, maces and bows—forearms, thighs 
and feet of car-warriors, horsemen and soldiers fighting on elephants, as well as heads of 
horses, mules, elephants, camels, donkeys and men (foot-soldiers). (7-8) Their armies being 
beaten (thus) by the Vrsnis, who were keen after victory, the kings led by Jarasandha, tur ned 
their backs and withdrew (from the field of battle). (9)

O1 
aS 
Whitt) le will

M8 xy,

pis. 54 ] BOOK TEN ; 343.

Widiiiiti Sie ieie iain ie bik le 
a EWE Mee we eee He we He He Hr Hr SESE SE RE We WT Me We We we Me HE Me Re Wee ee EE ee eee ee ee eH

FarRyATe? aA renege agkeet | aeieté «= IERTAGaTL 120 | 
at OM: Geeege etree eats frenfreat us fret afeq ead eet 
ae SIeAa anfergea Hecho | Vaitaaasantea Wael: 1221 
ane: Weeate Fag cise: | setae: Saisie wae TEL 1R2 | 
aerate A Urey = seefe caffe | aoa cath SH fasted se 1eN! 
aaa oat ad | aheqeagemn: oui: wmeseehe: arerariea: 1241 
feaait ae THIS STRATTATARCT | eT ae ferstearat set ares: wefAT: 1261 
Ga satiera Pages AIT: UAL aaa: Gest aq: WG Yt TT: 1201 
Approaching Sisupala—who felt distressed as though his wedded wife had been 
abducted and was cheerless and dispirited, and whose face was withering (through 
melancholy)—Jarasandha and others spoke to him (as follows):—(10) "O tiger among 
men, shake off this despondency. Permanence of joy and sorrow is not seen in embodied 
beings, O king ! (11) (Just) as a puppet dances to the will of the showman, likewise does 
this creature exert according to the will of Providence so as to reap joy and sorrow. (12) 
Having sustained defeat at the hands of Krsna (a scion of Sura) in as many as seventeen 
encounters, though followed by twenty-three Aksauhinis (each time), | won only one battle 
(viz., the last one). (13) Yet | never grieve (over discomfiture) nor exult (over victory), 
knowing as | do the world to be ravaged by Them coupled with destiny. (14) This time too 
we, (who are) leaders (even) of those commanding troops of warriors, have all been 
vanquished by the Yadus, protected by Krsna, though accompanied by a small army. (15) 
Time being favourable to them, the enemies (the Yadus) have won this time. We shall 
(likewise) excel them when time is particularly propitious (to us)." (16) Thus admonished 
by friends, SiSupala (the ruler of Cedi) returned to his capital alongwith his (surviving) 
followers. Those (other) kings too, such as were surviving, (accompanied Sisupala to Cedi 
and) then returned each to his own capital. (17)

wait qd weds ponfgsned Wy: | Veda, Fomattieva qt ait 1221 
SRN WEST: Yad AayySML Hist Aeleredherd: ARIA: 1%e 
sea SR PTA a Sfenvin! pitt 7 wdaahs aadde aa a: 120! 
SUS We aR we Pat: | Mea aa: HoT A AAMT Aa 12k I 
strgS(‘éARTOTeRE Ha: 1 tea eine Ga eT A WaM EAT 122! 
face: PUA ad | Wet Mead fers lSaae@ad 123! 
wafiper qee wa quot fai: at: lone aa aot fe aq Houle 1! 
Sa af wank a yfwea saigaagia: | eteisa Aq a Alas: Healer: 1241 
aa A eal Aol: Bellen HST aH | Ha Han agora saltitere VlOrT 12S | 
aphid ae, sat aa east faa: 1a ara aque Hot facaer TAA: 1291 
Serfsa: ated «fase | AeA: | GAtaeuied dea asACTA: 1261 
uftet ufser ae aatedt ainda aq aagernad ad wa aisteotalt: 1281 
qd | rege «=| UgUifursareen | Fraga Hes Why FA AWachy R01 
wea aoa: wet faeasd ayf: | ferafenee fra alerol eqyeld: 13e! 
est wigaedrent sfanutt qafager (Ufa «= aeditideara = Heut Adi 1321

4 
SA A4 @ ‘

Ps

, b we a) wy . & 
4 AAS ‘. \

ee eee hh i Bel Bel Re Rel eal Re Rel el el Re Rl a Rl ll Wy We We We We We We We We We Wie We Ree eee eee eee eee ee eee Olis 
' Be ¥e wv, 
a %

ANITA ATA, cada TA | St Alea HAT Wet A Ay 133 |

Surrounded by an army (consisting of one Aksauhini) the mighty Rukmi, for his part Wh 
hated Sri Krsna and did not brook his sister's being married (by Him) after the manner of the 
Raksasas, followed (close) upon the heels of Sri Krsna. (18) Enraged and full of indignation 
the mighty-armed Rukmi, who was clad in armour and armed with a bow, had undertaken 
the following vow within the hearing of all the kings (before they dispersed):—(19) "Without 
making short work of Krsna in an encounter and bringing back Rukmini! shall not re-enter 
Kundinapura: solemnly do | declare this before you (all)." (20) Saying so and mounting hig 
chariot, he commanded the charioteer as follows:—"Drive the horses with despatch to the 
place where Krsna may be; (for) there is going to be my encounter with him. (21) With m 
sharp-pointed arrows today | shall take away the pride of valour of that most evil-mindeg 
cowherd, by whom my sister has been forcibly carried away." (22) Pursuing the Lord ina 
single chariot forthwith the bragging fool, who did not know the extent of greatness of the 
almighty Lord, shouted out to Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) saying “Stop ! Stop !!" (23) 
(Nay,) drawing (the string of) his very tough bow at full length, he hit Sri Krsna with three 
arrows and said, "Wait a moment, my enemy, a (veritable) disgrace to the race of Yadu! (24) 
Having kidnapped my sister even as a crow would steal a sacrificial offering, where are you 
going ? | shall presently take away your pride, O fool, who are (so) wily and given to strategic 
fighting. (25) Leave my sister before you bite the dust when struck with my arrows." Smilingly 
tearing his bow Sri Krsna pierced Rukmi with six arrows, his four horses with eight more, his 
charioteer with two and his ensign with three. Taking up another bow, he too hit Sri Krsna 
(back) with five shafts. (26-27) Struck with those volleys of arrows, however, Sri Krsna (the 
immortal Lord) rent his bow asunder. He snatched yet another and the imperishable Lord 
cleft that too.(28) The celebrated Sri Hari (likewise) tore every weapon that he took up 
(subsequently one after another)—viz., an iron club, a sharp-edged spear, a pike, a sword 
and a shield, a javelin and a bludgeon. (29) Then, leaping down from the chariot, sword 
in hand, he darted in rage at Sri Krsna with intent to kill Him, (even) as a moth would into 
a flame. (30) While he was (thus) rushing (towards Him), the Lord split his sword and shield 
(too) into particles with His shafts and picked up a sharp-edged sword, in readiness to 
make short work of Rukmi. (31) Overwhelmed with fear to behold this endeavour (on the 
part of Sri Krsna) to dispose of her brother, the virtuous Rukmini fell at the feet of her 
Spouse and pitifully prayed (as follows):—(32) "O Master of Yoga, O incomprehensible

Lord of the universe, O blessed god of gods, O mighty-armed One ! You ought not to kill 
my brother.” (33)

AIA FATA

cal UhaTatacn Pacgser PaTAA Tags |

cidade rarer Teteara: Hun Wada 13% |

mearmg: aa agra «= afett ae ATT: 1341 
PUT ae Seay wrt ag agdoy fay: |

Sieg SM PO Paetar| art zasahaat deci geal aet: 130! 
Taran, aleergaen WIS | Hag aa a aisha aa: HAA YA, 3e 
sydereqist 4 aridemditi ana: Qia atau ga: fie ea GA: 138!

Dis. 54 ] BOOK TEN 3

airarmmeaa =: «= oenrofafafafifa: 1 seta smear Pale, GA GALE: 1S! 
wae qed feat uae asta: | OaS=re at Ral: sttreren: fara 12 | 
aaa fort ag: adyy geamiawad wat geet MENHEC Is?! 
Teme FTA eat tari eee glean sft aemnamivat 
we We wt men ademie teamiana yea ySder sitfeion aa: rox 
ee | TEAM SEIMUTUNeH: | sera ea: dana eer isa 
TeMISa dirt fener: ati aaqareecgaeat am wa: 11 
THe cee fatramen: afi anemia adhe Hela vet 
aa Wa AM awa Heda Al saqyeRHseMas amssmaaqa Wa 1c 
AMAT Wee ca Fea wen wa afafaa ive

Sri Suka continued : With His feet thus clasped by Rukmini—whose limbs were 
perceptibly shaking with terror, (nay,) whose mouth was being parched and throat choked 
through grief and whose gold necklace had been displaced through nervousness—the 
merciful Lord desisted (from His purpose). (34) Binding the evil-doer with (his own) scarf, the 
Lord disfigured him by shaving him (with the blade of His sword) in such a way as to leave 
(intact) a part of his moustaches and locks. Meanwhile the chosen among the Yadava 
warriors (led by Balarama) crushed the wonderful army of the enemy (even) as elephants 
would trample a lotus plant. (85) Making their way into the presence of Sri Krsna, they found 
there Rukmi reduced to that (ignominious) plight and all but dead (through shame). Filled with 
pity to see him bound, the almighty Lord Sankarsana released him and spoke to Sri Krsna 
(thus):—(36) "Krsna ! you have perpetrated an impious act abhorred by our race. (Partially) 
removing the moustaches and (curly) locks of a relative and (thereby) disfiguring him ts 
tantamount to killing him. (37) (Turning towards Rukmini,) please do not take offence with 
us, O good lady, thinking of the disfiguration of your brother. None else is responsible for 
One's joy and sorrow; fora man reaps the fruit of his own doings (in the shape of pleasurable 
and painful experiences). (38) A relative does not deserve death at the hands of his relative 
even if he has committed an offence deserving such treatment and should be let off. Why 
should he who stands killed by his own offence be killed again? (39) Such is the code of 
conduct specially prescribed for the Ksatriya race by Brahma (the lord of created beings), 
by virtue of which even a brother is permitted to kill his (own brother). Hence it ts (so) 
exceedingly cruel. (40) (Reverting to Sri Krsna,) the proud alone, who are blinded by pride 
of fortune, offer indignity to their relatives for the sake of dominion, land, (other movable) 
property, women, honour, dignity or any other consideration. (41) (Turning to Rukmini once 
more,) it is your differential outlook through which you, like an ignorant person, constantly 
bear ill-will, among all created beings, to those who are ill-disposed to you, and wish well to those 
who are kindly disposed to you (remaining neutral to those who are indifferent to you). (42) By 
the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) is engendered this self-deception in the mind of those 
who are identified with the body, that a certain individual is your friend, another your enemy 
and a third,neutral to you. (43) Indeed the transcendent Self, which is but common to all 
embodied beings, is perceived by the ignorant as varied, even as a luminary (such as the 
sun orthe moon) is viewed as different (in relation to the different vessels full of water in which. 
the luminary is reflected), or as the sky is conceived as different (in relation to the different 
apartments or jars in which it is enclosed).(44) This (objective) body (psycho-physical 
Organism), constituted as it is of physical substances (the five gross elements), the (five) 
Senses and the objects of their perception (viz., sound, touch, sight, taste and smell), and 
has a beginning and an end, and which has been projected through ignorance on the

[565] B.M. Part II—40

Re Se eRe Ke Re SR Re ROMER RR RE SY tel Bic til Bie Pal Mel Peel Phe! Mel Mil Micd Mie! Mic Riel Med Mol Mel Mel Me) Mick Mick Mal Mol cd Mil Mic Mick Mick Mel Med Mel Mel Med Med Mic acl Me! Mel el eS ¥ee Lis. 54 
Ft ev y 
q

Self, subjects the soul (which is essentially free from birth and death) to metempsychosis, (45 
There is no union or disunion of the Self with or from any other substance (Such as the bog 
or the eye with which it is perceived), there being no such substance (other than the Self), 
O virtuous lady, and the appearance of such other substances (as the body or the eyes) being 
attributable to the Self (alone), (just) as there is no union or disunion of the sun with or from 
the eye and colour (both of which owe their existence and appearance to the sun itself). (4g 
Changes commencing from birth (and ending in death) pertain to the body alone and neve; 
to the soul, (just) as waxing and waning etc., pertain to the phases (of the moon) and not to 
the moon itself (which is ever the same). And indeed death (of the body) is attributed to the 
soul in the same way as the total disappearance of illumination is spoken of as Amavasya 
(denoting the disappearance of the moon itself). (47) (Just) as a dreaming man perceives 
his own self (as invested with a body etc.,) as well as the objects of perception (Sound, taste 
and so on), and also experiences pleasure, pain etc. as the fruit of his past doings), even 
though none of these (really) exists (not even the body through which he seems to enjoy the 
pleasures etc., his actual body lying inert all the while), so does the ignorant Jiva undergo 
transmigration. (48) Therefore, completely getting rid—through realization of Truth—of grief 
born of ignorance, that withers and infatuates the soul, be consoled, O young lady of beautiful 
smiles ! (49) 
Myeh SAI

W Wad dat wan sitar ante uReea AA Aeal AAee Iho!

snes «= Sgt feta: Lee fame ferret: 1421

Un eine Aa Raa wed GI steal eat HOMIE sata |

chives A Naess AAAS GAT 1&2 |

Sri Suka went on : Shaking off disconsolation when thus comforted by Lord Balarama, 
the slim lady eased her mind by recourse to reason. (50) Allowed to escape with life alone, 
his army as well as his glory having been smashed by his enemies (the Yadus), and his own 
hopes belied, and brooding over his disfigurement, Rukmi built for his residence a large city, 
Bhojakata by name. (Solemnly) declaring that he would not (re-) enter Kundinapura without 
killing the evil-minded Krsna and recovering Rukmini (his younger sister), he lived there in 
a spirit of indignation. (51-52)

War vangqaad fia wear qwarta faferaqaant Hege 143! 
del Helaal FU aqyat Fe Wisyerawaat HM aguat zai!

7a Ads Yfem: 9 sysafvipuee: | oaequergdeaiaararcal: 1G | 
a qrargaatidschd i MlaraanIeIPaAAUT:

art sitgea SUA ORISSA Ih: 14S | 
fanart HEYA EAHS YS | TSE CECA. 149 | 
qeyeancadetagarda: | fret Wafat ae aera GReMaary 14S | 
Sava ROT Ae Waa adedd: | Us Uses ayasjafatera: 149! 
sReraaye Us Aerie: queer! efeva wardd apr pet fra: uf igo! 
ad Sead Ae IAS led qa SUe VAS Ad -TaNAAIS EAT: 14S | 
Having thus completely routed (hostile) kings and brought Rukmini (the daughter of

Bhismaka) to Dwaraka, the Lord espoused her with due ceremony, O jewel among the Kurus , 
(53) Great was the festivity on that occasion in the house of all men at Dwaraka (the city of

.

Dis. 55 ] BOOK TEN 347

the Yadus), who cherished exclusive devotion to Sr Krsna, the Ruler of the Yadus, O 
protector of men! (54) Full of joy and adorned with €ar-rings made of highly polished gems, 
men as well as women brought (valuable) presents for the bride and the Bridegroom, who 
were clad in picturesque (bridal) attire. (55) That city of the Vrsnis put up a smart appearance 
with flags raised in honour of Indra, picturesque wreaths, tapestries and bejewelled 
ornamental arches, auspicious articles (such as fried grains of paddy, sprouts of barley and 
flowers etc.) placed in front of every door as well as with pitchers full of water, aloe-wood 
burning as Incense and lights. (56) It had its roads moistened by the elephants, shedding 
temporal Juice, of invited friendly kings, and was graced with tall plantain and areca-nut trees 
set up at the entrances. (57) Among those running to and fro through excitement in that city 
the Kurus, the Srfjayas, the Kaikeyas, the Vidarbhas, the Yadus and the Kuntis rejoiced to 
meet one another. (58) Hearing the story how Rukmini was carried off (by Sri Krsna), which 
was being sung at every place, the (assembled) princes and princesses felt greatly 
astonished . (59) Great was the jubilation, O king, among the citizens in Dwaraka at the sight 
of Sri Krsna, the Spouse of Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity), united (in wedlock) 
with Rukmini, who was no other than (the said) Goddess Laksmi. (60)

Thus ends the fifty-fourth discourse, forming part of the story of Rukmint 's wedding, 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

wtisct tict hs 
0D PES SS

3D USSSA sera:

Discourse LV 
The story of Pradyumna’'s birth (and the destruction 
of the demon Sambara) 
MY SAA 
mI araeaia al: APL Star | salads yada eae 1k 
a we we agat qonddaqaa: i sqa gia faena: addistaa: fg: 1 2 | 
qd ae: mMaedt wal andar. a fafecisse: Wa Weeder Ter | 2 | 
aq fist amar Wa: aise: Gel gal Sea Ae Yelat Aceisitfahy: 1 x | 
a mea adi sanigeer dal were aera afer! & | 
SBI deat SIs Aaa «Aaa Aes Aa AUT: Aigceta: | 
Tea mada Alatrtaartay | & |

a a ame a4 udt dean aahedticatideese agtahi 9 silat 1 9 | 
frefrrr arate; at guleraren | wmea feel aes as Ge dara | c 1 
Tatton area a molt weal: | SaaaTa AN dadiat a fas) < |

a a Ufa Usesradat wemae wWelndar

usiserardaayaatat earadet the Aika: 1201

a he Pel el ed Ped ck cd Ried ad ed Med Med Md Md Med Ml ad el ed ld We Wee WE We Ke We We We Me He He Me eee eee Wee tre wertene: 55 
' ae 
Wr

dhe ad act Pact Pha Pied Pack Pcl Mick Reed Ried cl ad Med Mad

qa warn alfwiaie afaeseri aqaanitma ada att ae iee,

Sri Suka began again : Having been burnt (to ashes) in his former birth by the wrath o 
Rudra (the god of destruction), Kama (the god of love), a portion of Lord Sri Krsna, soy ht 
for his part Him alone once more for investiture with a body. (1) Sprung from the loins of Si 
Krsna, the selfsame god of love was (re-) born of Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha) and 
became widely known as Pradyumna, and proved to be a compeer of his Father in every 
respect. (2) Coming to know Pradyumna to be his (future) enemy, the demon Sambara, who 
could assume any form at will, carried off the babe (from the lying-in-chamber) while it Was 
not yet ten days old and, casting it into the sea, went home. (3) A mighty fish swallowed jt 
and the former too was alongwith others enmeshed in a huge net by fishermen. (4) The 
fishermen brought the fish as a present to Sambara and the cooks (in charge of his kitchen) 
took it into the kitchen and cut the wonderful fish with a knife. (5) Discovering a babe in the 
bowels of the fish, they handed it over to Mayavati (a maid-servant of Sambara), whose mind 
was full of doubts; and the celestial sage Narada (presently) told her everything as to who 
the babe was, how it was born and how it had (finally) made its way into the bowels of the 
fish. (6) The maid-servant was really speaking (no other than) the illustrious consort of Kama, 
Rati by name, who had been (eagerly) awaiting (all the while) the reincarnation of her spouse, 
whose body had been burnt to ashes (by Lord Siva). (7) Having been entrusted with (the work 
of) cooking pulses and rice, she fastened her affection on the babe now that she had come 
to know the child to be (none other than) Kamadeva (the god of love). (8) At no distant date 
Pradyumna (the son of Sri Krsna) attained (the prime of) youth and kindled love in the breast 
of women who gazed on him. (9) Lovingly regarding him, her husband—who had eyes big 
as the petals of a lotus and exceptionally long arms, nay, who was charming among men— 
with bashful smiles and upraised eyebrows, Rati, O dear Pariksit, greeted him with amorous 
gestures. (10) Lord Pradyumna (the son of Sri Krsna) said to her, "(I find that) your affection 
(towards me) has got perverted inasmuch as, having abandoned your motherly sentiment, 
you are behaving as a paramour (which is rather strange), O mother !" (11)

Wa ANAC: Wad! Weld! Ste Astetepal ett Ut: HA VaTL AAT 1e2 Wk 
wT wie faeraiamreratisa: | aeismdttecties srl war wat 13! 
wee sife gah ga | Sane: | Wreeidfae MG a aenfimfearfatar: 1 ex! 
URatetid a At pila TT GAeeHen dat faa alae 12h! 
sured dat fat seer Ages | Arata AeTaTat Adararfaararr 12 | 
Seis Waa PTA SATead| stearreheraaa: fara Garay chierzL 1 29 | 
wistefarat gdatia: vet ea gare: 1 facet 89 nernforeafarmeter: 122! 
Tema TTA eA feet «Ss eae SAT 188 | 
Tad «Wa NEA Wear Mel | STA BWAA Shea: wifevid Waal FA 120! 
ao mai aaa cat vaca qqesead ad arvif agrrasat: 12°! 
Teisario Weta vena: | arena verre adaaateit 122! 
ait THEA MTAG MANTUA: | MSH Ue Set: aarftotaderraa aM: 1231 
Penaafagera = fentté «= apuse.! racer fare: cHrere aTARASaTSTETERAL 1 2X 
srenldarn fefasi: qate: paatent: | uefaracnfva yt at fara 124!

pis. 55 ]

Fat fick Pick Mick Md Mick Sick f

BOOK TEN 349

Rati replied : "You are the son of Narayana (Lord Sri Krsna), who were stolen away by 
the demon Sambara from the lying-in-chamber. | am your appointed wife, Rati, and you are 
(no other than) Love, my consort! (12) While you were not yet ten days old, the said demon 
Sambara cast you into the sea, where a fish devoured you and from the bowels of that fish 
you have reached this place (the residence of Sambara), my spouse ! (13) Get rid of this 
demon, your formidable foe—(so) difficult to conquer, knowing as he does hundreds of 
wiles—by recourse to (similar) wiles like stupefaction. (14) Overwhelmed with parental 
affection, your afflicted and disconsolate mother, is wailing like a she-osprey whose young 
has departed or like a cow deprived of its calf." (15) Advising him thus, Mayavati (Rati, so- 
called because of her being adent in wiles) imparted to the high-souled Pradyumna a spell 
called Mahamaya, which was capable of undoing all kinds of wiles. (16) Approaching 
Sambara, Pradyumna accordingly challenged him to a combat, reproaching him with 
unbearable taunts and (thus) stirring up strife. (17) Taunted with abuses, Sambara, like a 
serpent trodden under foot, sallied forth, mace in hand, his eyes suffused with blood through 
indignation. (18) Whirling his mace with (great) velocity and hurling it at the high-minded 
Pradyumna, he uttered a roar harsh as a clap of thunder. (19) Beating back with his own the 
mace as it came flying at him, the almighty Pradyumna angrily hurled his own mace at the 
enemy, O protector of men ! (20) Fully resorting to the illusive demoniac devices taught by 
Maya, the demon rained a volley of missiles on Pradyumna (the son of Sri Krsna), himself 
remaining (unperceived) in the air. (21) Being plagued with the shower of missiles, 
Pradyumna (the son of Rukmini), who was a great car-warrior (able to encounter ten 
thousand warriors single-handed) brought into use a great charm consisting (purely) of 
Sattva and capable of rendering ineffectual all kinds of illusive devices. (22) The demon then 
employed hundreds of illusive devices practised by the Guhyakas (Yaksas), Gandharvas 
(celestial musicians), PiSacas (fiends), Nagas and Raksasas (ogre). The celebrated 
Pradyumna (the son of Sri Krsna) counteracted them (all). (23) Taking up a sharp-edged 
sword, he then forcibly severed from Sambara's body his head with a coppery beard and 
moustaches alongwith his diadem and ear-rings. (24) Being showered over with heaps of 
flowers by heavenly beings, who were singing his praises (all the while), Pradyumna was 
taken to Dwaraka through the air by his consort (Mayavati), who was capable of journeying

by the air. (25)

srauat = Us COAT! Ase Usa WG fagta acreh: 12E 
aq a wear dinelgaareni seraate amet gfe ef 120!

; Aoacnl@chliots: | pat aar Raat Slat Mioeqet aa s 121 
sam aaweaa | fad: soe: Safed: Gea fate: 12¢1 
aq aaa aa aefeut i sted Gad AS eqqalent 1201 
a vad ade: Hel al SAGAN: | Yd: HAT aT et Sel GAT AA aT 1381 
Tq arenas Al atal a: Paneer! waeraareaa ate silaft Hafad 132! 
sy <a Si erect wager: iomperagia §«=—- ReTeTawaet: 1331 
a wa at wagi a A ae aetssien: 1 stair Mle ar: wpe A Ye: 13X1

Like acloud attended with lightning, Pradyumna descended with his spouse from the sky 
into the magnificent gynaeceum crowded with hundreds of ladies. (26) Seeing him, sombre 
as a cloud and clad in yellow silk, with exceptionally long arms and reddish eyes, wearing 
a winsome smile and a charming countenance, his lotus-like face graced with locks of dark- 
blue curly hair, and thinking him to be Sri Krsna, the ladies, so the story goes, hid themselves 
Wherever they could (out of bashfulness). (27-28) Concluding gradually through slight

[. Di 
ek hh Re Rel Rel Mel RM Rl Rel Rel Rl Rl al el il ih il Bl el Bd Bl We We We We We We We Ree eee ee eee ee Hr ee ae 
: BF 4

dissimilarity (viz., the absence of Kaustubha and Srivatsa) that he was not Sri Krsna, th 5 
ladies went up to him overjoyed, yet greatly amazed to find him accompanied with an 
excellent young lady. (29) Presently Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha)—the corners of 
whose eyes were (naturally) dark (without the use of collyrium) and who was gifted with a 
sweet tongue—recalled on that occasion (through similarity of features) her own lost sop 
milk flowing from her breasts through (maternal) affection. (30) (She said to herself,) "Who 
could this jewel among men with lotus-eyes possibly be? Again, whose son may he be orh

whom was he borne in her womb and who, in fact may be this young woman obtained by him 
(through good-luck)? (31) My own son too—who was stolen away (by some evil spirit) from 
the lying-in-chamber and has been missing (all these years)—must have attained an age 
similar to this boy's and come to possess similar features, should he be living anywhere. (32) 
But how could this boy acquire (such) similarity of form with the Lord bearing the Sarnga bow 
in point of features, limbs, gait, voice, smiles and glances ? (33) Or he may undoubtedly be 
the selfsame boy who was borne in my womb; (for) great is my affection for him and my left 
arm is throbbing. (34)

wT dimer aeal taatge: i caarnggegRe || TAT 1341 
faarraista 9 wranquiar valet: | anesHaad Fa | Wareromigeny 136 | 
Ta | MSI HOA Uae: | Se, Added AB Yaar 1301 
Sal aga qonmt ae faa: i qadt at ufiger sfarot a aie iac 
aS weAManeHvd §=«=—- skate: | Stel Ya sara Stet fapetlt east 13° 
4a yg: faqaechsianaretat aus Wecural: | 
faa 4 ad Ge Tearaiors aM erisfafawa feeqarea: 1Xo | 
Sia SAM ad AS UA Seca CAAA SIS TEATS ATA TAT SATTATSATA: 14 4

While Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha) was thus speculating, Lord Sri Krsna (the Son 
of Devaki) of excellent renown made His appearance (there) alongwith (His parents) Devaki 
and Vasudeva. (35) Although the (whole) truth was fully known to Him, Lord Sri Krsna (who 
is petitioned by all men) remained quiet. The sage Narada (however) narrated (to them) 
everything as to how the demon Sambara had stolen away the boy (while he was yet a babe) 
and so on. (36) Hearing of that great miracle (viz., the baby's escaping alive and unhurt from 
the bowels of a fish and his subsequently killing a powerful demon) the ladies of Sri Krsnas 
gynaeceum greeted with joy the boy who had been missing for many years (past) and had 
returned (to life) as it were, though (once) dead. (37) Devaki and Vasudeva, Sri Krsna and 
Balarama, as well as Rukmini and the other ladies were transported with joy to embrace the 
(newly arrived) couple. (38) Hearing that Pradyumna had returned, though (long) lost, the 
citizens of Dwaraka—so the story goes—said (to one another), "Oh, the boy has by good- 
luck come back (to life) as it were though (once) dead !" (39) Indeed it is no wonder that when 
Pradyumna (Love incarnate)—whose very thought agitates one's mind, nay, who was an 
exact likeness of the personality of SriKrsna (the Abode of Rama, the goddess of beauty and 
good fortune)—came within sight, (even) his mothers, who often (mis-) took him for their own 
Spouse due to his close resemblance with his Father, sought seclusion (out of modestly, love 
being kindled in their heart). Much more did other women feel like that in his presence. (4

Thus ends the fifty-fifth discourse entitled "The story of Pradyumna’s birth," in the 
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS ry

pis. 56 ] BOOK TEN 351

BA WeUSRrRAa sear:

Discourse LVI 
The story of the Syamantaka gem; Sri Krsna weds

Jambavati and Satyabhama 
MH Iara 
wad: eat por safenfeas: | wath alot mane ear! Q |

Sri Suka began again : Having done a wrong (to Sri Krsna), Satrajit gave away to Sri 
Krsna of his own accord after due exertion his daughter (Satyabhama) alongwith the 
Syamantaka gem. (1)

x

Usara 
Palistd: fatentie ce wore feaieaar | MAH: HAA Hele Sel Adi BR: | 2 |

The king (Pariksit) submitted : What wrong did Satrajit perpetrate against Sri Krsna, 
O holy one ? Wherefrom was the Syamantaka gem got by him and why did he give away his

daughter to Sri Hari ? (2) : 
ALA SATA

area Satis: Gal WHA UA: VET | Maes Aoi wre Gas: Mah! 3 | 
a d fas aft mos wat zen va: i sfast skeet wsieterear Aree: | x | 
qd fasiaa wal ade ypesa: | feerisesivad zerg: geese: 1 & | 
TR AAS GNM aMiernfaaa = erq AG TaT! & I 
wi stefa afadt al fegasitead | qe Wieden qo aes frag: 1 9 | 
Toafasha a art fietaat fagqedsn: | areal YS Ay 8 Al Aes: WAT 1 cI

Sri Suka replied : The sun-god, though adorable in the eyes of Satrajit, his devotee, 
behaved as a loving friend to him. Pleased with him, the sun-god bestowed on him the 
Syamantaka gem. (3) Wearing that gem about his neck and shining as the sun (because of 
that gem), he entered Dwaraka (presumably from his place of worship in the outskirts of the 
city) but could not be identified, O king, through his (dazzling) brilliance. (4) Gazing at him 
from a distance, their eyes blinded with his splendour, and suspecting him to be the sun-god, 
people reported his arrival to the Lord, who was playing at dice (as follows):—(5) “Hail to You, 
O Narayana, the Wielder of a conch, discus and mace ! O Lord, who (once) had a cord tied 
about Your abdomen (by mother Yasoda by way of punishment), O lotus-eyed One, O 
Protector of cows, O Scion of Yadu ! (6) Dazzling the eyes of men with his rays, here comes 
the glorious sun-god with intent to see You, O Lord of the universe ! (7) Indeed the foremost _ 
of the gods (Brahma and others) in the three worlds seek the way to You (but fail to find You). 
Having come to know You as living incognito at present among the Yadus, the sun-god (who

is self-existent) comes to see You, O Lord.” (8) . 
ARH Jara 
freq Wee: | re ATet vada: warferaforn sae! ¢ 1

Tar wae oft FaalqeIqen! seea cawet aiti fasteiaged igo!

We Re Re We ee We ORE Re EEE NE EE Wy We We Re He RR ee eee We We Me Ke Me Me HE Me Me He Me See ee ee ee Re We We ee Be aM mek 06 
. . - f Lie 
%

fa fa auiunmsl a gala sti glemediftera aulfrenecisgsn: | 
4 aba afar aredssafelat AT: 1221 
aq aia afer ania aeuera aithon | Aare: Mele Arenas 182 |

Sri Suka continued : Sri Krsna (the lotus-eyed One) heartily laughed to hear the repor 
of those unknowing persons and observed, "He is not the sun-god, itis (only) Satrajit glowing 
with his gem." (9) Entering in state his own splendid residence, which had been COnSe€Crateq 
as a mark of festivity, Satrajit caused the gem to be (duly) installed by Brahmanas in th ‘ 
apartment intended for gods. (10) The gem, O lord, yielded from day to day gold weighing 
eight Bharas (equivalent to three maunds and five seers approximately). Famine, pestilence 
and (other) calamities, serpents, mental worries and bodily ailments and other evils and 
rogues no longer exist where the gem stands worshipped. (11) Though solicited once by S57 
Krsna (who thought that the king was the fittest person to possess such a wonderful gem), 
Satrajit, covetous as he was of wealth, did not hand it over to Ugrasena (the ruler of the 
Yadus), not foreseeing the (evil) consequences of rejecting the request (of Sri Krsna, the 
Supreme Person). (12)

dial At mos wager ACMI Te sane WM Ae aq 1831

wai wed cal afte sati fh faseraaa Pedt afortresa iex

Gist Us HARA Alt sHisdch faeri saga wat wat Garis Tada 141

Ta: moa eat aforeitat aq Ta: | BAT AA Tape Sut cHUisaaSMT: 12e |

way cia foaming weacedhrauedt Arie: 12

eq saan a die safer atid «alfsgs aaa aaa: 1%! 
Wearing that gem of surpassing lustre about his neck, one day, Prasena (brother of 
Satrajit) went about a hunting on horseback in the forest. (13) Having killed Prasena, horse 
and all, and snatched the gem (out of curiosity because of its uncommon lustre), a lion was, 
while entering its mountainous cave, made short work of by Jambavan (the celebrated king 
of bears of Ramayana fame), who wished to have it. (14) The latter for his part used the gem 
as a plaything for his boy. Not finding his brother (back), Satrajit, the other brother, felt very 
miserable. (15) (He said to his own people,) "Surely my brother, who had gone to the forest 
with the gem about his neck, has been killed by Sri Krsna !" Hearing that, people (of a 
malicious disposition) spread the rumour in a whisper from ear to ear. (16) When the Lord 
learnt this, He followed the tracks (of the horse carrying) Prasena alongwith some citizens 
(of Dwaraka) in order to wipe off the imputation cast on Him. (17) Discovering (first) Prasen@

as well as his horse killed in the forest by a lion, people further saw the lion (itself) killed on 
the mountain side by a bear. (18) |

meas 86a | | aeISSqa uel fader wean afe: Te: 128! 
TA Gel ates aemlsth Hatiad Hanhreafemadesdentas 120! 
aA A Sa at Mental iter, | eaARA Hal ATA aera ae: 12k | 
4 4 wma 4 gaa wiftenssam: ued wea Heat aiar aaTafa 122! 
EG Medeavalatsrtaa: | streqeneastalte: Mena Ratathta 122! 
Areas erase: | Sareea eases a, 1281 
Pera slater ersTe ere: laforera: fiaamaemrenta faferd: 124!

SM ST AAA HTT sits: Tat ae fara] Woes «wf 125 | 
@ fe Tags Ber Garrat aa ae! are: HEAT: UL STAT AMTSSIAT 1281 
aengeiominacantadatcra — arfiraaanfattsferctsfee: 1 
aC: Ft: Ba Irae aT gE wafers ale Vafigeratht 1221 
gfa RTA AeRTAAYT: | AE AER wa Baastaa: 12° 
ara: UT UM A FUT wT wh Tafa fiat 1301 
ufrredtite sma aaqemd = fae freee = sySarent AUT 1321 
yar: St get aa sneadi geri adored a ufo qemeiosen 21321

The Lord stationed the people outside and entered alone the fearful cave of Jambavan 
(the king of bears), covered with thick darkness. (19) Espying there the excellent gem 
converted into a toy for an infant, and resolved to carry it away, the Lord waited there by side 
of the babe. (20) The nurse shrieked as though afraid to see that wonderful human being (but 
really on perceiving the latter's intention to carry the gem away). Enraged to hear the scream, 
Jambavan, the foremost of the mighty, rushed to meet Him. (21) Thinking Him to be an 
ordinary mortal and failing to perceive His greatness (divinity), Jambavan, full of rage, 
actually fought with the said almighty Lord, his own Master. (22) A most tumultuous duel 
ensued between the two, keen as they were to overthrow each other, like a pair of hawks 
contending for a piece of flesh, and fought with weapons (such as a mace), rocks, trees and 
(bare) arms and (finally) struck each other with their fists—which fell as severely as the 
strokes of lightning. The combat raged day and night without a pause for (as many as) twenty- 
eight days. (23-24) Having his many joints and muscles pounded with the strokes of Sri 
Krsna's fists and his strength and courage (too) depleted and limbs perspiring (all over), 
Jambavan spoke to Him (thus), highly astonished (at this unexpected discomfiture, which he 
had never experienced before):—(25) "I (now) conclude You to be (none else than) the all- 
powerful Visnu, the most ancient Person, the suzerain Lord, (nay), the life-energy, the 
Organic power, the strength of mind as well as the bodily strength of all created beings. (26) 
Indeed You are the Creator (even) of Brahma and others (the progenitors of the universe), 
as wellas the Reality that underlies (as the material cause of) even created substances (such 
as the Mahat-tattva), the Ruler, in the form of the Time-Spirit, of those that control and destroy 
others, the supreme Self of (all) embodied souls. (27) (I now understand) You are the same 
Lord Ramacandra (my Master) to whom the ocean with its crocodiles and whales thrown into 
agitation by Your casting sidelong glances, marked with anger slightly kindled (by its 
refractoriness), allowed passage, yet by whom a bridge was constructed (atits own entreaty) 
as an embodiment of His own glory, (nay,) by whom (the fortress and city of) Lanka (the 
Capital of Ravana, His arch-enemy) was Set on fire, and severed by whose (unfailing) arrows 
the heads of ogres fell to the ground !" (28) To His devotee, Jambavan (the king of bears), 
by whom His identity—which is all-consciouness (and bliss)—was thus directly perceived, 
O great king, the lotus-eyed Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) spoke (as follows) in a voice 
deep with emotion, stroking him with His soothing hand out of supreme compassion:—(29-30) 
"For the sake of this gem did we (ihe leading citizens of Dwaraka headed by Myself) arrive 
at (the mouth of) your cave, O chief of bears; whereas | came here {inside the cave) with a 
view to wiping off the false imputation against Me through that gem." (31 ) Thus addressed 
(by Sri Krsna), he (Jambavan) joyfully gave away by way of worship his own daughter, 
Jambavati, alongwith the gem: so the tradition goes. (32)

srapr fri ait: sfawer fares war: idler aleamerht gfaet: Wt aq: 1931

Store hae -

fra zat eat sfaavarengels: | Geel aeaseita fared Horr 13x | 
aaa Woda eftadt gkelne: sander gt | Awa 1gu; 
ast q tare, setfeser a ai wgtya fagrel: wart wag eft: 131 
suet Rlat SC WdSC WARGTTALI ae Ue Alita ad sianelea: 130 
Not finding Sri Krsna (a scion of Surasena) return (ever) since He entered the cave and 
disappeared into it, the people (that had accompanied Him to its mouth and had been lef 
behind by Him there) returned to their city (Dwaraka), full of grief, having waited (there) for 
(as many as) twelve days. (33) Hearing (from them) that Sri Krsna had not come out of the 
cave (till then), Devaki (Sri Krsna's mother), the divine Rukmini (Sri Krsna’s premier Spouse) 
and Vasudeva as well as His (other) relations and kinsmen grieved for Him. (34) Cursing 
Satrajit, the aforesaid citizens of Dwaraka, stricken (as they were) with grief, worshipped 
(prayed to) Goddess Durga (known by the name of Candrabhaga), the Supreme Energy 
(of the Lord), for the (safe) return of Sri Krsna. (85) Thanks to their worship of (and 
prayers to) the Goddess and the benediction pronounced (by the Goddess) in response 
to their prayer, as a matter of fact, the said Sri Hari appeared (all of a sudden) in their 
midst accompanied by His (new) bride (Jambavati), and gladdening them (all by His 
dramatic appearance), His purpose (in the shape of recovery of the Syamantaka gem) 
having been accomplished. (36) All were filled with great joy to find Sri Krsna (the Ruler 
of the senses), as though returned to life after death, with His (new) bride and with the 
gem about His neck. (37)

aiid awe aaa Ustehaet | uff arenas war All TH AeA 13C1 
@ adldstled! a Welclaeaqaed: | Sql WaT BA UAT 1381 
AiSqeAaeeael aemaeAelhe: | HA WATAA: Wiles Ald: HAA 1¥o | 
f& Hal Ae Val Sat Wie a Vat Aa | stéeleaiy «ak AE BfaTTMTGUT Kk I 
aa deat qa dha waa aisuasd adkiaee aft aca <2! 
Wa Safaal Seal Pats Vaal BALI At a wage Ponaasex gs iv3! 
aT Rawat wTagquad aenfate 1 agitattaat Sfroraatarearpurt fara, 1S | 
Ware A Awl wdkomt ad FCida caumea ad aA Mout: ivul 
ot AASMad AEM UAC Medea Ca TU SAHRA TTS EATS: 146 |

Duly summoning Satrajit into the royal presence at court and having told him how He had 
recovered the gem, the Lord handed it over to him. (38) Full of great shame he took the gem 
and with his head cast down returned home thence, repenting for his sin (in the shape of 
flouting the divine command and calumniating the Lord). (39) Brooding over that sinful act 
(of his) alone and feeling nervous over the unpleasantness, created with the mighty (Sri 
Krsna and His followers), he thought (within himself), "How shall | be able to wipe off my guilt 
and how could Sri Krsna be conciliated ? (40) Whatcourse will prove expedient for me Or what 
should be done so that people may not curse me, short-sighted, mean, stupid and covetous 
of wealth as | am ? (41) | shall give away to him my daughter, a (veritable) jewel among 
women, as well as the (Syamantaka) jewel. This will be the proper remedy as there will be 
no end of quarrel otherwise." (42) Having thus resolved by recourse to reason, and moving 
in the matter himself, Satrajit made a present to Sri Krsna of his own blessed daughter aS 
well as of the gem: so the tradition goes. (43) The Lord espoused according to the seriptura 
ordinance the said girl, Satyabhama (by name), (who was) solicited by many and (was) gifted

Dis. 57 ] BOOK TEN 355

1 RRS RESTS PCIE SE BEC RE REECE BPO RE BEECH 
with an oD ae disposition, comely appearance, magnanimity and other (similar) virtues.(44) 
The Lord (however) said (as follows), O protector of men, "We would not accept the gem;

letit remain with you, a devotee of the Sun-god (who conferred it on you). We shall only enjoy 
its fruit (in the shape of the abundant gold it yields everyday." (45) :

Thus ends the fifty-sixth discourse, forming part of the story of Syamantaka, in the 
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramaharmsa-Samhita.

BA AAAs sera:

Discourse LVII

Syamantaka stolen; Satadhanva killed and Akrira recalled to Dwaraka 
My sara 
fasreratista Meat aerrncd ugar! pat A Heal Peal Gat Hel g | 
wet gd afagt mem suma ai qese-al a age a apfaia aaa: 1 2 1 
Sri Suka began again : Hearing about the sons of Pandu and Kunti having been burnt 
(to death in a house of lac built for them and subsequently set on fire by Duryodhana), 
although the truth (about their having escaped unscathed in good time before the house was 
set on fire) was fully known to Him (omniscient as He was), Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) 
proceeded to (Hastinapura, the capital of) the kingdom of the Kurus, accompanied by 
Balarama, for-a friendly inquiry after their family affairs (by way of condolence). (1) Meeting 
Bhisma, Krpa, Vidura and Gandhari (wife of King Dhrtarastra) as well as Drona, and equally 
sharing their grief, so the tradition goes, the Lord said, “Ah, what a pity I" (2)

welder US Waa: | sepaaaton aft: wea Wed | 2 |

Qsena wifi waned fare a: | pea casi ene aia |S |

wa faanirensat aarferne: | araaeiieetse a Aa: aitorsitfera: 1 |

eto EASA eS MAead | Sa VA AieHeraorrea Bar| & |

izi i Sri ing, Akrara and

Seizing this opportunity (afforded by the absence of Sri Krsna), O king, cri |

diftivesrie enBtnee leading Yadava and a devotee of Sri Krsna, who hated Satrajit for his 
having calumniated Sri Krsna) said to Satadhanva (who had a malice prepense), "Why 
should not the gem be taken possession of (at this opportune moment) ? (3) Why should not 
Satrajit—who having solemnly promised us his jewel ofa daughter, yet disregarding us, gave 
it away to Sri Krsna—(be made to) follow (the fate of) Prasena (his brother) ? (4) His mind 
having thus been poisoned by them, that vile and most wicked fellow, whose life had (now) 
been spent, murdered Satrajit (in cold blood) out of greed while he was asleep. (5) Having 
made short work of Satrajit (even) as a butcher would slaughter animals, and taking the gem 
in the midst of the womenfolk who were (all) screaming and wailing as though masterless, 
Satadhanva withdrew. (6)

gaunt a fat at adler qatar ead ait at eceiit qadti © |

Di 
es cain anacanancaassennnaeetnnNeeenatankinnknmnentnwness SOOT

Ft Rg 
Sega yd SI STA Tee! puna fafenata agisseren firadent < 
qapuaat UWiaqga FolHari sl a: we weitere fae: 1 e | 
ST HTS BAT: AST: WAI AAAAARA Sd ed aft aa: 120}

Overwhelmed with grief to behold her father slain, Satyabhama too piteously wailed Saying 
"Ah father, dear father, |am undone!" and fainting (at intervals). (7) Consigning the deceaseq 
to a trough full of oil (to guard against decomposition), the afflicted lady drove (all the way) to 
Hastinapura (the city bearing a name denoting the elephant) and reported to Sri Krsna, who 
was (already) aware of the fact (omniscient as He was), the death of her father. (8) Hearing 
the (sad) news and following the practice of the human world, O Pariksit, the two almighty 
Brothers wailed with tears in Their eyes, exclaiming: "Alas, a great calamity has befallen us." (9) 
Returning (forthwith) from Hastinapura to Dwaraka alongwith His consort and elder 
Brother, the Lord made preparations to kill Satadhanva and recover the gem from him. (1 0)

AAS HOA Aral wilt: Wa | aera HPaantvarad A Aisle 1221 
TH: «Hal Fed Wael: ial 4 Aaa Heda cals 221 
Ha: Pelasdial aagurentia: Breari ATI: BAe Pa farsa Wa: 1231 
Jared: A Ashe ufwimenaradi aisene al faced fagriteaatcion 1 ex 
a s¢ tiem fad qaaaia era aiast faagst ae a faguifedsrar ieui 
G: CMe: Meqtieled Ufvti ce clear ates shesteftrasie: 1261

Ta TA POT ae i arrarenfeyea «= SRM «AA: 12191 
Tae: A Aaa aderat Aerator de Vesa Adaistret sal 121 
__ Alarmed to know of Sri Krsna's plans (to kill him) and in his anxiety to save his life, 
Satadhanva too solicited Krtavarma for help and the latter replied (as follows): (11) “I dare 
not cross the two almighty Brothers. Having given offence to Them, who can as a matter of 
fact hope to live in peace ? (12) Kamsa was shorn of (all) his glory through enmity with Them 
and met his end alongwith his followers. (Nay,) Jarasandha (the powerful ruler of Magadha 
and father-in-law of Kamsa) escaped (with life) at the end of (each of his) seventeen 
encounters (with Them), deprived (even) of his chariot." (13) Having been refused help (in 
these words by Krtavarma), he next sought Akrdra for help. Akrira too replied, "Knowing the 
strength of the two divine Brothers, who will dare antagonize Them ? (14) Hail to the 
celebrated Lord Sri Krsna of marvellous deeds, who creates, preserves and dissolves the 
universe by way of sport; nay, deluded by whose Maya (His beginningless Energy), (even) 
the progenitors of the world cannot comprehend His activity; who, having uprooted a (whole) 
mountain (Govardhana) (even) as a seven-year-old boy, held it up in one hand with as much 
ease as an infant would pluck up and hold a mushroom; Hail to that immortal and immutable 
Self, the mostancient Being !" (15—17) Refused help even by Akrira, Satadhanva deposited 
the valuable gem with him and, riding a horse capable of traversing (ina single journey) one 
hundred Yojanas (eight hundred miles), left (Dwaraka). (18)

Testa = = | HO US Saat Wee Ue REEL IS | 
facet fagea Uf gaa! Usama ae: FOSeaRaS AT 120! 
Uehara Wether | ashuT AN Sahat aaa SSA PAUTT 122 | 
ACMA PON WEA hdHL! Fa ed: wWddaqderaa a faa iz 
dd 3e ae qi a ate: aera | wisi Get =eaEaN Gt AST 122! 
se factentt se Baad ani sae fafeet wm fade agra: 12%!

a ae Mewtera afer: SIAM: | aidarra «= fafiraedufet «© fut: 1241 
sare en Alctarafserat war fay: 1 arte: Sitar wach ele |

CettsRRate et Garey ETAT: Galea: 126 |

oat oakema = fre Weer: | STA a Aut: ste Prarn: Face fay: 1210 1 
ad: A PRATT tea weet a1 are Gehastar aren: |: arse: 1c

Mounting Their car with a flag bearing the device of Garuda (the king of birds) and drawn 
by four horses possessing extraordinary speed, O king, Balarama and Sri Krsna (who is 
solicited by all men) drove in pursuit of Satadhanva (the slayer of Their father-in-law). (19) 
Leaving the horse, that dropped down (exhausted) in an orchard in the outskirts of Mithila (the 
capital of the Janakas), Satadhanva took to his heels, greatly alarmed; and Sri Krsna too 
chased him in rage. (20) Lopping off his head with His sharp-edged discus, the Lord, (also) 
moving on foot in fairness to the enemy, who was going on foot, looked for the gem in his upper 
and lower garments. (21) Sri Krsna, by whom the gem could not be found (with the slain), 
returned (to Their car) and said to His elder Brother (Balarama), "In vain has Satadhanva been 
killed (by Me); forthe gem is not with him !" (22) Thereupon Balarama replied, "Surely that gem 
must have been deposited by Satadhanva with somebody (at Dwaraka). (Therefore) return to 
Dwaraka (and) trace him. (23) | (for my part) long to see the king of the Videha territory, my most 
beloved friend." Observing thus, Balarama (a scion of Yadu) entered Mithila, O Pariksit ! (24) 
Delighted at heart to see him, the king of Mithila rose all of a sudden (from his seat) and 
worshipped Balarama (who was worthy of adoration) accordingtothe scriptural ordinance with 
appropriate presents. (25) Honoured by the high-souled Janaka, who was full of love (for him), 
Balarama (who was of an independent mind) sojourned in the aforesaid city for a number of 
years. (Later on) at the opportune time Suyodhana, the (eldest) son of Dhrtarastra (and the 
leader of the Kauravas), learnt the use of a mace at his feet. (26) Reaching Dwaraka (on the 
other side), Lord Sri Krsna related to Satyabhama (His beloved spouse) the story of His having 
slain Satadhanva and (nevertheless) of His not finding the gem (with him), anxious as He was 
to please her (with that comforting news). (27) Then. with the co-operation of His kinsmen, the 
aforesaid Lord caused to be performed in an appropriate manner all the obsequies that were 
conducive to the welfare in the other world of His murdered father-in-law. (28)

eR: PAA A aa Walder auquateret gH: waleteat 12e1 
SR eASREIE, A Bhar! ANT AMTATEATaT « Ageferensitfetenr: 1301 
sage faa sed yferafrard fe aediiteaginy 1321 
Msadht cit: WHeHaIrMMaa Al Aga Meet Meradisasd H chiiag 1321 
Tease wa BA Fl ecaistasia ax ata a arian: 1331 
sft qaqa: set Amafee ero sit Aa AAMT MeeR Sed: 13% 
uated pata fer: nen: | fagrnfaotera: aA sarq Z 1341 
Wd aud «= Aeteaeed Adal | Aden Alor: sitar fated: Fava a: 1361 
Valiasateaeate Weldeted: aa: | art Frtare: fous farerst a atfaerz_ 1 319 1 
went aheatereaent Gad Ale: | fearg at: MS A Telit AAT Bet 131 
ala Ae «SR Adee | Ste feoaT WTeISel acd HaNAad: 1391 
Ud BMARRIES: wena ae stat aed eat eer xo!

QKAEARAARRAANAAHAARAAEOLAA LA AHLA LE LHRLKHKR ARAL BrP Ar Ke We Gr Fr Ke Ke Ke Ke Be Se Be Be We Be He Ke Be Be Be Hr Ge Hr Ke Be Se Hr Be Hr Ve Hr Hew; wre

Dis. 57

waa aaifean aia wt ores: | fase afer years seta wy: xe |

Sore stricken with fear to hear the news of Satadhanva having been slain (by the Lord), Akriira 
and Krtavarma, that had instigated Satadhanva (to murder Satrajit and take away his gem), Went 
out of Dwaraka (to escape His wrath). (29) Akrura having gone abroad, portentous phenomena 
foreboding misfortune appeared before (the eyes of) the residents of Dwaraka and agonies 
(both) physical and mental, (nay,) those brought about by divine agencies and those caused by 
other living beings overtook them again and again ever since.(30) So declare some historians 
(Vaisampayana and others), forgetting what has been stated (by me) before, O dear Pariksit | 
Isit (ever) possible that evil portents should be seen in the (very) home of the Lord whois the (one 
Abode of ascetics (that are capable of counteracting all evils by their holy presence)? (31) "(Once 
upon atime) when Indra (the god of rain) did not pour seasonal showers (in his kingdom), the ruler 
of Kasi (the modem Varanasi) gave away with due ceremony to Swaphalka (the father of Aknira), 
(recently) arrived (athis capital), his own daughter, Gandini (by name); thereupon Indra sent down 
showers in the kingdom of Kasi. (32) Wherever stays the said Akrura, Swaphalka's son, who has 
inherited his father's virtue, they say, Indra pours showers all round; neither calamities nor 
epidemics appear there." (33) Hearing the above-quoted words of the elders and though 
recognizing that the absence of Akrira was not the only cause of the evil portents, Lord Sri Krsna 
(who is solicited by all men) had Akrura duly brought back (to Dwaraka) and spoke to him. (34) 
The Lord, who was not only omniscient but knew the mind (of all too), received him with respect, 
admonished him and addressed sweet words to him and (then) smilingly said, so the tradition 
goes:—{35) "That the glorious Syamantaka gem surely lay deposited with you by (the deceased) 
Satadhanva was already known to us, O master of charities ! (86) Satrajit having left no male 
issue, (it is but meet that) the sons of his daughter (Satyabhama) should offer oblations of water 
and rice (to the spirit of the deceased) and, paying off his debts, should inherit the rest of his 
property. (37) Yet let the gem—which cannot be easily maintained by others—remain with you, 
Strict in the observance of religious vows. My elder brother (Balarama), however, does not (fully) 
trust me in the matter of the gem (and suspects that it has been got removed by me). (38) 
(Therefore, pray,) Showit (to us) and (thereby) bring relief to your relations (Balarama, Satyabhama 
and Jambavati). (I know) your sacrificial performances are going on unceasingly these days on 
altars of gold (thereby betraying the existence of the Syamantaka gem with you: for you could 
not otherwise get so much gold).(39) Won over by gentle words in this way, Akrdra (Swaphalka's 
son) brought and delivered the gem, which was brilliant as the sun, wrapped in a piece of cloth. 
(40) Having shown the Syamantaka to His kinsmen (Balarama and others) and rubbed off 
through the gem the blame resting on Himself, the Lord then gave it back to Akrira. (41)

aeeade Wad gaa fanidiaie: qfaet ques ai 
Sea elt YoraTere at qentft eftaauter ara ana ise

He-who simply reads, listens to or ponders this most blessed story replete with the 
exploits of the all-powerful Lord Visnu—a story which destroys all sin—gets rid of his evil 
reputation and sin and attains (lasting) peace. (42)

Thus ends the fifty-seventh discourse, forming part of the Story of Syamantaka, 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

pis. 58 ] BOOK TEN 359

We We We Me Eee eee ae ee ee ee 
ge te ETE OE Se We he We Hew, SESE SESE SE MES R RE He HMM eS eR eR MTeoR eee eee tet We Se We He He He He He He Me Be Br Be He Fe 
f - * gi

AAPISTSRAa Seared:

Discourse LVIII 
sri Krsna's espousal with (the rest of) His eight principal Spouses 
yh Sara 
Grat Usa SE Sa Gea: | Sse Ta: sitar qgerafefada: 1 2 | 
gt ward wet yEcahacam siepnag dtr: son qeafrarrnt 2 | 
aRearegt = aT aNREdTE: | argent set chat eI WE a: 1 2 | 
que wee fet wefiaec wen ue anna afisated: 1 x | 
wae a pen Hemfedtiadie stfen fafresttemaaqedi & | 
ava alee: wef: ghtasnfwated: | femeesa a ufae: udaraqdi € 1 
gat Tara PallAanerecaiictatalsaaisaesra: | 
agar = ees eT fqgee = ftqgsrea: | © | 
qaTe THAR ASUS OTA | CA A TEL SRI SMTA |S 
dea Pale ASY AAA Hal AAI Aa A: SAT HOT Wiel A Mfiteaat 1 e | 
a ast wornfafere ears: | cent at Bad Bar etal ale Fra: 1 R01

Sri Suka began again : Once upon atime the glorious Sri Krsna (the foremost among 
men), accompanied by Yuyudhana (Satyaki) and others, drove to Indraprastha (the modern 
Delhi) to see Yudhisthira and his (four) brothers (the sons of Pandu), who had been seen (at 
the court of Drupada, having once been taken to have been reduced to ashes within a house 
of shellac). (1) Seeing Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), the Ruler of all, arrived 
(at their door), the valiant sons of Prtha (Sri Krsna's aunt) rose (from their seat) at once (even) 
as the senses become active (again) on finding respiration returned. (2) Embracing the 
immortal Lord, with (all) their sins (of previous lives) wiped off by the (all-purifying) touch of 
His (divine) person, the heroes were transported with joy to gaze on His countenance bright 
with loving smiles. (3) Bowing at the feet of Yudhisthira and Bhima (both of whom were senior 
to Him), and then hugging Arjuna (who was born on a day when the constellation 
Purvaphalguni was in the ascendant and was thus senior to the Lord only by eight days, the 
latter's advent being marked by the ascendancy of Rohini, but was nevertheless treated as 
His equal), He was (in His turn) saluted by Nakula and Sahadeva (the twin-born half-brothers 
of Yudhisthira, who were the youngest and junior to the Lord). (4) Slowly approaching Sri 
Krsna, who was seated on an excellent seat, Krsna (Draupadi, so-called because she had 
a dark-brown complexion and thus bore affinity to the Lord in hue as well as in appellation), 
who had been newly wedded and (therefore) felt a little abashed, and was (absolutely) free 
from reproach (though espoused by all the five brothers), bowed low (to Him). (5) Honoured 
and greeted in the same way by the sons of Prtha, Satyaki made Himself comfortable in his 
(Own) seat. Treated with respect, others too satin acircle near by. (6) Having metand greeted 
His father's sister—Prtha, whose eyes were moistened through excessive love—and 
hugged by her (in turn) and questioned about (the welfare of) His kinsfolk, He (gave suitable 
replies to her and) made inquiries (in return) about her (own) health as well as about that of 
her daughter-in-law (Draupadi).(7) Recalling her numerous past sufferings, Kunti, whose

throat was choked with nervousness occasioned by affection and whose eyes were wet With 
tears, spoke (as follows) to Sri Krsna, who reveals Himself (to His devotees) in order to eng 
their miseries:—(8) "Happiness returned to us, and we were blessed with a protector the ve 
moment my cousin (Akrura) was despatched by You (to enquire about our welfare the Other 
day), remembering us, Your relatives, O Krsna ! (9) The mistaken notion recognizing One 
individual as one's own and another as alien does not exist in You—who are the friend. Nay 
the very Soul of the universe; yet constantly present in the heart of those who remember You, 
You end their sufferings." (10) ;

etext Fara 
fe a arahd Seat a aceneiaci arta ada aat qe: HA iee 
saa ASaia: Ga! Se, AaArasreterat «fey: 1221

Yudhisthira said : "| do not know what meritorious act has been performed by us, O 
supreme Lord, in that You; who cannot easily be perceived (even) by masters of Yoga, have 
come within our sight, men of perverse understanding that we are." (11) Entreated thus by 
the king (Yudhisthira), the said Lord happily spent (there all) the (four) rainy months, bringing 
joy to the eyes of the residents of Indraprastha (by His divine presence). (12)

Up wae far amearqimedd aque quit alert 1231 
ie pwd daa feed faftd ariageneqmentet sia atdizal ex 
daar Gat AS SEL! WAM, WAI, GSM, SRUTSSAICHAH 124 | 
ar, fea: fasa Ua Rear wdegqara | qeatia: fend | stream 126 | 
aaagea fase dha ait venti Hol cag: Hat Ad arecelar 1201 
Tae = atet Plast fea! ase Dea: ASM HI: WASTAML 12C1 
hl a Hella qatar pcista fH fanidta | wat wat ulated ad Hoar assy 128

Once upon a time (after the Knandava forest had been consumed by a huge conflagration) 
the all-conquering Arjuna, the slayer of hostile warriors, accompanied by Sri Krsna and clad 
in an armour, mounted his chariot, distinguished by its flag bearing the device of a monkey, 
and, taking his (famous) Gandiva bow and a pair of quivers containing an inexhaustible stock 
of arrows, entered a dense forest, infested with carnivorous and other (innocent) beasts, for 
the sake of sport. (13-14) There he pierced with his shafts (a number of) tigers, boars, bisons, 
Rurus (a species of deer), Sarabhas (a species of eight-footed animals now extinct), 
Gavayas (a species of quadrupeds resembling the cow), rhinoceroses, deer, hares and 
porcupines. (15) His attendants took such of them as were useful for sacrifice to the king 
(Yudhisthira), the full moon (which is considered specially sacred for sacrifices) having 
approached. Overcome with thirst-and fully exhausted, Arjuna (who abhorred detestable 
acts) went to (the bank of) the Yamuna. (16) When they had bathed in the river and drunk 
of its crystal water, the two great car-warriors, Sri Krsna and Arjuna, (both of whom had a 
dark-brown complexion and accordingly bore the epithet ‘Krsna’') noticed a maiden of comely 
appearance strolling about (on the river bank). (17) Sent by his (divine) Comrade, Phalgun@ 
(Arjuna) went up to that beautiful and excellent damsel with well-set teeth and a charming 
countenance and questioned her (thus):—"Who are you and whose daughter may you be, 
O fair damsel ? Where do you come from and what do you mean to do ? | infer you to be in 
quest of a (suitable) match. (Pray,) relate everything (to me), O good maiden !" (18-19)

a sich | Tea A A wa Yecisarasra: 1221 
alicrdid CARMA aarty ase | Re aad for AaeaASaAA 122 I 
AMA TSIM ATGSATA ASH TAL Tepe qq fag, asqUrTad, 123 | 
et eT: APSE: watt CATE aa ant fact fasentor ee 
mata Ma ami frafrsta ama aed agama anf: 1241 
aishSt eelgrata wi Wi snfarnet qui ad ardtemfaf: 1261 
wag Aft ae: AMT weT Toe! aie, QUASI RIIMA: 12191

Kalindi (for such was her name) replied : Daughter of the glorious sun-god, | seek Lord 
Visnu, the Bestower of boons of one's choice, who is worth wooing (in everyway), for my 
husband and am (accordingly) engaged in the severest (form of) austerities. (20) | would 
choose for my spouse none else than that Abode of Sri (the goddess of fortune), O gallant 
one ! May that Lord, the Bestower of Liberation and the Refuge of the helpless, be propitious 
to me. (21) Known by the name of Kalindi, | dwell in a palace constructed by my father under 
the water of the Yamuna and propose to stay there till |am able to see that immortal Lord." (22) 
Arjuna (who had conquered sleep) spoke accordingly to Sri Krsna (son of Vasudeva) and He 
too, who knew of it (already), picked her up into the chariot and drove (back) into the presence 
of the king (Yudhisthira). (23) Sri Krsna had, as soon as requested, got built (long ago) by 
Viswakarma (the architect of the gods) a most wonderful and picturesque city for the sons 
of Pandu. (24) Residing there in order to oblige His own people (the Pandavas as wellas their 
mother and wife), the Lord had (some time before) acted as the charioteer of Arjuna in order 
to consign (the forest of) Knandava (owned by Indra) to the god of fire. (25) Pleased (with 
the aforesaid service), the said god of fire had conferred on Arjuna, O king, the bow 
(Gandiva), (four) white horses as well as a chariot (drawn by them), a pair of inexhaustible 
quivers and an armour which could not be pierced by archers. (26) Nay, rescued from the 
(said) conflagration (which consumed the forest of Khandava), Maya (the architect of the 
demons) had (built and) presented (as a token of gratitude) to his friend (and benefactor, 
Arjuna) an assembly hall, in which optic illusion seized Duryodhana, who mistook a sheet

of water for a paved floor and vice versa.- (27) 
a fa aaa: gelesen: | aneat axet ya: mefeaeda: 121 
saa oafedt qaada ahidi fara we GMI WAG 1Re! 
Duly permitted by Arjuna and with the consent of His (other) friends and relatives 
(Emperor Yudhisthira and so on), the Lord, accompanied by Satyaki and others, returned to 
Dwaraka. (28) Now, on a certain day, when the planets exerted a favourable influence and

when the season (too) was most propitious and a most auspicious star was inthe ascendant, 
the Lord. who was supreme felicity (personified), espoused Kalindi, (thereby) bringing

highest joy to His own people. (29)

feraraferatarereat aera | aaat AK Hat Teel ~AVEAATA 1Z0 | 
qonfeperrerrat | feraferat «aque: | Neel Ea FEM TS Teal TIAA 1 BR

Vinda and Anuvinda, the rulers of Avanti (the modern Ujjain), who followed the will of 
Duryodhana, deterred their sister, who was devoted to Sri Krsna, from making her Own 
choice (in a gathering of princes invited for the purpose). (30) Sri Krsna (however) forcibly 
snatched away Mitravinda (as such was her name), daughter of Rajadhidevi (His own 
father's sister’), in the midst of (other) princes, who stood gazing (helplessly), O king ! (31)

THRIATA alaea stele Ustfaenfin: | ae AeaTtad, Sa eat arafsrdt FI 1321 
Tat Sena aeniteat aA Magar! dag Wes aT AOL 133 | 
at Feat queers War read Ufa: ise aalaeagt GR AeA aa: 13x 
a wiaeua: se: Taraneh: | stecrarra Teo Osta Nicafed: 1341 
at famentiad aad Ase dea wrod 
qed A ufaueaisien: wild Aa ae A ya ad: 13e1 
qoeugsrst: fara faut sient: aftite: declare: | 
Mok: MHacaCIaaal: Hey SILA Wa AA St FSi 130 | 
afd Uae ARO wad sneer GUE qeaitr fucuc: 1321

There was a very pious king of Kosala, Nagnajit by name. He had a brilliant daughter, 
Satya, nicknamed Nagnajiti (after the name of her father), O Pariksit ! (32) Princes could not 
win her without subduing seven excellent, though wicked, bulls with pointed horns, that were 
most formidable and could not bear (even) the smell of heroes. (33) Hearing that she could 
be gained (only) by one who was able to subdue the bulls, Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector of 
the Yadus), accompanied by a huge army, drove to Ayodhya (the capital of the kings of 
Kosala). (34) Full of delight, the said king of Kosala was hailed with joy (by Sri Krsna) while 
welcoming Him by going forth to meet Him, offering Him a (high) seat and valuable articles 
of worship too. (85) Beholding Sri Krsna (the Spouse of Laksm!i)—who was not only after her 
heart but was worth wooing (in every way)—arrived in state, the princess sought Him (as her 
husband) and prayed (as follows):—"If He has been (constantly) cherished by me as the goal 
of my sacred vows, let Him grant my innocent prayers and be my husband. (36) Through what 
effort (of mine) can that almighty Lord be pleased with me, the dust of whose lotus-feet do 
Laksmi (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) and Brahma (the lotus-born) as well as Lord 
Siva (who dwells on Mount Kailasa) and the (other) guardians of the world bear on their head, 
and who assumes from time to time embodied (divine) forms suited to His (various) pastimes 
with intent to maintain the standards of morality set up by Himself." (37) To Sri Krsna, who 
had now been (duly) worshipped, the king (of Kosala) spoke as follows:—"O Narayana, O 
Lord of the universe what can I, an extremely poor fellow, do for You, sated as You are with 
the Bliss of Your very Self ? (38)

Sh SAI 
He Welt @: pdedaiae: \temsite ar afd qe 13et

Sri Suka continued : Full of delight, the Lord, who had (now) taken His seat, 
smilingly replied to him in a voice deep as the rumbling of a cloud (as follows), O scion 
of Kuru ! (39) |

* Vide IX. xxiv. 30.

The Lord said: Solicitation has be 
Ksatriya, sticking to his own duty, O 
friendship | ask (of you) your daughte 
match). (40)

€n condemned by the wise on the part of the humblest 
ruler of men ! Yet in My eagerness to secure your 
', SINC€ We are not prepared to pay any price (for the

UHNATT 
aismRiseaterent AT araeat gellar: | Teepe weg sitdaeranfert ise 
fe ae: Ga: Ua Aa: erat i det | dtedatenst «= aaenerattaa 1x2 
wat Mat ak gem arama: 1 wistm: seat fers Fares: 1x31 
an fry: «Urata agra iat wanfimat eat fra: waive 
Wa waaanvd aqent uae wy: | Se BAN Hen eee ar 1s4 | 
aaa AM ara: atfesireats, eciterea: | Aree oa SEA STA SALSA XE | 
ad: Sta: Yat Us eat Gora fafa: | at Werele ara fafa Beall 3g: Iv 
Weis ged: Pot oe Fa wee ahr wae way ala: ixcl 
Beale Agiidatefgsntara: | aa ard: srafen: GaaAIgA: 1¥8 | 
wade uwadnee fay: igqadar fraea feniiagqarmar ito! 
TTA ATS, LA CASA aSs ON ATL N48 
aut YAR weet Aaa adtiaesfeareqal aa = alee: 1421

The king replied : "Who else can be a more welcome match for my girl, O Lord, than You, 
the one Abode of (all) excellences, on whose bosom dwells Sri (the goddess of beauty and 
fortune) as an inseparable companion. (41) With intent, however, to secure a (good) match 
for our daughter a vow has already been made by us, O Chief of the Yadus, for testing the 
prowess of suitors. (42) Here are seven excellent bulls, O gallant One, (so) difficult to tame 
and (so) hard to holdin check. Good many princes have been worsted by them and have had 
their limbs broken. (43) Since these animals must be curbed by You alone, O Scion of 
Yadu, You will be the acknowledged bridegroom for my daughter, O Spouse of Sri !" (44) 
Hearing of this vow and tightening His girdle, nay, revealing Himself in seven forms, the 
Lord brought them (all) under His control by way of sport. (45) Tying them with cords (after 
Passing them through their nose), now that their pride had been curbed and their spirit 
broken, Sri Krsna (a scion of Sura), drew them, when tied, by way of sport even asa child 
would draw toy-bulls made of wood. (46) Amazed and delighted at that (feat), the king gave 
away his daughter to Sri Krsna; and the almighty Lord (too) espoused her with due 
ceremony, worthy as she was of Him. (47) Having secured Sri Krsna as the beloved 
husband of their daughter, the queens too derived supreme joy and there was great 
rejoicing (over this happy event). (48) Conchs, kettledrums and big drums sounded; there 
Was vocal and instrumental music and the benedictions of Brahmanas (the sacerdotal 
Class) were pronounced. Men and women clad in fine clothes and decked with garlands

felt hi joi 49) The king gave away as dowry ten thousand newly calved cows and 
th SM crs eee a0 ng maid-servants decked with a string of gold coins, nine 
thousand elephants, a hundred times as many chariots, horses a hundred times the

number of chariots, and men-servants hundred times the number of horses. (50-5; 
Placing the (married) couple in a chariot, the king of Kosala, whose heart was moistened 
through affection, sent them attended with a large army. (52)

sade woot wat ufs are vada: ygiel. aeriigd: oe igs, 
qaqa: Wad safsanass: | Mustdt wear fee: apna tux 
URaeHor 8 eR. TTI A ea «Tao aaaitaa: uu

Hearing of this, the highly envious kings, even though they had their spirit broken by the 
Yadus (the followers of Sri Krsna) and earlier by the lusty bulls, intercepted Sri Krsna, while 
He was taking the bride (with Him), on the road. (53) Arjuna, the wielder ot the Gandiva bow, 
who was (accompanying the Lord and was) keen to oblige his friend and cousin, repulsed 
them even as they came discharging volleys of arrows (at the Lord), (just) as a lion would 
drive away small beasts (before it). (54) Reaching Dwaraka with the dowry, Lord Sri Krsna 
(Son of Devaki), the foremost of the Yadus, delightfully spent His time with Satya. (55)

Saaid: at wvstquad faqy: | meat wgiidal Her: aaddatfaft: 1461

Gat WU vseadset wav aadat welt: a quot: genfta iu

SMa Wat: HONIG AES: | AT = sal dfaleereatsrecahar: 14c1

sia Sead Fe URAee Seca caseHs SAY Senfeeqslel AME TSARAAISeAM: 1421

Sri Krsna (next) married Bhadra, a princess of Kekaya, daughter of His father's sister, 
Srutakirti* offered (to Him) by her brothers, the foremost of whom was Santardana. (56) He 
(further) carried away single-handed, in an assemblage called for self-election of a husband, 
Laksmana, daughter of the (then) ruler of the Madra territory, endowed with auspicious 
marks, (even) as Garuda (the king of birds) snatched away (the jar of) nectar (from Indra's

paradise). (57) There were other such consorts of Sri Krsna, (all) good-looking and

numbering thousands (sixteen thousand) rescued from the captivity of Bhaumasurart(the 
son of Mother Earth) after killing him. (58)

Thus ends the fifty-eighth discourse entitled "Sri Krsna's marriage with (the rest of) His 
eight principal spouses", in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

a se NOES 
* Vide IX xxiv. 30

TThe demon was born of Mother Earth through her touch with the Lord manifested as the divine Boar at the time of His 
lifting her up from the depths of the ocean (vide III. xiii. 31). Mother Earth herself acknowledges this in the Visnu-Purana when 
she says:—

Dis. 59 ] BOOK TEN 365

Discourse LIX 
The Lord snatches away (by force) a Parijata tree (from Indra's paradise)

and kills the demon Naraka (the son of Mother Earth).

UAT 
aM eal Waa At at a a: fea: | Feet ued fae afer: 1 2 |

The king (Pariksit) submitted : (Be pleased to) recount the aforesaid exploit of Sri 
Krsna (the Wielder of the Sarnga bow)—how the demon Naraka (son of Mother Earth) was 
made short work of by the Lord and wherefore the aforementioned damsels were kept in 
bondage (by the former).(1)

Myh Sara 
Soul = FAWN WAGUSHAA | AAT «Aa «aA 
aurea Wesrad: Wewafaagt Bat 1 2 | 
frat: Tagtioraregaq | WURMgddes: Add Bad 2 1 
Tear fafdstiasdiq. sraanifit ara: 1 achonfe wes ar qeorerietenfet | x | 
git waft genft wafaarti stem eat goat Pifeitig mere: & |

Sri Suka replied : Having been apprised of the (nefarious) activities of the demon 
Naraka (son of Mother Earth) by Indra, whose umbrella* (one of the insignia of sovereignty) 
had been snatched away (by the demon), (nay,) whose mother (Aditi) had been robbed (by 
him) of her ear-rings and who had been evicted (by the same demon) from the summit (called 
Maniparvata) of Mount Mandara (the mountain of the gods), the Lord rode on (His carrier) 
Garuda (the king of birds) alongwith His (favourite) spouse (Satyabhama)f and flew to 
Pragjyotisapura (the capital of Naraka and the premier town of Pragjyotisa, now identified 
with Assam), fortified (as it was) on all sides with ramparts of mountains and weapons (such 
as artillery), (nay,) rendered difficult of access due to its belts of water, fire and wind, and 
encircled with myriads of dreadful and strong snares laid (here and there) by the demon Mura 
(an associate and follower of Naraka). (1—3) Sri Krsna (the Wielder of a mace) shattered

LL

* The demon had snatched away (as a matter of fact) the umbrella of Indra's own brother Varuna (the guardian of the 
"western quarter and the god of water) and not his own (vide verse 23 of Discourse LIX). But, as the head and overiord of all 
the Lokapalas and the ruler of all the three worlds, he deemed this as an encroachment upon his own sovereign rights and 
a direct affront to himself and hence considered himself deprived of his own umbrella.

+ The Lord had conferred a boon on Mother Earth saying that He would not take the life of her son Naraka without her 
consent. And Satyabhama being an incarnation of Mother Earth, the Lord took her with Him in order to secure her consent 
before killing the demon. Again, it is mentioned in the scriptures that Indra complained to the Lord about the behaviour of the 
demon and sought redress of his grievances while He was staying in the palace of Satyabhama. Hence He took her just for

her diversion.

Di 
esis caacncrnnhhsnesesenennnnennnenennnenwennwaenanwnnnedds> S. 59

i = . ———aT

down the (ramparts of) mountains with His mace, (known by the name of Kaumodaki), the 
fortifications of weapons with His shafts, (the belts of) fire, water and wind with His discus 
(SudarSana) and the snares laid by Mura with His sword. (4) He blew down the engines (fixe q 
on the ramparts) and broke down the hearts of the gallant (defenders) with the (blasts of) His 
(famous) conch (Pafcajanya), and the fortification wall with His massive mace. (5)

Casa «eal Masser! Ge: Wa sae ca: VSR Fe! & 
ASHE Gefen QIPAGAMACASCAUT: | 
Takase uafnfauasanetad FATT: 19 | 
stad Yes ae Tend fer aateldad a def: | 
meat Aa feansraz AeMgRaAvSHeleATgune | S| 
aqde «a fafa wea ek: aearmfirafeaeitcrar | 
Waa d ally wudiead aM weal als ear aad! @ | 
aad «Tet Tet Wa Terent Pfeife agen | 
srg aeateradsita: Rife Uh Beak leat igo 
a: aoTansita auaeat 4 8 fadygistaitea-scsrat | 
aan: «aq faddenqu: sfafmaradae: Adela: 1221 
AISA: samt famaqdqiwaneus aaa: | 
Wis up waue wal wvlasamt fem garage: 1221 
Wyse «wa Nel: waegwyerasid Bateau: | 
aqaoache Wag warnidhataddfaessteed S123 
4 wWeyeiadde wnat Menreitefeysnefpadu: | 
arian Pe Att || Ta: 1X 
fier atid treats: )3=— wane ena | 
qt aa wes fer galas adieced seri 
PU A a Agee dens ad gna w fags: 1241 
qq Ses wa Tenet faframfifea: fireitad: | 
afar aA dea SMAHAC 12 | 
Hearing the blast of Paficajanya, terrific as the clap of thunder (heard) at the end of a 
Kalpa (marking the dissolution of the universe), the five-headed demon Mura rose from 
under the water (of the moat), where he had been lying asleep. (6) Lifting up his trident, the 
terrible demon, who shone like the sun and fire appearing at the endofa Kalpa and (as such) 
was difficult to gaze at, darted at the Lord, even as a serpent would rush at Garuda (son of the 
Sage Kasyapa), devouring as it were (all) the three worlds with his five (gaping) mouths. (7) 
Brandishing his trident and hurling it with force at Garuda, the demon roared with (all) his five 
mouths. Filling the horizon and the atmosphere as well as all the four quarters, the great roar 
covered the entire cosmos. (8) By a pair of shafts discharged with (great) vigour Sri Krsna 
split into three the trident even as it came flying at Garuda and struck in return his (wide open)

mouths with (more) shafts. Mura too hurled his mace in indignation at Sri Krsna. (9) With 
His own mace Sri Krsna (elder Brother of Gada) split into thousands of splinters the said mace

-

lt

a a-t? 
-Dis.59] BOOK TEN , - 867

(even) as It came flying on the battle-field. (Nay,) the invincible Lord lopped off in mere sport with 
His discus (all) the (five) heads of the demon as he rushed at Him lifting up his arms. (10) With 
his heads severed the demon fell lifeless into the water like a mountain whose crest had been 
sundered by the might of Indra. His sevensons, distressed as they were at the death of their 
father and impatient to take vengeance, stood fully prepared to give battle. (11) Urged on to 
an encounter by the demon Naraka (the son of Mother Earth) and placing Pitha, their 
generalissimo, at the head, Tamra, Antariksa, Sravana, Vibhavasu, Vasu, Nabhasvan and 
Aruna, the seventh, sallied forth equipped with arms. (12) Coming up, fierce through rage, 
they hurled shafts, swords, maces, javelins, spears and pikes at the invincible Lord. Lord Sri 
Krsna of unfailing prowess (however), so the tradition goes, cut down with His own shafts 
the (whole) body of arms into pieces as small as the sesamum seed. (13) The Lord sent them 
(all), Pitha and others , to the abode of Death,* their heads, thighs, arms, feet and armours 
having been lopped off or split open. Enraged to see (from the top of the fortress) the generals 
of his army having been killed by the discus (Sudargana) and arrows of Sri Krsna (the 
immortal Lord), the demon Naraka, son of Mother Earth, rushed forth with (an army of) sea- 
born elephants (whose descent was traceable from Airavata, the king of elephants, the 
carrier of Indra). Perceiving Sri Krsna with His spouse (Satyabhama) mounted on Garuda 
(the king of birds) like a cloud united with lightning and appearing above the sun, Naraka 
hurted at Him the javelin known by the name of Sataghni; (nay,) all his warriors too hit Him 
allat once. (14-15) With His sharp arrows endowed with peculiar wings Lord SriKrsna (elder 
Brother of Gada) forthwith hit the troops of Naraka in sucha way as to lop off their arms, thighs 
and necks, and mangle their bodies and kill their horses and elephants. (16)

af aa: samt ararattt pese | sheafesadient: antchenarhafa: 1201 
Saar: Watla uarsat fad Ws! Wedd SAAMI USAaAaST: 12S 1 
uMafarat Al yeqeqdiapr fasfadt aa wecaied an ieei 
aq Wa: wetsaat ag: sfaedt aa: | area dar feet areted sa fea: 1201 
aes ovitisad eqaree faaetem: i afgania yada ane fant eft: 1 
SOT TSA ASH ALAPAAT 122 1

apuss defnteysst amt ufset ud aqrqed

set waitagea: qi meted fafera sfet i221

WaT 4 aadieadad sede sant vemos 
sTeiea «6 faatst «Sat | Baraat Sieafe: sore ter Akesauren feat 12x!

Borne by Garuda, who was striking down elephants with his wings (allthe way), SriKrsna 
with His sharp arrows, three for one, cut down (afew minutes later), O jewel among the Kurus, 
all the weapons and missiles that were employed by the (hostile) warriors (against Him 
before their death). Being struck by Garuda with his bill, wings and claws, the elephants-(of 
the enemy) in their distress retreated into their city (Pragjyotisapura) itself. Seeing his army 
put to flight when assailed by Garuda, the demon Naraka fought on (all alone). (17—19) The 
son of Mother Earth hit Garuda with the same javelin by which the (very) thunderbolt (of Indra) 
me ——

* The use of the compound word 444i in this context is intended simply to convey that the Lord made short work of them.

Obviously those who died at the hands of the Lord could not be expected to have visited the abode of Yama. They must have

attained absorption into the Lord by virtue of that unique privilege.

had been beaten off. Though pierced by it, Garuda did not budge any more than an elephant 
would when struck with a garland. (20) His attempt having proved futile, Naraka (son of 
Mother Earth) picked up a pike with intent to strike at Sri Krsna. (But) before he coujg 
discharge it, Sri Krsna with His discus (Sudarsana), which was keen-edged as a razo, 
lopped up the head of Naraka, who rode on an elephant. (21) Fallen on the ground, Naraka's 
head, which was accompanied with a pair of ear-rings and adorned with a lovely diadem 
shone most resplendent. "Oh, what a pity !" cried his people and “Bravo !" exclaimed the 
seers; while the chiefs of gods extolled Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), covering Him 
with (a shower of) flowers. (22) Approaching Sri Krsna, Goddess Earth (the mother of 
Naraka) delivered (to Him) a pair of ear-rings (belonging to Aditi, mother of the gods), brilliant 
with jewels chased in purest gold, alongwith a garland of sylvan flowers accompanied by a 
Vaijayanti (a garland of valuable flowers interspersed with jewels), as well as the umbrella 
belonging to Varuna (the god of water and the guardian of the western quarter) and the crest 
of Mount Mandara, known by the name of Mahamani or Maniparvata (so-called because of 
its abounding in precious gems). (23) Bending low (in humility) with joined palms, and with 
a mind full of devotion the goddess then glorified (as follows) Sri Krsna (the Lord of the 
universe), who is worshipped (even) by the foremost of gods, O king ! (24)

Tae eager GAMMA | HGRA UAT AMIS TRG | 
7a: Us Aa: Used aa: Ugseaa AMM UseTeeas 124! 
aM Wiad Pa aleaa fawaigesafestsa guise aA AA: 121 
SMA SPAS AAU Sareea rehel | OTA, A, OAT, AIST A 121

a a faga we see so amt ftera favetdae: |

WAG Ga Wil Wad sles: Wa geal War Ut: 1221

ae wat wifenfet am aif ear aa sfsarftr |

ad Wada ate waafetta’ wnaqt wa: i301

qaresisd «da | 38oWeUsst )«= id: «= WOaTfdectoarfea: |

MM, Weed ge eusi freqentannersmen 32!

Earth prayed : Hail to You, O Ruler of the (very) gods of god, O Wielder of aconch, discus 
and mace! O Inner Controller of the gods and other beings, my salutations be to You, who 
have assumed this form in deference to the wishes of Your devotees. (25) Hail to You, who 
have a lotus sprung from Your navel ! Hail to You, who are adorned with a garland of lotuses ! 
Hail to You, the lotus-eyed One !!! Hail to You, who are possessed of lotus-like feet!!! (26) 
Salutations to You, who are no other than Lord Visnu, though appearing as a son of 
Vasudeva ! Salutations to You, who are anterior* to all evolutes, the Cause (even) of Prakrt 
(the source of the entire creation), (the Embodiment of) perfect Knowledge. (27) Hail to You, 
the birthless Creator of this (objective) universe, the Absolute, possessed of endless 
potencies ! (My) salutation be to You, O Inner Controller of the great and the small, O Lord, 
who are one with the five (gross) elements, O Supreme Spirit ! (28) When inclined to create; 
O Lord, it is You who assume vehement Rajoguna (and appear as Brahma); for the 
dissolution of the universe You assume gross Tamoguna (and appear in the form of Rudra: 
the god of destruction); and for the continuance of the world You assume abundant 
ann InSr Seine Sse 2

* The Sruti says:— Yararefreratata aq Gores Yea,

- 
- 
- 
=

Dis. 59 ] BOOK TEN | 369

Sattvaguna, though remaining (ever) unobscured (by these Gunas), O Lord of the universe! 
(Nay,) You (alone) are the Time-Spirit, primordial Matter and Spirit (too) and (yet) distinct 
(from them). (29) Myself (earth), water, fire and air, ether, the (five) objects of the senses (viz., 
sound, touch, colour, taste and smell), the gods (presiding over the Indriyas etc.), the mind, 
the (ten) Indriyas (the five senses and the five organs of action), the ego, the Mahat-tattva 
(the principle of cosmic intelligence), (nay,) the entire mobile andimmobile creation—(all) this, 
O Lord, is a (mere) phantom (appearing) in You, who are (really) one without a second. (30) 
This son (Bhagadatta) of Naraka, afraid as he is, has (accordingly) been brought (by me) to 
(the soles of) Your lotus feet, O Reliever of the distress of those fallen at Your feet! Therefore, 
protect him and place on his head Your lotus palm, which destroys all sin. (31)

My Sara 
gia sential ateinas vfthasai aama site wife anoiad 1321 
aa Ue WeMeeM THA | AeA fama Usa saat |e: 1331 
dq sias feat dlea adit factfem: iaaer afstssits ufa dare isx! 
Vea Ui Hel ae aaqteM! git Mal: yeeg qe wea eas <a: 1341 
wT: sifeote gradt quypfawisant: | warden Waa saul wed 136! 
WaPo vis Udedienthat: | UMS Ades WeaTTa chal: 1301 
Sri Suka continued : Entreated in these words by Goddess Earth bentlow with devotion, 
and vouchsafing security (to Naraka's son), Sri Krsna entered the palace of Naraka (son of 
Mother Earth), full of all (kinds of) riches (luxuries). (82) There Sri Krsna saw sixteen 
thousand (and one hundred* ) Ksatriya maidens snatched away by Naraka from (the 
gynaeceum of) kings (as well as of gods, Siddhas and demons) after showing valour. (33) 
Fascinated to behold that hero among men, who had (now) entered the women's 
apartments, the damsels mentally chose Him for their beloved spouse ushered (into their 
presence) by (a benign) providence. (34) (They) all severally set their heart on Sri Krsna with 
the feeling (prayer), "May He be my husband and may Providence approve of this.” (35) Sri 
Krsna sent them (all) in (closed) palanquins to Dwaraka, now that they had been duly washed 
and neatly dressed, and (also) sent (with them) valuable treasures, chariots, horses and 
abundant wealth, as well as sixty-four swift-footed white elephants descended from Airavata 
(the king of elephants and the carrier of Indra) and endowed with four tusks. (36-37)

Tal Qe sale a qleeci ysiakaats Asawa aA Aisa: 13¢1 
Dea ura ufterd Tenia! smerdar fagqarimbhiatarad a 133! 
wnrfad: Paw Weleraanw: | sraqwaw: wuld Agere: 1¥ol 
zara atera feetieentfef: creat warteqqaefere | 
fag wa faqad were aot a ant femea ise!

* We read in the Visnu-Purana as follows :-—

qt WA | eT oY ASE: eT ee Preahatn 
: X : X xX x x x 
a a aarti Wemgeafawn: watt <q dee vera 
(V.xxix. 9,31) 
"Having brought by force, O Krsna (who are supplicated by all men)! daughters of gods, Siddhas and Asuras as well as

of (human) kings (rulers of men), that demon (Naraka) detained them in his (own) palace. x x x Sri Krsna of incomparable 
prowess saw in his gynaeceum, O high-minded one, sixteen thousand and one hundred maidens."

We Wee Ss Se EH eo sth f Bef Pcl it Pel Mick Mal Ric! Mod Mick Mick Riad Med Mick Med Riel Med al Med el Mal Me) Bel al Mal Biel Bld bel iel ied ed el Mel Mel ed cl Ml Rel Rel el Rel el Rl RRR eel RRR PPR e hh eT Dis. 39 
ESE He Wey, 
{ Xew,

Flying (thence) to the abode of Indra (the ruler of the gods), the Lord made over to Adit 
(Indra's mother) her pair of ear-rings (recovered from the possession of Naraka, by whew! 
they had been snatched away by force), as well as the umbrella (of Varuna) to Indra, ang vel 
worshipped (in return) alongwith His beloved spouse (Satyabhama) by the said king E: 
immortals accompanied by his consort. (38) Urged on by His consort, He pulled upa Parijata 
tree (from the garden of Indra) and, placing it on the back of Garuda and vandquishing the 
gods, Indra andall (who opposed Him), He broughtit down” to His (own) capital (Dwaraka).(39) 
It was planted to adorn the (pleasure-) garden attached to Satyabhama's mansion 
Hankering after its (delicious) fragrance and honey, bees followed it (all the Way) from 
heaven. (40) Bowing low (with reverence) and touching His feet with the corners of his 
diadem, Indra had (formerly) sought from Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) the accomplishment 
of his purpose (viz., the recovery of his mother's ear-rings and the umbrella of Varuna from 
Naraka). Once (however) he had his purpose accomplished, he fought with Him, though 
wise. Oh, the ignorance even of the gods (who are predominantly Sattvika in character)! 
Accursed is opulence. (41)

MN Yad Wah AAPM a: fea: | aera MTA AGUISAT: 12 | 
Tey AAT PATA ARTA: | 
WV withstand sari TISHATHIAT, 1S3 | 
sa Taafasaral ufa fase seneaist + fag: veat acta | 
PSH a TaTA TATA Teal Ag ASIC: had 
Te FATA TE UAT ea ara OH aSTHU Ta st T AT: | 
aasanaateedeeian sife fasifdey: wt aremixul 
TA USE ATAISEATA: 148 |

Assuming as many semblances as the brides, and remaining undiminished (integral), the 
almighty Lord espoused with due ceremony (all) those damsels in different mansions at one 
and the same hour. (42) Remaining constantly (and simultaneously) present in their 
mansions, which were not only unsurpassed but were beyond (all) comparison (in point of 
abundance of luxuries), Sri Krsna, who wrought inconceivable things and was perfect in His 
own blissfulness, sported with those part manifestations of Goddess Rama like an ordinary 
mortal, (scrupulously) performing (all) the duties of a householder. (43) Having thus secured 
for their husband the (very) Spouse of Rama, whose ways (the path leading to whom) even 
Brahma (the creator) and others are unable to make out, the aforesaid ladies waited upon 
Him with incessantly increasing joy, greeting Him with glances accompanied by loving smiles 
in their (ever) fresh meeting (with the Lord) marked by exchange of jokes and bashfulness. (44) 
Though attended by hundreds of servant-maids, they rendered (personal) service to the 
almighty Lord by going forth to meet Him (when He called at their door), offering Him (an 
exalted) seat and excellent articles of worship, laving His feet, presenting betel leaves 
seasoned with catechu, lime areca-nut parings, cloves and cardamom seeds etc., relieving 
His fatigue (by kneading His feet etc.), fanning Him, daubing Him with sandal-paste an

oo eee EE ee

% We have already seen in verse 55 of Discourse L that Indra himself sent a Parijata tree to Dwaraka even when the cily 
was built. But it was planted elsewhere away from the mansion of Satyabhama, who wanted to have one just beside her.

decking Him with garlands (in the hot weather), dressing His hair, arranging His bed, bathing 
Him and serving Him with refreshments etc. (45)

Thus ends the fifty-ninth discourse entitled “The Lord snatches away 
(by force) a Parijata tree (from Indra’s paradise) and 
makes short work of Naraka," in the latter half of 
Book Ten of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

st 2: ~et t <3 * 
07D OT TS ery

SID Upas sear:

Discourse LX

A dialogue between Sri Krsna and Rukmini

aie Gea ware wiaeqiuf cee Set asa adie: 1 2 1 
aaacion fax wgaerwader: ia fe sa: Sada Wile aqys: 1 2 | 
ahearaae anMHeMtaetedt | farsa faaa aleriforrecia 1 2 1

Tfeesnraratar: qaifaneiad: | Seas WMsraTAIsAG: | ¥ | 
ROSIE IRI IR CIS IG ELIE I lqarest US Tecerfatartd: 1 &

Wa:tamaa aN we afgrtisael game smadiee air! ¢ | 
qOeasa Wes atleididd attadt eat sore gael! © | 
aut oauredt afigIat © Wsgetadeacasmaeem |

: Araya A Utena | ¢ | 
at wfrot Braman fraer at clea qadqeaTr | 
Sita: waaenplisohtennvsaatieraenagea Beas 1s

Sri Suka began again : On a certain night Rukmini (the daughter of king Bhismaka), 
accompanied by her female companions, was serving with a fan her (divine) Spouse (Lord 
Sti Krsna), the Father and Illuminator of the world, who was comfortably seated on her own 
bed. (1) The same birthless Lord who creates, sustains and destroys the universe by way of 
Sport was born in the race of Yadu for maintaining the (moral) standards set up by Himself. (2) 
Rukmini waited upon her Spouse, the suzerain Lord of (all) the worlds, (who was) 
comfortably seated on a superb cushion, white as the foam of milk, mounted on a couch, O 
king ! within that (well-known) inner apartment (of Rukmini Ss palace)—whose beauty was 
heightened by a canopy fringed with brilliant pearl-strings hanging from it, by gems serving 
as lights, by flowers and garlands of jasmines resonant with the humming of black bees, and 
by silvery rays of the moon thathad penetrated into it through eye-holes of latticed windows— 
(nay,) which was fanned by breezes blowing through the garden (attached to it) and laden 
with the fragrance of Parijata trees (figuring in it), and scented with fumes rising from burning 
aloe-wood and escaping through the (aforementioned) eye-holes. (8—6) Taking from the

hand of a female companion the chowrie provided with a handle of jewels, the glorious lad 
rendered service to the Lord, fanning Him with it. (7) Holding the handle of the fanin her hand 
adorned with rings and bangles and making music by her anklets made of gems beside the 
infallible Lord, she looked (most) charming with the splendour of her pearl necklace 
reddened by the saffron painted on her breasts covered by the end of her sari—and with hey 
girdle of unsurpassed value worn about her hips. (8) Delighted to see her, the beautify 
Laksmi Herself, who was exclusively devoted to Him, and had assumed a form matching with 
Sri Krsna's—who had sportfully taken a (human) semblance—(nay,) on whose countenance 
embellished by locks, ear-rings and a neck adorned with a gold necklace, shonea Nectarine 
smile, Sri Krsna (who captivates the neart of all) spoke smilingly (as follows). (9)

SHTTAT TATA 
TTA eae quotnarefaytar: | aarqure: sitadt watered: 1201 
ae Safar feat Send, Saher! SA WT MAA TT Hea AGISAA 122 1 
TTA fed: WE PAR WO Tar! aeahs: Hew MAH IAAT 182 
sTUapaal Garena gaya | SURVal: Vaal PY: WA: Alara Arisa: 123 1 
fifeasal da safafensracraiven: | AAI WTA A lea Al Voted GAA 1 ev 1 
qantas «0 ofad SS I nfasia: 1 datfdarel Fat a Arraemal: aha 1241

acwidelasa Cae TaT | aT AS TOTetaT Farha: Teter eT 18k | 
WMeHisqsd a ws afradta aa aA: Fa se A HRT RVI 
Degas evadaaaleat qa: 10a fgafa amie sant aifa aa: 1221

qa 4 adder CAR Baad Sis Fat WR aAvisdetdradr 12! 
saat aa Aad A Teena: | stieeceassere gurl Neateatfarian: 1201

The glorious Lord said : Princess ! you were sought after by kings, who vied in wealth 
with the lords of the spheres, wielded great influence, were endowed with splendour and 
distinguished for their comeliness, magnanimity and bodily strength. (10) Leaving them (all), 
the king of Cedi etc.—who were all love-intoxicated and had called at your door as suitors 
and to whom you had been affianced by your brother and father—how did you choose for 
your husband us, who were no match for you. (11) Afraid of kings, O beautiful one, ourselves 
have sought refuge in the ocean, have entered into enmity with the strong and have well- 
nigh relinquished the royal throne. (12) O lovely one ! generally those women suffer, who 
follow the track of men whose ways are not clear and who are treading the paths 
unrecognized by the world. (13) We are penniless and are ever loved by the poor. Therefore, 
O lady of slender waist, the well-to-do, as a matter of fact, do not generally resort to Me. (14) 
Marriage and friendship should be contracted between those two who are equal to each 
other in wealth, birth, sovereignty, exterior and future prospects, and never between 4 
superior and an inferior. (15) O princess of Vidarbha ! ignoring these facts due to your short 
sightedness, you (wrongly) selected (for a husband) us, who, though praised for nothing by 
beggars, are (really) devoid of merits. (16) Even now choose you an eminent Ksatriya who 
is a match for you. Through him shall you find the desires of your heart fulfilled both here and 
hereafter. (17) Kings like SiSupala (the ruler of Cedi), Salva, Jarasandha and Dantavaktra, 
nay, your own elder brother Rukmi too bear enmity towards me, O handsome lady ! (1 8) It 
was in order to curb the pride of those haughty kings, who had grown blind under the 
intoxication of their might that you were brought by Me, the eclipser of the wicked, O 
auspicious one ! (19) Having no desire of women, progeny and wealth, we are really

Dis. 60 ] BOOK TEN 373

- : 
Re HREM ME HEME BEM We We We We Me Ve He He We We We We We Wee ee He He We We We We We We We We We We ee He He WoW We We Bee He We He ee ee eee ee ee EE EE CH

indifferent (to the world), remain steeped in a sense of fullness through Self-Realization, are 
unattached to home or the body and doing no work remain as a witness only like a light.(20)

MIP SAA

Gidget TATA = aeeifta | aaasced «aed | SORA 221 
git fawteeraetaisse: = free Sean 
ATA WaT ale Seay sri Strat Sed WTA £1221 
Val GR eeu ye fester: | 
ata genet eet denaeedeaesars 1221 
Ta: YUawTRtHessatesetssad aA wid | 
ees fagaftra: asda der Wa argfaga sfaaite dart 1exi 
ae EST Warm HT: PAA: TAA VRMMNSAAAM: HSU: PISA AT 1241 
wget aT AYA: | RI WA deat NTS Vero 12 1 
Tyee A eat ded Yaris gTen ussfawa Try 1201 
ARaaMa Aeae: HI Haut wy: | wetfewunferasacel «Wal «Afar: 1201 
Sri Suka resumed : Having spoken this much to Rukmini, who looked upon herself by 
virtue of her constant presence by His side as His most beloved wife, the Lord, who sought 
to uproother pride, became silent. (21) Hearing, then, these unwelcome words—such as had 
been never heard before—of her beloved Husband, the Lord of the three worlds, the glorious 
lady was struck with terror and, shuddering at heart and shedding tears, she was actually 
plunged into endless grief. (22) With her speech choked with excessive anguish she stood 
(there) scratching the ground with her tender feet gleaming red due to its (ruddy) nails, 
soaking both the breasts—painted with saffron—by her tears rendered black through 
collyrium and with her face cast down. (23) Severe agony, fear and grief had so obliterated 
her reason that the fan dropped from her hand which (shrivelling immediately) allowed the 
bracelets to slip off. The body too of that lady, who had lost control over her mind, swooning 
suddenly, fell down with dishevelled hair like a banana tree uprooted by the wind. (24) Seeing 
His beloved spouse, who had failed to grasp the deep subtlety of His humour, bound to Him 
with such a tie of affection, that merciful and glorious Lord Sri Krsna was moved with pity. (25) 
Quickly stepping down from the couch and lifting her up, the four-armed Lord gathered up 
her locks and wiped her face with His lotus hand. (26) Wiping her tearful eyes and breasts 
soiled with tears of grief and folding in His arms the virtuous lady, who was single-heartedly

attached to Him, O king, the Lord, whois the resort of the righteous and knew how to console, 
comforted His distressed consort, who was confounded in mind by the severity of the joke

and was undeserving Of it. (27-28) 
ATTA TAT

aT a aawigqaa sit al AcTaOM! age: Tiara saeassaktags 1281

qd oa saeerephereciiag chelaareurrate: Waryqnetdtey 130 1

ag fe ut ort we year aatiiad am: faa Ate aah 1381 
The glorious Lord said : O daughter of the King of Vidarbha, no, do not be angry with 
Me. | know you are devoted to Me. | behaved jestingly with you, O beautiful lady, only with 
intent to hear your retort and to behold your countenance with the lips quivering due to 
resentment through love, with the corners of the eyes growing red while darting glances, and

with the beautiful line of eyebrows knit together. (29-30) O lady marked with fear and frown 
to the householders engrossed in their household duties this indeed Is the greatest gain ri, 
they pass a few hours in pastimes in the company of their beloved. (31) at

Meh SATA 
aq una we ae uftermaniare aahethh Saar wet 1321 
awe wa Gear ala Maa | Usiseoratkarenaies UN 1331

Sri Suka went on : Rukmini (the daughter of the King of Vidarbha), O king, on being 
thus amply comforted by the Lord, realized His utterance to be a joke and gave up the fear 
of being abandoned by her Darling. (32) Gazing on the Lord's face with affectionate 
glances graced by a bashful smile, she spoke (thus) to the greatest among men, O scion 
of Bharata ! (33)

weqUqara 
qTaahdetia-ciaeraale ~ ~ ae a War WTA SAM fay: |

S AM deri Were: ae Wopfeyetaa 12x! 
Ha water Wrea semdrd: wd AWx SUORAAA se | 
fd cafes: apdltend adaeiord faye 9 qaISeH 134! 
aaneudtnret 8 yaiat «6 aetiepe §|=— quay | afttream | 
aaeeimanaeaniae «8 wwedfeqna 3 A Aad 136! 
faftesal Aq War a adishea fase ae ates afeystist ewan: | 
A a fetyqqisdhciearen: TEI Yar afeysrata asta qq 130! 
a aq anus: mem ages anda fagsia peat! 
aa fas wafer Wad: Wat: Ga: fans war: qae:faar 132! 
a aMaeqminifeagqua sireissaes watt a garsfe | 
faal Nacya sdlitdarmaneaenferatsetvatnad alsa 13e! 
Wel adeta Test ae Wo facet aefaacd Beat at aA! 
fae am wafedigt wat WUT awa wate geal BUT soa: Ivo!

‘ ISH | 
wea fagea fafayaaraqsna diefra asquedt a serfera: fHixe! 
ai wad da Weer waned waaoaiq

Cemied aaa Wier val wadrevanelfafameiy: 1x2! 
dq aaa wie a wa a aM 
ara dete gaieiee a @ ustaquaremamart: 1x3! 
qa: Wet Fa wade: aot yea weniafasresyen: | 
aeons 8A 86a )8=6Sfafisrasrg «= tila 1s

Dis. 60 J

BOOK TEN 375°

Bi el Oy ey wy ey 2 , th» te . 
$$ ERE ESE PERE WE WERE OE Ee EE we er ee Me EE we HE ERE OE ee OE ro We Ge We Me We He Se He Meee Me Se Ke He MEM HE YE;

ARIA AUT ach areas eraTa rar feereengafa cerca feraT | 
Siewa wate cerdaiteye a a ugermereatedt st ive 
HeTGTa AT dt MUI sna we ufe aMfafines: | 
wea Fer surnaisart aria ag ea: UTAH 1X E | 
qaelete Ft aaa AGEs | stare ga fe sa: eave: we Ua: SaPAL 19 | 
Ta Yea wiswia Ad za qeilsadi a fayard, at fawevearea: isc

Rukminti said : Of course, it is as You said, O lotus-eyed Lord, that | am surely unlike 
You, the glorious one, possessed of infinite qualities. What comparison is there between 
You, the glorious Lord of the three principal deities (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) and established 
in Your own greatness, and myself, the primordial Nature comprised of the three Gunas and 
one whose feet are clutched by the ignorant ! (34) True it is that You sleep in the ocean of 
the (devotee's) heart as if afraid of the three Gunas, O Lord of wide strides, who are pure 
Consciousness, the Self. You are ever at loggerheads with the wicked senses and even Your 
servants kick aside such a dark and gloomy thing as kingship. (35) The ways (even) of sages 
fond of the honey of Your lotus-feet are obscure and hence surely incomprehensible by 
beasts among men. For, when the doings of (even) those who follow You are as though 
supernatural, those of the Almighty Lord in You must be much more so. (36) Certainly You— 
to whom (even) Brahma and others, who accept offerings (from others) bear offerings—are 
Akifcana (not in the sense that You own nothing but) because there is nothing other than 
You. Those blinded by wealth and (engaged in) gratifying their senses do not know You. who 
steal away the hours of their life. You are the most beloved of those Brahma and others (who 
enjoy the respect of others), and vice versa. (37) Indeed You are the embodiment of every 
(recognized) object of human pursuit, a personification of absolute joy, seeking which the 
wise give up everything. Their contact with You is most deserved, but not so of the man and 
woman who are attached one to the other and therefore subject to pleasure and pain. (38) 
You have been elected by me (as my husband), knowing that Your glory has been sung by 
sages who have renounced the rod, and that You are the Soul of the universe and are ready 
to bestow Your very self (on Your devotees), and rejecting (even) Brahma (the lotus-born) 
and the rulers of heaven (Indra and others), whose fortune and blessings are dashed to the 
ground by the force of Time as propelled by a mere play of Your eyebrows, others (Sisupala 
and so on) being of no account. (39) Your plea that You resorted to the sea out of fear (of 
the kings) has no meaning, O elder Brother of Gada; for, by the mere twang of the Sarnga 
bow you put them to flightand carried away myself, Your share, OLord, (even) as aliondrives 
away other animals and appropriates its prey. (40) The foremost of kings like Anga, Prthu 
(the son of Vena), Bharata (born of Jayanti, the spouse of Lord Rsabhadeva), Yayati (the son 
of Nahusa), Gaya and others retired to the forest renouncing their undisputed sovereignty 
in quest of You, O Lord of lotus eyes. Did they suffer because they sought Your feet here 
?(41) O Lord, the abode of virtues ! the fragrance of Your lotus-feet grants freedom from 
transmigration to the people, is the resort of Laksmi and has been extolled by men of wisdom. 
What mortal woman with a clear insight into the real purpose of life, who has (once) smelt 
it, would (dare) ignore it and seek another who is ever subject to grave fears (of senility and 
death etc.)? (42) | have sought as my befitting partner You, who are the suzerain lord of the 
universe, (nay,) my own Self and the granter of (all) desired boons both here as well as 
hereafter. May Your feet, which seek him who worships You and release him from the 
deceptive cycle of births and deaths, prove to be an asylum to me, who have been wandering

[ . 
Te Biel fie ed Pk ed Ml Pcl el Rl Ml Rick Mick Ried cd el ld We We We Me Ve We He HE ENE ee He EE WEE IS .

Wy Oe Wy wy er ey He ee ee EMH 8 9 9 He wo 
Xe wy,

through (repeated) births. (43) O infallible One, O Destroyer of foes, let the kings (Sisupa 
and others) suggested by You be the choice of that woman into whose ears has not entereq 
a lay pertaining to You and sung in the courts of Siva and Brahma. Within their homes those 
kings behave towards the ladies like a donkey, an ox, a dog, a cat and a slave. (44) This 
human body, the interior of which contains (nothing but) flesh, bones, blood, worms, ©XCreta 
phlegm, bile and wind, is covered with skin, moustaches, nails and hair on the body and heaq 
is a living corpse. That stupid woman alone serves such a body as a husband, who has neve, 
enjoyed the fragrance of honey in the lotus of Your feet. (45) | wish to burn with love for Your 
feet, O lotus-eyed One, who delight in Your own self and do not see anything extraordinary 
in me ! When for the advancement of this world You cast Your glance on me (as Prakrti) 
assuming a superabundance of Rajas, that alone constitutes, as a matter of fact, (an act of) 
supreme grace on me. (46) (When You ask me to choose another partner even now,) O 
slayer of the demon Madhu, | do not regard Your words as without meaning; for sometimes 
surely enough, there are girls who like Amba* (the daughter of the celebrated king of Kasi), 
cherish love for somebody else (than the one by whom they have been won). (47) The mind 
of awoman of easy virtue, though married, is always attracted towards a new person. A wise 
man should not (therefore) maintain such an unchaste woman; for by doing so he falls both 
here and hereafter. (48)

MTA ATA

Maitaidaded Wa yeti aqatfed aaa ad at aaa fe ixel 
a aM aa Sl eae Aa | ara Wear aeareda eatar Fraar to | 
seal usm ofa a aM ageasemmara a editeofa 1421 
a0 Wirt aaa aa Adds Haeaisuatiar teat AA Aaa 142!

MW wa waoriaae ace a wae wa aafaqi 
aq weurar feast 8 FO doit: aga: 143 
fepa Textapata aa hddafdanratt we: | 
Weenies Ui querer wasn Refs: fear: uxt 
A cleat surest afeott zea ceaife ora aa wfaareae | 
Ma Fe yee A went fe say 14h! 
wgiarem af miicea sigecdin a agemeniea i 
GU aesaisHeariaie Aad: fafa aa aq fae ius 
GeeaIssmeus Hata: sential ate faratt yaa | 
Tet feta sengaaaard faba cafe ad sftacam: iu!

The glorious Lord replied : O virtuous lady ! it was with intent to hear you speak in this 
Strain, O princess, that you were subject to a joke by Me. In fact, the interpretation you have 
put on My words is wholly and literally true. (49) Whatever blessings you seek from Me are

SS EE a ne

We are told in the Mahabharata how the three daughters of the then king of Kasi were conquered in an open contes! 
by Bhisma for the sake of his cousins. Citrangada and Vicitravirya, and how Amba, the eldest of them, who had set her heart 
upon Salva. was. when she opened her mind before Bhisma. allowed by the latter to seek the company of Salva.

Dig. Sradaennnannenasenesseesenvenenatt oo cane cnnvasssceerteesante sine 
undoubtedly ever possessed by you, who are solely devoted to Me, O blessed one ! And 
blessings sought from Me lead to freedom from desires, i.e., Liberation. (50) O faultless one, 
|have come to know your love and fidelity to Me. For, though | tried to shake you by My words, 
your mind could not be estranged from Me. (51) They who propitiate Me, the Bestower of 
Liberation, for conjugal pleasures through austerities and vows have given their heart to 
sensuous enjoyments and are deluded by Maya. (52) Having obtained (propitiated) Me, the 
Source and Bestower of Liberation as well as of worldly riches, O proud lady, they who seek 
after the latter only are unfortunate (as a matter of fact), inasmuch as these can be obtained 
even in the lowest species of life (which are compared with hell). To such men (however) 
whose mind Is given to the pleasures of sense (even) hell appears to be a pleasant resort. (53) 
Well itis, O mistress of My household, that you have practised constant devotion to Me, which 
rids one of worldly bondage, and which is (so) very hard to practise for the wicked and more 
so for a deceitful woman reeking with unclean desires and given to sense-gratification 
only. (54) In the whole of My houshold | do not see a house-wife affectioate like yourself, 
O proud lady, who, ignoring all the kings assembled on the occasion of your marriage, sent 
a Brahmana carrying a confidential message to Me, of whom you had (only) heard good 
accounts (and whom you had never personally known). (55) You put up with the disfiguration 
of your brother vanquished in battle, nay, his death* (too at the hands of Balarama) on the 
happy occasion of (Aniruddha's) wedding in a tournament of dice-playing, and the grief 
repeatedly caused by the memory of these (unpleasant) incidents. You (however) never 
spoke a word (about these things) for fear of separation from Us. By this conduct of yours 
you have (completely) won Me over. (56) A messenger was sent by you with a most 
judiciously-worded message in order to secure My hand. While | was tarrying, you looked 
upon this world (full of relatives and friends) as void and (even) sought to cast off this 
(charming) body of yours, which you did not consider as worthy of anyone else. Let that 
(unique) love of yours stand to your credit. (Unable to repay it) We (only) hail it with joy. (57)

ARI SAA

wa GRATES: | TT TA Atel «fase 1421 
aurora faye yealhaioniemt qerettar, sat colada: 143! 
ofa seErTaa FSM TRAE Glecdal aA STS POT! AA STAs: 1Go |

Sri Suka continued: In this way the almighty Lord of the universe, though immersed in 
the Bliss of Self, sported with Laksmi (in the form of Rukmini) by indulging in amorous talks 
(with her) imitating the ways of humanity. (58) So did the all-pervading Lord Sri Krsna, the 
Preceptor of the universe, sported (simultaneously) in the mansions of His other spouses 
too, discharging His household duties like a (common) householder. (59)

Thus ends the sixtieth discourse entitled “A dialogue between Sri Krsna and Rukmini, . 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 
GOSS OD

* Described later in verse 36 of Discourse LXI, though the incident presumably occurred earlier.

[565] B.M. Part II—41

raha & =

<

eM MH We a OY Se i tel Ml el Mel Mick Mod Med Mal 
LE

ZINTA sear:

Discourse LXI 
(A description of the Lord's progeny;)

Rukmi killed (by Balarama) during Aniruddha's wedding

Sh SATA 
Ura: HOR UA sal alison: | AsitsaTanihag: Aaleeaaay 1 2 | 
Teer died wigaisgd fea ss aad @ @ A ania: fea: 1 2 1 
dean eae eras Aenea Tas adaesteu: 
UAlted! Waal A wat fasid wala: wages afaat faye: | 3 | 
: et - = se. 
Ud vwswegandarsa fanfd ww sap: | x | 
su woofanara ofa faaen sareaista a fag: veat acta |

eHellardtaada Tela alchAaa Ss AeA 1 & | 
Tel HAA EUSA ofa AUTO: | 
aasanaeeatieediern sifa faufdey: wt ami «i

Sri Suka began again : The aforesaid wives of Sri Krsna bore Him ten sons each, who 
were in no way inferior to their Father in respect of all their mental and physical qualities. (1) 
Perceiving Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) not stirring out of their palaces but (always) present 
there. the princesses regarded themselves each as His most beloved spouse. (As a matter 
of fact) those ladies were unaware of His real character. (2) The loving ladies were 
exceedingly charmed by the lovely countenance, resembling a lotus flower, long arms, big 
eyes. glances full of love and merriment and winning talks of the Lord; (but) with (all) their 
charms they were unable to win the heart of the Perfect One. (3) (All) His sixteen thousand 
(and odd) wives could not shake His mind by their shafts of Cupid and other charms skilled 
in conveying the message of love despatched by their arched eyebrows fascinating with the 
sentiment expressed by their suppressed smile and sidelong glances. (4) Having gained for 
their husband (such a one as) the Consort of Rama, whose ways even (great) gods like 
Brahma are unable to know. the aforesaid ladies indulged with ever growing delight in loving 
smiles. affectionate glances and a longing for union which ever appeared as new, and SO 
on.(5) Though attended by hundreds of servant-maids., they rendered (personal) service to 
the all-pervading Lord by going forth to meet Him (on His arrival), offering Him a seat an 
excellent articles of worship. washing His feet, presenting betel-leaves seasoned with lime: 
catechu. areca-nut parings. cardamoms, cloves etc.. relieving Him of His fatigue (by 
kneading His feet etc.). fanning Him. daubing Him with sandal-paste and adorning Him wit 
garlands. dressing His locks. arranging His bed, bathing Him and serving Him with dishes 
(of various kinds). (6)

Dis. 61 ] ~ BOOK TEN - 379°

ent ae #80 9 we oe Me Oe Me Me HE Me Me Meee ee ee We ee He wy Oe He We We We We We He We We We We We He ewe

ara a SAGAN server Quiem: | set aera Nee yon a1 8 | 
areca: «Yes aedesx atari qaresgqeqgs7 TRAAATA: |S | 
aera fray wes se gt: | MELATTGT ara Uial are: fig: 1 <1 
Wd: Gad: ayy: wagquiqnieen | asuadesadauaereen: 1201 
A: MIMS AMAA ari ane: aaa: yotrasahrs age 122! 
fasaisards aqua sfts: sd: | Wraaen: Yat Pa Breen: Pageant: 1221 
anassisaaag = feerehra4r qu: | 3: gay: star phratafeta: Gat: 123 | 
aq: chfagat a: gareds were: | aifadel: qotare: cafes: araenisaz: 12% 
Tara TAA Aes: Wee Rel: | IsM: UT Verein: BE sileitsatferd: 12% 
gait eaishet Ws addisae Wa WI Weel: Wed afeftafercnst: af: 1261 
aaa, Fee: YE: Wewumshte Ha: quel usa am sas Wate: 1201 
aqararadaen wWievaraa at: | weeMegisugaqaet «=—-_- elas: 121 
Ua q Sfaaon Ws A Vise Gti uaSl Gua aya: alfest Fal 
OI: HOTA AAMT A ASAT 123 1

Of the (sixteen thousand and odd) wives of Sri Krsna, who had ten sons each, | (now 
proceed to) mention to you the sons, Pradyumna and so on, of the eight principal 
spouses (alone) that have been previously referred to (by me). (7) With Pradyumna as 
the eldest, Carudesna, Sudesna, the valorous Carudeha, Sucaru and Carugupta and, 
next to him, Bhadracaru as well as Carucandra, Vicaru and Caru as the tenth were born 
of Rukmini. They were in no way inferior to their father. (8-9) Bhanu, Subhanu, 
Swarbhanu, Prabhanu and Bhanuman, Candrabhanu, Brhadbhanu and Atibhanu, the 
eighth, as well as Sribhanu and Pratibhanu were the ten sons of Satyabhama. Samba, 
Sumitra, Purujit, Satajit and Sahasrajit, Vijaya and Citraketu, Vasuman, Dravida and 
Kratu—these were the sons of Jambavati. Samba was the eldest of them and they were 
all loved by the Father. (10—12) Vira, Candra and Aswasena, Citragu, Vegavan, Vrsa, 
Ama, Sanku, Vasu and the glorious Kunti were the sons of Nagnajiti. (13) Sruta, Kavi, 
Vrsa, Vira, Subahu, Bhadra, who fought the enemy single-handed, Santi, Darsa, 
Purnamasa and Somaka, the youngest, were born of Kalindi. (14) Praghosa, Gatravan, 
Simha, Bala, Prabala, Urdhvaga, Mahasakti, Saha, Oja and Aparajita were the sons of 
Laksmana (the daughter of the ruler of Madra). (15) Mitravinda's sons were Vrka, Harsa, 
Anila, Grdhra, Vardhana, Annada, Mahasa, Pavana, Vahniand Ksudhi. (16) Sangramajit, 
Brhatsena, Stra, Praharana, Arijit, Jaya, Subhadra, Vama, Ayu and Satyaka were born 
of Bhadra (Saibya). (17) Diptiman, Tamra, Tapta and others were the sons of Sri Krsna 
through Rohini (the first of the other sixteen thousand wives). And from the loins of 
Pradyumna appeared the mighty Aniruddha through Rukmavati, the daughter of Rukmi 
(Rukmint's brother), born while he was living in the city known by the name of Bhojakata, 
O king (Pariksit)! The mothers of Sri Krsna‘s progeny numbered sixteen thousand and 
Odd. (Hence) the sons and grandsons of (even) these (other) sons of Sri Krsna reached 
the figure of tens of million, O protector of men ! (18-19)

Ro ee ee RRR AS RHR R eR tee 
HATA 
ae ema sae gedt afi ger uty ey Ti octane 
\ waareatte 8 fags fastened faa: 1201

sandal 0 (ts AMATI ALI fans Safed wee agatha ahr: 12)

The king (Pariksit) submitted : How did Rukmi, who had been worsted in battle p 
Sri Krsna and had (ever since) been awaiting an opportunity to kill Him, give away hig 
daughter to his enemy's son? (Pray,) tell me this, O learned soul—the circumstances which 
brought about a mutual alliance through marriage between these two enemies. (20) Yogis 
clearly see the past, present and future, (nay, even) that which lies beyond the perception 
of the senses, that which is remote and that which is intercepted (by something else). (21)

MIP SAA 
qa: aat aaersseqteai ue: Taam Me Tete ge 1221 
TI «at SR HT: | ate MPa Gal Heal wad: Hear 123 | 
Seu Us data aati saa fagnerai Hat alread fas iex

Sri Suka replied : Pradyumna (who was Love incarnate himself) was elected by 
Rukmavati in a choice marriage. Having completely vanquished in battle—with none other to 
help him beyond the chariot he drove in—the kings assembled (there), he carried her away.(22) 
Though constantly thinking of his hostility towards Sri Krsna, by whom he had been treated with 
contumely, yet seeking to oblige his sister (Rukmini, who had been instrumental in saving his 
life), Rukmi gave away his daughter to his sister's son. (23) Krtavarma’'s son, Bali, O king, 
married Rukmini's daughter, Carumati, a girl with large eyes; so it is said. (24)

dfenaitega wat saaectet: i teat agasta wa: frafesantdar | 
SHAM de Gt BLING: 1241 
ahead Ue vfanuit wacherati gt diste wy: UTramemenied: 126! 
der, Had sae aes za: iaara esanct 9 sladendfafisia 120 
Sha wa Uta Wee dedisaml aeomer aa cavalier 12é! 
Wi «Ae Weeled wd qf Sees Sieg: TIeaa ae | 
Sd, Paaatgqeiyeardagergs: 1281 
det wal eee Te WE ae: | framers sett daanfira: 1201 
Wat ated: aa waa ga Uefori steeurensiaeet =e oHeAed 122! 
a oa fide wat atorsents: i cat fd wae aeq orient sft 132! 
qasdiamannt acta fad wee: edat aaata vat aft a yar 33! 
amiga deuf gqpustretfed: \uedor ufteat aad cpreitfed: 13¥! 
Aarerent erat qa Te sare: | aadferta Us ala a WareaM: 1241 
coferraterarfertanet watered: | ee: urges wA qd quae 126! 
siogist CAT Wekat eat ual Gada Hal alseaa faaqafaa: 129!

ze ee vert: ust gain aa ufterfsen: 13¢1 
Fred | VATe Arscealel ATETATeY aT 1 leerUitereweay Tse, Benguarsh: 1381 
weal FISRETE, eet: frathaeret AWA: So | 
Se AEMTad TE Tee Sea EA sae afreshra 
Sea Aaa aTAISeAT: 16,2 |

Though nursing deep-rooted animosity towards Sri Krsna and knowing such union as 
contrary to (the principles of) piety, Rukmi (further) gave away his grand daughter, Rocana, 
to his daughter's son, Aniruddha, with intent to gratify his (own) sister (Rukmini), bound as 
he was by ties of affection (with her). (25) For that festive occasion, O king, Rukmini, 
Balarama and Sri Krsna, Samba, Pradyumna and others drove to the city of Bhojakata. (26) 
The aforesaid wedding being over, some haughty kings with the ruler of Kalinga (the modern 
Utkala) at their head strongly said to Rukmi, "Thoroughly vanquish Balarama in a game of 
dice. (27) Ignorant though he is of dice-playing, as a matter of fact, O king, great is his 
addiction to it." Thus advised, Rukmi invited Bala and played at dice with him. (28) In that 
game Balarama made a wager (successively) of one hundred, one thousand and ten 
thousand gold coins; Rukmi, however, won them all. Showing his teeth on that occasion, the 
ruler of Kalinga very loudly laughed at Balarama (the wielder of a plough), who (however) 
resented it. (29) Then Rukm! made a bet of one lakh and Balarama won this time. Resorting 
to cunningness, Rukmi (however) said, "| have won." (30) Like the sea on a full moon, 
Balarama (the glorious one) was (now) agitated with anger. His eyes, which were naturally 
red, began to glow with rage and he made a wager ofa hundred million gold coins.(31)According 
to the laws of gambling Balarama won that too. Taking recourse to deceit Rukmi (however) 
said, "| have won. Let these umpires arbitrate on this point." (32) A voice from the heavens 
thereupon declared that the bet was rightfully won by Balarama alone; Rukmiis surely telling 
a lie when he says with his tongue alone (and not from his heart) that he has won. (33) 
Ignoring that voice, Rukmi, who was instigated by wicked kings and prompted by his own 
death, spoke mockingly to Balarama (as follows):—{34) "Being keepers of cows roaming in 
woods, you do not know the game of dice. Kings (alone) play at dice and sport with arrows, 
not men like you." (35) Insulted thus by Rukmi and ridiculed by kings, Balarama flew into a 
rage and, lifting up an iron bar, killed him (even) in that festive assembly. (36) Quickly seizing 
the ruler of Kalinga, who had laughed at him with open teeth (and had now taken to his heels), 
(even) at the tenth step, Balarama smashed those teeth. (37) With their arms, thighs and 
heads broken, and bathed in blood, when struck with the iron bar by Balarama, other kings 
fledin terror. (38) For fear of estranging the goodwill of either Rukmini or Balarama, the Lord 
did not make any favourable or adverse commenton His brother-in-law, Rukmi, having been 
killed. (89) Having comfortably seated Aniruddha alongwith his newly-wedded wife in an 
excellent chariot, Balarama and the other Dasarhas, who looked upon Sri Krsna (the Slayer 
of Madhu) as their asylum, and who hadall their objects accomplished; drove from Bhojakata

to Dwaraka. (40)

Thus ends the sixty-first discourse entitled "Rukmi killed (by Balarama) during the wedding of 
Aniruddha", in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISSED OD

Xtras,

sig fgufsaniseara:

Discourse LXIl

Aniruddha made captive

WHAT 
ame 20 aaa I Ie at ftargarien 
Ud Ad AAA AAT, AAA 1k |

The king (Pariksit) submitted : Aniruddha, a (veritable) jewel among the Yadus, 
married Bana’s daughter, Usa, and in that connection (1 am told) a great and terrible combat 
ensued between Sri Krsna and Lord Sankara. May you be pleased to tell me all this in detail, 
O great Yog! ! (1)

MP SAA 
am: Glaideasl aeons: 1 aq amaqeaa eeasafa Afeiti 21 
Take: Oat am: Rraukew: aati wet aan eiaiss aan qed: | 3 | 
Berea GT Va A Wana GW ae Bet: Tater fees ga asa: | 
Ueeaeaiet AUsasasaySy | X | 
Wa Pay: WoO WMA: | aUsca A a aad quia & |

Sri Suka replied - Bana was the eldest of the hundred sons of the high-souled Bali, by 
whom the (entire) globe was given away to the Lord who appeared (before him) in the form 
of the divine Dwarf. (2) Sprung from his loins, Bana even took delight in devotion to Lord Siva. 
He was worthy of honour, liberal-minded, intelligent, true to his word and of firm resolve. (3) 
Hein those days ruled over the beautiful city known by the name of Sonitapura. By the grace 
of Lord Siva the gods, though adorable (themselves), behaved towards him as servants. 
Endowed (as he was) with a thousand arms, he propitiated Lord Siva (the Delighter of all) 
by playing upon (various) musical instruments during the latter's Tandava dance. (4) The 
ged Sake te ee ve Hnnae beings, who affords shelter to all and is (so) fon

es, bade him ask (of Him) a boon of his choice. Bana nt 
presence as a guardian of his city. (5) ee a |

B wraisse fifiet uret cfteigda: | fnitarhatis Meader | & | 
Te St Fea Chet Tethered Gaver HATE | 9 | 
ete Aa at UW ata Asvad! felaat siden a ot wat UAL! C |

ROGET mydaitdaaerarer | arerat quirad staresfit sega: 1 ¢ | 
Teg TAM GG: HYRT COTY aT | cae ways Up vada Algol 
sae: Grins: aE ofargui weiter, fiftereet waciteaert apeft: 1221

Touching His lotus-feet with his crown shining like the sun, Bana, intoxicated as he was 
with the pride of his prowess, spoke one day to the Lord of Kailasa, who was standing beside 
him, (as follows:—) (6) "I bow to You, the Preceptor and Ruler of all the worlds, the celestial 
tree which grants the desires of men whose longings have not been sated, O supreme 
Deity!(7) The thousand arms given by You (by way of a boon) have only proved a burden to 
me (SO far); (for) in (all) the three worlds | do not find a well-matched rival other than You. (8) 
Eager to fight, | proceeded, O most ancient Person, against the elephants guarding the 
quarters, pounding the mountains (even as | marched) with my arms full of itching (for a 
combat); but they too took speedily to their heels in terror." (9) The Lord flew into a rage to 
hear that and said, "When your ensign is broken, your encounter will take place with one 
equal to Me; that will crush your pride, O foolish one !" (10) Thus spoken to, the fool with a 
perverted mind withdrew to his palace, full of joy, O king, awaiting the fulfilment of the augury 
of Lord Siva (the Lord of Kailasa), even though it was expected to deal a crushing blow to 
his power. (11)

aqereat ama det as mehr dai aemedd ard SPEsydT AT 1k2I 
QM dat qaasdadl aif ara ated | aia wea scent fager star yarq 1231 
aU Ut FEMA a daa weg aie alqewaaradt 1ex! 
& a area qy: alae aa: leer A ase WegAqIMAa 1241

Even as a virgin, his daughter, Usa by name, enjoyed in a dream sexual delight with the 
lovely son of Pradyumna (viz., Aniruddha), who had (however) neither been seen nor heard 
of (by her) before. (12) Not finding him there (on opening her eyes), she got up in a state of 
excitement saying, "Where are you, my darling !" in the midst of her girl companions, and felt 
greatly abashed. (13) Kumbhanda was the minister of Bana and Citralekha, his daughter. 
Full of curiosity she, a (constant) companion of Usa, questioned her friend (thus):—(14) O 
princess of charming eyebrows ! whom are you looking for and what is the nature of your 
longing ? | do not find till today anyone who has espoused you. (15)

SIA 
as: aia: a sam: areola: i dita «= geared «= equa: 126 | 
qe Wa srt Walaa Ae | Ha aa: Weal fatcat At qistarviel 1 e191

Usa replied : In my dream was seen a certain youngman of dark-brown hue, with long 
arms and lotus-like eyes, cladin yellow and captivating the heart of women. (16) | amin quest 
Of that darling, who having allowed me to drink the honey of his lips, has gone to some 
unknown destination, plunging me, though thirsting (yet), into an ocean of misery. (17)

FAA ATA 
ore ascnsifa fietaat afe mead aqaet at set watedt career ie 
saa VATA AAU | SATEEN AAT AGS AMT TAT 129 | 
Tay a a aw, Wrage! aloa wAPH a ee Sas GST 120 | 
sae fafekad diearaenet fear aiseraatiafa ste Waa Alaa 12e1

Citralekha said : "| shall bring the youth who has stolen your heart, if he is traced (by you) 
in the three worlds (the elite of which are going to be depicted by me), and dispel your agony 
(thereby). Point him out." (18) Having said so, she drew faithful sketches of gods, 
Gandharvas (heavenly musicians), Siddhas (a class of superhuman beings endowed with 
mystic powers), Caranas (celestial bards), Nagas (a class of superhuman beings—half men 
and half serpents), Daityas (demons), Vidyadharas (artistes of gods), Yaksas (a class of 
demigods) and human beings. (19) Among men she portrayed the Vrsnis, viz., Sura, 
Vasudeva, Balarama and Sri Krsna. Perceiving Pradyumna, Usa blushed. (20) Beholding 
Aniruddha portrayed with particular care, Usa cast down her face through shyness, O king, 
and smilingly exclaimed: "It is he, it is he !" (21)

ASEM AAs WA HoT Altri sat fagaar usr gent HVatlear 1221 
wa Wa wads wate area gee aforagqe ae fremestai23 
a add qa faster gleaeai aed wy gett A oar Gas! 
UTea a: Aaa efe aT ea: LUMA aread: aspera: 1241 
Je: wat Weasel Aisi A age wBarauedtsa: 126!

Concluding him to be Sri Krsna's grandson, Citralekha, who possessed Yogic powers, 
journeyed, O king, through the air to Dwaraka protected by Sri Krsna (Himself). (22) 
Resorting to her Yogic powers, she bore away Aniruddha (son of Pradyumna), (who had 
been) lying asleep there on a beautiful bed, to Sonitapura and showed her friend the object 
of her love. (23) With her face lit up with joy to behold the loveliest of the lovely, she enjoyed 
life with him in her palace, which could not be easily peeped into by males. (24) Honoured 
with exquisite raiment, garlands, sandal-paste, incense, lights, seats etc., drinks, food and 
other edibles, as well as with (loving) words and (bodily) service, and remaining concealed 
in the maidens’ apartments, with his mind captivated by the said Usa—whose love (for

him)was constantly increasing by leaps and bounds—Aniruddha had no idea of the number 
of days (that slipped away). (25-26)

a aa agar sani gaAAML| Rafer GUase: 129 
Vel Seep Ustet gleddan feraiea qatar: Haat: Herasuny 2c! 
Sees Fe Mla gar yfdsera a fase 129!

While she was being thus (secretly) enjoyed by Aniruddha (the hero of Yadu's race) and

felt averloyees the eunuchs (in charge of the gynaeceum) noticed her through marks that 
could hardly be concealed, as having been deprived of her virginhood. They reported (to 
Bana as follows):—"O king, We notice the conduct of your virgin daughter to be such as is. 
apt to casta Stain on your family. (27-28) We are unable to make out how came about the

defloration of your daughter, whois constantly quarded by usi 
such) be easily perceived by men."(29) yg y us in her house and could not (as

aa: seafect saroit faq: ATG: WANA: HAMM WAlsseile AEgeA 130 | 
erie od Yedet ant | fesracrgser 
RS Meee fanaa a ufveqaai3e 
ateararaa: Sreranrkayurar Aaa RM PSA | 
wate nyafesasrat ae endiaqder fafa: 1321 
a ad sas gamenfafiitcioeacter area: | 
saq ad uke cafe aarcat cused fata 133i 
fargatat am oUftt: «sede: «Bat ae | genegemiiseac | 
aq waa wane farina faftiagefeqen: yea: 13x! 
qd armridiert act wd wet afl aa 
wa yet | oaefamefaget se | Prerengqeneremitfedtd 1241 
ofa steered FEM Tee Beara Cas SaUeishegea a feafeasisena: 1621

Sore distressed to hear (the news) of his daughter's pollution, Bana hastened thence to 
the maidens' apartments and noticed there Aniruddha (a jewel among the Yadus). (30) 
Bandasura was taken aback to behold Aniruddha, sprung from the loins of Pradyumna (who 
was no other than Love incarnate), (and therefore) exceptionally charming in all the (three) 
worlds—dark-brown of hue, clad in yellow, having lotus-like eyes and long arms, a face lit 
up with the lustre of his ear-rings and (curly) locks as well as with his smiling glances, playing 
at dice with his darling—who was decked with festal ornaments all over her body—and 
seated in front of her, and wearing between his arms a wreath of jasmine flowers peculiar 
to the vernal season, tinged with the saffron painted on her breasts, during his bodily contact 
with her. (81-32) Perceiving Banasura to have entered the room, surrounded by a 
detachment of armed soldiers, Aniruddha (a scion of Madhu) stood firmly taking up (in his 
hand) a steel bludgeon with intent to make short work of them (all) like Yama (the god of 
death) wielding his rod (of punishment). (33) Like the leader of a pack of boars killing (an army 
of) dogs, he made short work of the warriors even as they rushed on all sides with intent to 
Seize him. Being struck by him, they issued out of the mansion and ran helter-skelter with 
their heads, thighs and arms smashed. (34) The powerful Banasura (the son of Bali) got 
enraged and bound Aniruddha with the cords of serpents, while he was (busy) exterminating 
his army, so the tradition goes. Overwhelmed with grief and despondency to hear of his

bondage, Usa loudly wailed with tear-drops in her eyes. (35)

Thus ends the sixty-second discourse entitled “Aniruddha taken captive," in the 
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PIII SIS

.

Dis. 63

319 faateaniseara:

Discourse Lilll 
Aniruddha brought back (to Dwaraka)

a SAA 
ssi Whee WET WA ANA Aa aden Aral adaware eg | 
qRerRiguivd ait see wt aisag: wiorgt qua: Head: | 2 | 
TEA qqIAs We: ArasaA ARNT: | AalGAqusM WAPOA: 1 3 1 
Seu Mees: Aa: PddtlearLi weston AAI Alea: 1 x | 
TATA EM AM NS TONAL, idem «486 - earfesqereishareat 1 4 | 
ans wa es: Bad: Wadd: sie Areqad qqse Wap: | « | 
ai We Feri weet pega We EIAs! | 
PMUSHIHUA aed Ge AGT: | APA SOYA AW Te Aes: | c |

eed: Aue aaa: fagenon: iterate agar faarsgarr ¢ | 
ACTER MESIPE CEROMISCAEE | Stetatdensisy Adie, Afar 120 |

TARGUS HSS ACN! aaa Mavs: BWM: Weed: 12k 
quran sexe frarrerrentr anfguri sera: wrareara 9 angurfortaterd: 1221 
Wawa a aa aaa A Med saa A OU A Uda A Ie3t 
aera ¢ faker yeoman yaar yaat aifhsteratfarregfar: 1 eX

re: 9 SERS: 89 aad: | ote fag aa: ferhaarareHne OMI k4!

pas: = quenvigy Uddddenttedt | agaeietiaia sda add: 1261 
Sri Suka began again : On this side the four rainy months slipped by the relations (Sri 
Krsna and others) of Aniruddha, who (sorely) missed him and had been sorrowing for him 
(all the time), O scion of Bharata ! (1) Hearing from Narada the (whole) story as to how he 
had been taken prisoner as well as of his doings (viz., how he had disposed of a whole 
contingent of Banasura's army), the Vrsnis, who looked upon Sri Krsna as a deily, 
proceeded to Sonitapura. (2) Accompanied by (an army consisting of) twelve Aksauhinis 
and united under the command of Balarama and Sri Krsna, Pradyumna Satyaki, Gada, 
Samba and Sarana, as well as the (other) jewels among the Yadus—Nanda, Upananda,

. Bhadra and others—closely besieged the Capital of Bana from every side. (3-4) Beholding

oe city with its urban gardens, fortifications, towers and gates being shattered, Bana, full 
ee Sallied forth to meet them with an equally strong army. (5) Surrounded by (His 
ollowers known by the name of) Pramathas, including His son (Lord Kartikeya), and riding 
on His bull, Nandi, Lord Rudra (too) fought with Balarama and Sri Krsna for the sake (on the 
Side) of Bana. (6) A most tumultuous and astounding encounter took place between Sri 
Krsna and Lord Sankara—an encounter which made one's hair stand on end; and another! 
between Pradyumna and Kartikeya. (7) Another combat (similarly) raged between Balarama 
(onthe one hand) and Kumbhanda and Kupakarna (on the other). A (similar) duel took plac¢ 
between Samba and Bana's son, and another between Bana and Satyaki. (8) Rulers of gods

Dis. 63 ] ‘BOOK TEN 387

RRS i ROR GA SB RBA BHA BREE Be BBB BE ef A Ret tet tt te Pete Rec Pet 
headed by Brahma, ascetics, Siddhas and Caranas, Gandharvas, Apsaras and Yaksas 
came forth in their aerial cars to witness the conflict. (9) Sri Krsna (a scion of Sura) put to 
flight, with His sharp-pointed arrows discharged from the Sarnga bow, the followers of Lord 
Siva, viz., the Bhutas, Pramathas, Guhyakas (Yaksas), Dakinis and Yatudhanas, Vetalas 
and Vinayakas, Pretas, Matrkas and Pisacas, Kusmandas and Brahmaraksasas. (10-11) 
Lord Siva (the Wielder of the Pinaka bow) discharged various kinds of missiles at Sri Krsna 
(the Wielder of the Sarnga bow); the latter (however) unconcernedly neutralized them all 
with counter-missiles. (12) Against Brahmastra He employed Brahmastra; against 
Vayavyastra He employed the Parvatastra: against the fiery missile He employed the 
Parjanyastra and against the PaSupatastra He employed His own (Narayanastra). (13) 
Then, stupefying with Jrmbhanastra Lord Sankara, who (forthwith) began to yawn, Sri 
Krsna (a scion of Sura) began to strike down the army of Banasura with His sword, mace 
and arrows. (14) Being beaten on all sides by the volleys of arrows discharged by 
Pradyumna, and emitting blood from every limb, Skanda escaped from the battle-field on 
the back of His peacock. (15) Struck by (Balarama's) pestle, Kumbhanda and Kapakarna 
also fell down. With their generals killed, Banasura's troops fled in all directions. (16)

fasittart ae FBI AUNSeMaU: | HOMagad BA Tet fata ATalenrL 1 V9 | 
ENP BNI aU: ws Ai waafeoot Wt st wed wreda: ec 
at fate wa ate arog: ian was eal WPA !k¢! 
TH let AM aM aan qisadel FT Goro io 
adedeaqa avaafies vest: | ams aaa frakoaearaadt Fer 128 |

Highly indignant to see his army being scattered, Bana, rushed towards Sri Krsna on the 
battle-field in a chariot, leaving Satyaki alone. (17) Drawing five hundred bows all at once, 
Banasura, who ran amuck on the battle-field, applied a pair of arrows to each. (18) Lord Sri 
Krsna (however) split all those bows at once and, striking down the charioteer and the horses 
as well as the chariot, blew His conch. (19) Bana's mother, Kotara by name, (now) stood 
naked with dishevelled hair before Sri Krsna with intent to save her son's life. (20) Making 
ita point not to look at the nude lady, Sri Krsna (the elder Brother of Gada) turned His face 
aside. Meanwhile Bana, who had been deprived of his chariot and had his bows broken,

retreated into the city. (21)

fanaa yam sand fierce serad deme cefva feet eat iel

aI ARO saat FI AGA AeA Aways FyNd yaTgTAt 1231

TR: aE «Awad aelied: | aes vit Wea sat: |

SUN EAlehal ASIA Weadiaties: 121 
On the host of Bhutas (genii) having been putto flight, the three-headed and three-legged

Jwara (the spirit presiding over fever and despatched by Lord Siva, who had now recovered 
from His stupefaction) rushed towards Sri Krsna (a scion of DaSsarha) as if burning the ten 
directions. (22) Beholding him, Sri Krsna (who was no other than Lord Narayana) sent forth 
His (own) Jwara and both the Jwaras, the one belonging to Lord Siva (the supreme Ruler of 
the universe) and the other belonging to Lord Visnu, began to grapple with each other. (23) 
Beaten with violence by the Jwara commanded by Lord Visnu and terrified not to find asylum 
‘anywhere else, the Jwara commanded by Lord Siva loudly screamed and, seeking shelter 
with Sri Krsna (the Ruler of the senses),glorified Him with joined palms (as follows). (24)

Teer ranusssanentnennannnnnnseeaned OSes 
ee : sav sara Att s,

aa wistdaihh wal dala aan wea

fafafeenieed ade sa sales SIAL!

aiel aa wd sila: eual ser AA so sie fawn: |

agra SSAA SAAT afer Wel 121

ARMAaeieaaaarAcart, Alege, fasta |

gama, seat RRA A: 1 RL

ass oA aM geet Weibwngeas satu

aad afeat asa at AA «= Alaareyseg: 1221

The Jwara said : | salute You, endowed (as You are) with infinite power, the Ruler (even) 
of the highest gods, the Soul of the universe, the one without a second, absolute 
Consciousness, the Cause of the appearance, subsistence and dissolution of the universe. 
comprising whatever there is, the most tranquil Brahma, who are (only) inferred (and not 
directly known) by the Vedas. (25) The Time-Spirit (which disturbs the equilibrium of the three 
Gunas), Destiny, Karma, Swabhava (the tendencies produced by the latter), the individual 
soul, the (five) subtle elements, the body, the vital breath, the ego, the evolutes (viz., the five 
gross elements and the eleven Indriyas), the subtle body (a combination of the aforesaid 
evolutes) and the process of mutual causation going on in a cycle between the Linga body 
and Karma as between a seed and the sprout—all this constitutes Your Maya (deluding 
potency). | take refuge in You, in whom the said Maya finds its negation. (26) Appearing in 
diverse forms, assumed by way of mere sport, You protect the gods and the pious, uphold 
the standards of morality that maintain the world order, and kill those who deviate from the 
path of virtue and live by violence. Your present descent (too) is intended to relieve the 
burden of the earth: (27) | stand scorched by Your radiance in the form of this fever, which 
is most terrible and hard to bear, and which, though mild (before), has grown (so) severe 
(now). Embodied beings undergo suffering only so long as they remain bound by desire and 
do not seek the soles of Your lotus-feet. (28)

fret seas aig a wate Wa! at at anfa Gare del aA Waa WAH 12S! 
SQMISAATAITS «Tet AIRES 1 UT WTR: STEN RISE 1301 
cet SAGHEAUT ATES: «A Upstate «FT 1881 
PATA SAU pas att | fers STAM, AeA Sa AAA: 132

SMa WTA Wa: | UeblqeHagqUser UAgaaaread 133 |

The glorious Lord said : "| am pleased with you, O three-headed one ! Let your fear of 
My Jwara cease (now). There willbe no more (cause of) fear from you to him who remembers 
this dialogue of ours." (29) Thus addressed (reassured) and bowing to Sri Krsna (the infallible 
Lord), the Jwara under the command of Lord Siva departed. Mounting a chariot in the 
meanwhile, Banasura returned (to the field of battle) to contend with Sri Krsna. (30) Highly 
enraged, the demon, who wielded various weapons in his thousand arms, then showered 
arrows on Sri Krsna (the Wielder of a discus), O protector of men! (31) While he was (thus) 
discharging missiles again and again the Lord with His discus, keen-edged like a raZOr; cut 
off his arms like the boughs of a tree. (32) (Even) as the arms of Bana were being lopped off, 
Lord Siva (the Source of the universe), who took compassion on His devotee, approached 
Sri Krsna (the Wielder of a discus) and submitted to Him (as follows). (33)

a ai wd Meraryatera famraartt « qeatft «ABI 
ere oe: ister: agigngdtar: | 
siasaa = aenfeert = are Ss ad qf 1301 
aia gd: fifasen aa oat a wait a asa | 
we 89 urifafeat «= quireaeactot after) L191

Sri Rudra prayed : Indeed You are the supreme effulgence lying hidden in the Veda 
(which is no other than the Supreme revealed as the Word of God) and known as Brahma 
(the Infinite), that men of purified intellect realize as all-pervading (like the sky) and 
absolute.(34) The firmamentis Your navel; fire, Your mouth; water, Your generative fluid; the 
celestial region, Your head; the quarters, Your ears; the earth, Your feet; the moon, Your 
mind; the sun, Your eye; myself, Your ego; the ocean, Your belly; and Indra (and the other 
guardians.of the sphere), Your arms. (35) Herbs and plants are the hair on Your body; clouds 
are Your (flowing) locks and Brahma (the creator) is Your intellect, Prajapati (the lord of 
creation) is Your organ of generation and Dharma (the god of virtue) is Your heart. Thus You 
are the Supreme Person with whom all the spheres are connected (as so many limbs). (36) 
O Lord of undiminished glory, You have taken this form for the vindication of virtue and 
advancement ofthe world. Endowed with power derived from You, we rule the seven regions 
(of the universe). (37) You are the one secondless, most ancient Person beyond the three 
states (brought about by Maya viz., the waking, dream and dreamless states), self-luminous, 
the Cause and Ruler (of all), Himself uncaused; yet, in order to reveal the diversities of the 
three Gunas, You appear through Your own Maya in divergentforms (such as those of gods, 
men, birds, beasts and various other beings). (38) Just as the sun gets concealed (in others’ 
eyes) by its own shadow (the clouds) and reveals the clouds as well as all other forms, even 
so, O Perfect One, self-luminous Yourself, You get as if covered by the Ego (which has its 
Origin in You) and yet make the Gunas and all beings, who are qualified by the Gunas, shine

(in Your light). (39) 
arena iect tera: aed | Sasa Fastht set gisele txot 
Saeaint oo weal «| Tee: | aN asia Act Gre Mla: 1k | 
aeat feast vel sre feria frdatsereatel famed as 182 
a we «= faaET Hage: | Male TARA 9 NASAA 1s3 | 
+ oma wierd wt wat =«(qecieidant 
permis «wet Samana wT Ba 
st | AAT farniisqardf TN MT ea | 
quent qq waa: wert am fe & cedt were: 14

a 
--@ ws 
a 
ae

(O Lord,) with their mind deluded by Your Maya people get attached to children, Wife 
house etc., and begin to sink and float in the ocean of misery. (40) He who, having obtaineg 
the human body (so graciously) granted by You, does not control his senses and Worshi 
Yourfeet, is no doubt pitiable creature who is deceiving himself. (41) O Lord, he who neglects 
You, the beloved Self, the Supreme Ruler, for the sake of sense-objects, which are just the 
reverse of You, (is a fool, who) swallows poison rejecting nectar. (42) Myself, Brahma (the 
creator) and the (other) gods and (all) sages of pure mind have taken refuge in You with oy; 
whole being, because You are our dearest soul and supreme Lord. (43) You are responsible 
for the appearance, continuance and dissolution of the universe, alike to everyone 
unperturbed, the beloved friend and deity, nay, the very Self of all. You are One without a 
second, the support of the worlds as also of the individual souls. O Lord, we adore You for 
release from the bondage of transmigration. (44) Lord, this Barrasura Is a beloved devotee 
of mine and is (much) liked by me; | have assured him of my protection. Therefore, (kindly) 
extend Your favour to him even as You did to (his great grandfather) Prahrada (the ruler of

the Daityas). (45) 
ATA ATA 
CI Wea: aM fa dal vad ae aafad aH Areaquifant ive 
saeisd «WATS AretaaISEL: | Nelela GW at A aeal A dara: ive 
CUA «NGG «eal aT Bled A eS YR Ge fd Ya: ix 
Tanisa wet: Rist waeresne: tude wad A Halsrmaisge: ise

The glorious Lord replied : O Worshipful One, We shall do whatever You have said and 
that which is pleasing to You. | have fully approved of what You have decided (about 
him).(46) (I know that) Banasura is a grandson of Virocana (Prahrada's son). | cannot kill him 
inasmuch as a boon has been granted by Me to Prahrada that no one born in his line would 
be killed by Me. (47) His arms have been cut off by Me only to curb his pride, and his huge 
army has been exterminated simply because it was a burden on the earth. (48) Four arms 
are left to him; they will be proof against age or destruction. He will be the foremost among

Your attendants. Though an Asura, he will henceforward have nothing to fear from any 
quarter. (49)

Sit oem Het sora fara: ise want dae aqaad ito! 
water «6 URtgqd «= Uae eAe A Ue eT at eaTgaifem: 1481 
Sst =| | eg at: UrefartAfercaere | 
facet Wg Menge ase: UR ectestieha: 142 |

Obtaining this assurance of security, the said demon saluted Sri Krsna with his head 
(bent low) and duly brought Aniruddha back together with his bride (Usa), placing them on 
a chariot. (50) (Thereupon) with Bhagavan Sankara's congratulation Sri Krsna departed 
placing in the van Aniruddha and his wife—who were finely dressed and fully adorned with 
ornaments—and were followed by an army consisting of one Aksauhini. (51) Sri Krsna 
entered His capital—artistically decorated with flags and ornamental arches, with its streets 
and quadrangles sprinkled with water—and was met by the citizens, His (own) relations an

Brahmanas, who came forth to receive Him with the sounding of conchs, drums an 
kettledrums. (52)

a WM PMlastt WO A PTL! Mala Maes A aS Bel Uta: 143! 
Set AA EPad AEM TRAC Seda SaAesee SeUeishreciaa aa Frefaaisena: 1631

; 4 ‘BO 
Dp eet er ahs TEN

SFI

(Pariksit !) he who, rising from his bed in

the morning, duly recalls the story of Sri Krsna's 
combat with Lord Sankara and His victory,

will never meet with discomfiture. (53)

Thus ends the sixty-third discourse entitled " Aniruddha brought back (to Dwaraka),” 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SITIES: 
PI-SSONSE CID

AA Aq: aipyaaseana:

Discourse LXIV

The story of king Nrga 
eh SAA 
wedded 89 UR gpa: | fred WPS AAP aa: | k | 
mifsen gat wa fafa: feurfter: seh Preah Gl aay: SAA! 2 | 
pond fiftd der fare: ae dent at ae qoehaa: 1 3 1 
casterda: ureleegat | afeterasfent: | are, We PUOMTATETecdeT: |X | 
rarreareraat era feearrer: | cteatstere aT at cater A cea | 4 | 
a osMmenatigst = fage A: PHOT | 
—) BU GISZUIaaR | & | 
ures fagafe afer wag frend agra: | 
ara owe atweedt cat aT A! 9 | 
anfat at adit ado 9 aanfidisedce: quel 
sree fafactat at aaa 4: MARA aA! < |

sri iksi i Sri Krsna's younger brother), 
an again : Pariksit, on a certain day, Gada (Sri Krsr )

Preah erie Caru, Bhanu and other Yadava princes went to play i pees

i 3 hey felt thirsty and went to a well in sea 
Having sported there for a pretty long time t ral elterd ieee ae

the well dry and noticed a strange anima (fa en was 
Shanrelsergueee a rock Their mind was struck with wonder at Ee sob ee ee 
a eedee i d attempted to take it out o 
th thongs of leather and ropes of fibres an lO tak . 
SrLaseinceeell eae they (went to Sri Krsna and) bee” ee ein ee = 
an Sa Ali lmighty Creator and Protecto 
Bhagavan Sri Krsna of lotus-like eyes, the almighty ¢ Eva ELIE eicteicce 
). he animal and lifted it up with His left hand by way of play.

laa Sania enOnE Lord, the animal forthwith cast off the form of a chameleon ae 
ae mapetanied into a celestial being adorned with wondrous jewels, clothes and es Is 
and ed of a charming hue like that of molten gold. (6) Although He knew the aes 
of his OBER the form of a chameleon, yet in order to make the facts known to the peop ie 
StiKr “th BeeGuet of Liberation) asked that shining person, "O highly blessed ane w : 
are ert: ssed of this excellentform ? | surely reckon you to be a great god. (7) T ae 
what Ke ne Were ou condemned to this state ? Surely you did not deserve it, O 3 y 
virtue aati We ae keen to know your history. If you consider it proper to inform Us abou

Dis. 64

MRR tee 
it, please tell Us all about you." (8) 
Sy SAAT 
sa HU ays: Heard i aed =osforaete «= femileatehaefar 1 e | 
Sri Suka resumed : (Pariksit !) questioned in these polite words by Sri Krsna, who js 
possessed of infinite forms, King Nrga bowed to the Lord of Laksmi with his crown brilliant 
as the sun, and submitted (as follows). (9)

JN AA Atsiseteatndsa: Ta lagen ae aA Huma igo, 
fe a asfafed ara adeyrerenfaron: | areeaedaant «= aatisenfy data 129 
aaa: faad yialaat fefa ana: | aaet aves dadkeel MI TM: 1221 
Tahkaateteutt: Aewaronadsn: mHfaret SATST: | 
Qalsial SARE: Aa GROAN calaey 1231 
Boge WUrattoaag sat: MlacHerayat HeaAAAa: | 
a: Aeitelaeraeaasa: set qaxat fesagasa: 1261 
TMyfewaadaseter: al: AeA RAM SAAT: | 
ama wit uteseq wis a aad wa giaieu 
Nrga said : | am aruler of men, Nrga by name, son of Ikswaku, O Lord ! My name might 
have reached Your ears, if the names of donors were (ever) mentioned (to You). (10) O Lord, 
what is there unknown to You, the Witness of the mind of all beings ? Your vision remains 
uninterrupted by time, yet! shall narrate my story to You in obedience to Your command. (11) 
(Lord !) | gave away to Brahmanas as many cows as there are particles of sand on the earth, 
(nay,) as many as there are stars in the heavens and as many as rain-drops (falling on 
earth).(12) They were all milch-cows, young and good-natured, beautiful in form and of good 
breed, tawny in colour. | got them all with well-earned money. They had their calves with 
them. Their horns were plated with gold and their hoofs with silver. They were all decorated 
with silks, garlands and ornaments. (13) Adorning with clothes etc., the best of youthful 
Brahmanas, who were even-minded and possessed of noble qualities and character, who 
came of a family suffering from want and who were pledged to truth, noted for their austerities 
and generous in imparting the knowledge of the Vedas (to their students), | used to give those 
cows to them. (14) | also gave away a number of oxen, lands, gold, houses, horses: 
elephants, girls with maid-servants, (piles of) sesamum seeds, silver, beds, clothes, jewels,

household articles and chariots. (Besides these) | performed (many) sacrifices and carried 
out several works of public utility. (15)

ned fame wet ant meat aepfaga a a war aa fama 126! 
a qaart deat qsrart wai aqinafa sf am A aaarfata vl 
fat fact aned: earefetereat | Mar erat aA AswaE WA: 1 RC 
rpg fast erdgreaprea a1 Tet wat MAB areerer weer 188 
Hamer . frgenastd: | aed Al Heo wart faasqet 120! 
We Sites & Usa SP AI Tareas «4 aat 128 
Wife 89 areieidt «= amermiada )«6oupere «6 Ra TEA 122 
qa aay Yaa ste Jot AA aR are ech ued Gener ara: 122!

is. 64 J ‘BOOK'TEN > or 
{seaneROMUReRNewsnNeeneneNteenseexensaesNenee riaccarneuacss.s 393 
Wr Be Be Ke Be Ke Be Be He Ke He Ke HEA Be OM Hr He

4 CaM Ye eit me ua a: eae geet ua mt 1ev! 
BESS “SS Wt Se here | aaeratenia ferent acaestaRia: 12u 1 
A St eet we fersisfarmer: orem attat: safegenereteeer: | 
MAGNET TSE UE we gE want: IRI 
eat STAT Tere eT aE CNM WWAiHeAeAs 129 | 
aprile A PT ai tamil wi ae are aad yard AERIAL 1221 
wt = WaMTETs WASATAeS | POTA aTEa Atat wad AA: 12e1

(On a certain day,) a cow belonging to a holy Brahmana (who never accepted any gift 
and was devoted to austerities) Strayed and mingled with my cattle and, ignorant of the fact, 
| gave It away to some (other) Brahmana. (16) While it was being led away (by the latter), 
the real owner saw it and said to the Brahmana, " This is mine !" The Brahmana, who had 
received itas a gift from me, said, " This is mine; for King Nrga has given it to me." (17) Both 
the Brahmanas, bent on establishing their respective claims, brought their dispute to me. 
One of them said, * You gave it to me." The other said, "If this is a fact, you must have stolen 
the cow.” | was confounded to hear what they said. (18) Placed on the horns of a dilemma, 
| tried to conciliate both (the Brahmanas) and said, "| shall give you one lakh of excellent 
cows; please give this over to me. (19) | am your devoted servant. May you be pleased to 
forgive this fault committed unwittingly by me and save me from this embarrassing situation, 
which will lead me to dirty hell." (20) The owner of the cowsaid, "Oking!| willinno case accept 
the offer made by you," and (abruptly) went away. The other (Brahmana also) departed 
saying, " (In exchange for this you offer me a lakh of cows, but) | am notinclined to take even 
ten thousand other cows." (21) O God of gods, O Lord of the universe, in the meanwhile (on 
my death), | was taken by the messengers of Yama (the god of retribution) to his abode. 
There Yama inquired of me, "O king, would you first reap the consequences of your evil 
deeds, or enjoy the fruit of your meritorious acts ? | do not see any limit to the charities and 
other virtues practised by you nor to the glorious life that awaits you (as their result)." (22-23) 
| replied, "O shining one, | shall first reap the consequences of my evil deeds.” (Instantane- 
Ously) the god of Death said, " Fall (then)", and falling from there, O Lord, | found myself 
transformed into a chameleon. (24) O Krsna, a servant of the Brahmanas and liberal in my 
gifts, | was devoted to You and ever craved for a direct vision of You. It is therefore that my 
memory of the past has not been lost even today. (25) O Lord, You are the Supreme Self 
contemplated and realized in their pure heart by the masters of Yoga through the eye of the 
Upanisads. | therefore wonder how You, who are beyond sense-perception, came here 
directly within my sight, whose reason Is blinded by the sufferings of various kinds; for You 
are visible to him alone whose release from the bondage of transmigration is near. (26) O 
God of gods, O Protector of cows, O Supreme Person, Ruler of the universe, O most glorious 
and infallible Lord, O undecaying One, O Narayana (the support of all Jivas), O Hrsikesa 
(prompter of the senses), O Krsna, (pray,) give me leave to go to my celestial abode. O Lord, 
Wherever | may be, may my mind ever dwell in Your feet. (27-28) O Creator of all, O 
Changeless One possessed of infinite energy (in the shape of Maya), hail to You. O Krsna, 
O Vasudeva (the support of all creatures), O Master of all Yogas, | bow (again and again)

to Y 
oe eS) afiaer UY VIET Ser | Sta TATRA FIL 1 Zo |

saat a 
d the Lord, touched His feet with his head, and with the

ing went roun ; 
seed BE atin an excellent aerial car while all men stood looking on. (30)

_

Be Se We Ve We Wee We We We We Bee We We ee He He Hee He ee Wee ee We ee tearesregtp lS. 64 
Life 
Xt try,

gem: Uns we War saatye: | meadal eat Uae Te 13 9

ai at sae qepradarie i asieerst feeqa uric 139 |

até gems ua fas ae offer sere fe fas skp are fefaferfie 133 |

faha fauramt alee: sereafaige wae cet seeforan: ay,

Ia wiser aad faaadi fr ashraad set are aioe: 136)

Yefa aad: vida wadagierca: | fast EaqdiAt aera Heftarz 1301

Ta UsEeMA Aedissafawgen: | HPsitaey wert searaethr: 1321

Wat Wendi a adam wa a:isadaeerin fasrat srad aft: 13¢1

TH AAA Yale Ad WeaANeAI AT: | MUA Wale Taryghssea: Iso |

fat qarranta qa gga Ai ad ae WA al AWEpEd Mea: 121

ame som fasaanie aalfed: | aM aaa Fa a Aisa A a ave 1x2!

Senet «Ue «CRA sitet a OTT sTeoritfia iva

wa fasnet war Heed skalene: Ulead: aderart fade froma vx!

(On the departure of King Nrga), Lord Sri Krsna, glorious son of Devaki, the Lover of 
Brahmanas and an embodiment of virtue, addressed His people (as follows) with a view to 
instructing those born of the Ksatriya class. (31) "The property of a Brahmana, even solittle, 
when misappropriated, cannot be digested even by one who is as powerful as Fire, much 
less by a king who considers himself a ruler out of (false) conceit. (32) | do not consider the 
most deadly poison to be a poison; for it has an antidote. A Brahmana's property is the real 
poison; for (once itis misappropriated) there is no remedy for it in the world. (33) Poison kills 
him (alone) who swallows it; fire can be put out with water. (But) the fire produced by the Aran 
(a piece of wood used in kindling fire by attrition) of a Brahmana's property burns a whole 
family with its roots (the forbears). (84) The property of aman made use of without permission 
brings ruin to three generations (viz., the man who uses it as well as his parents and sons); 
if, however, it is wilfully taken and enjoyed by force, it will bring disaster to ten generations 
before and ten generations after the enjoyer. (35) Foolish kings who, blinded by their royal 
fortune, covet and enjoy a Brahmana's property, which is terrible as hell, do not realize to 
what an abysmal depth they will have to fall. (86) Those despotic rulers who deprive liberal- 
minded Brahmanas, having a large family, of their property and means of livelihood, have 
to suffer with their descendants the tortures of the hell called Kumbhipaka (where the sinners 
are fried in boiled oil) for as many years as there are particles of earth moistened with thel! 
tears while they weep. (37-38) Nay, he who deprives a Brahmana of his livelinood whether 
given by himself or by another, lives as a worm born in the ordure for sixty thousand 
years.(39) (It is My desire that) the property ofa Brahmana should never find its way to MY 
treasury; (for) men who (even) covet such property forfeit their longevity, suffer defeat at the 
hands of their enemies, lose their kingdom and are born as dreadful serpents (afte! 
death).(40) O My kinsmen, do no harm to a Brahmana even if he is guilty of an offence. Even 
if he assaults you or pours abuse on you, salute him daily (in return).(41) Justas | bowto them

with vigilance three times a day, so too do you. Whosoever does otherwise will recelve 
punishment from Me. (42) A Brahmana's property, if misappropriated, brings about withou

3394

is. 65 ] : BOOK T 39 
SEeAeR TNT TLANT ETT C TAR RANA TE neA FA RENAE AeA ARE REET RANEneRnAEAnearawanmeTeNe 
fail the downfall of the man who does so, just as the Brahmana's cow brought about the 
downfall of this king (Nrga), even though he was ignorant of the fact that he had misappro-

priated. (43) Having thus exhorted the people of Dwaraka, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the purifier 
of all the worlds, retired to His palace. (44) | ue

Thus ends the sixty-fourth discourse, entitled " The Story of Nrga, " in the latter 
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BIg Gazapaniseara:

Discourse LXV

Baladeva triumphantly diverts the river Yamuna from its course 
Mh Jaa

aus: HEN Wa ware: | Teleqetechvs: saat Tanner 2 |

uftgmfantenvantantuifiae aiwatstiar ftacaraifiikfraea: 1 2 1

fat a: uf aené ast snd: | santergmieea Aa: fafragsio: 1 3 |

Taqgis fafiac afadifiafed: | aaa amet serene: | x |

aqua Wed eelecsefets: 1 fast Qaaed ase: ward: 14 1

UIs «8ey Sa Ofte aAooMa dedhaeena: | & |

aia wea Wa aad Haedad | Had Sea Al WA Fa aadiadr: 1 © 1

fsa drat a: Uroy fsa AeA: Best: | Hea fasta fos fos at aanfsrm: 1 ct 
Sri Suka began again : The blessed Lord Balarama, O jewel among the Kurus ! who 
eagerly longed to see all friends and relations (in Vraja), drove (on one occasion from 
Dwaraka) in his chariot to Gokula, ruled over by Nanda. (1) (On reaching there) He was 
embraced by the cowherds as well as by the cowherdesses (of Vraja), who had been long 
yearning (for His sight). Bowing to his (foster-) parents (mother Yasoda and Nanda), he was 
cheered with blessings and addressed as follows:—(2) "O Bala (a scion of Dasarha), You 
are the Lord of the universe; may You with Your younger Brother (Sri Krsna) protect us long!” 
(Then) placing him on their lap and embracing him, they bathed him with tears (of joy) from 
their eyes. (3) Bowing to the elderly among the Gopas with due ceremony, he was bowed 
to by the younger ones. He duly met (all) the Gopas according to their age, intimacy and 
relation to himself, cutting jokes with them, taking them by the hand and so on. When he had 
reposed himself and was comfortably seated, (all) the Gopas gathered round him. They had 
renounced all their worldly pleasures as well as the enjoyments of heaven, nay, Moksa (itself) 
for the sake of Sri Krsna of lotus-like eyes. Inquired about their welfare, they made (similar) 
inquiries about the health of their kinsmen (the Yadus) in a voice choked with emotion (as 
follows:—)(4—6) "Balarama, are all our kith and kin (at Dwaraka) well ? You are now married 
and are blessed with children, O Rama ! Do you remember us (now and then) ? (7) By good

luck the wicked Karnsa has been killed and our kinsmen luckily redeemed (from his tyranny). 
Happily (enough) you have (either) killed or vanquished your enemies and taken shelter in

Re Re ewe We Be Re REC Ree Se Se Me Ree BE EN Mer Vee MOK We Be Ree Re Ke Ke He We Me Ree Br Be Hee Be He We Be We Be We He Hr He We He enw seeds: 6 
{Bc Hey, 
Wr

a fortified place (like Dwaraka)." (8) 
Wal Fa: Use Weenie: | afer Ga HP: qreisrtace: | e | 
caf Sit at SRL frat wt a a: sree Ae BE HATTA 
orf at SRASHTHATAa AElyst: 10! 
at fat aed Ud, GAM ge | eet SS STR GRAS ASA TA 188 
a a: Ga: Uesr wa: Ufoaatec: | Ha YZ meat eld srglaa afar ies 
ei Y Jevnafeaeat aa: para gen: ahaa: | 
Jet a fernae 9 qalemactateygfaaceng: 122 
fe AMAT Wea: HM: Head: | aereathafear Hret ale Tat aa A: 1 ex 
i alisiiead are aifeanina saukgs weal wea: fea: eu 
The Gopis felt (greatly) honoured by the sight at close quarters of Balarama and 
(approaching him,) smilingly asked him, "Is Sri Krsna, the beloved of the ladies of Mathura, 
happy ? (9) Does he (ever) remember his relations and friends, or (even) father and mother? 
Will he come here even once to see his mother ? Does Sri Krsna of long arms remember our 
constant devotion to him ? (10) For his sake, O Lord, we forsook our mother and father, 
brothers, husband, children, sisters and (all other) relations, so hard to renounce, O scion 
of Dasarha ! (11) Yet, O Powerful one, he left us, who were so beloved of him, in a moment, 
breaking asunder all ties of affection. (We could stop him if we would, but) how could women 
fail to put faith in his honeyed words ?" (12) (One Gopi said,) "How could the city women, who 
are shrewd (enough), believe the words of that fickle-minded and ungrateful soul ?° Another 
Gopi said, "Sri Krsna is a past-master in the art of conversation. His winsome smiles and 
(loving) glances must have kindled love in their breast and overpowered them. Hence they 
put faith in his words." (13) (A third Gopi said,) "O Gopis, whatis the use of talking about him? 
Take up some other topic for conversation. If he can spend his time without us, we should 
also be able to spend our time without him." (14) Thus talking (among themselves) and

recalling Sri Krsna's laughter, His talk, His winsome glances, (graceful) gait and loving 
embraces, the women wept (bitterly).(15)

UgieM: = POT eRe: | ARTS Wa, Aqrernifaa: 1261 
a Wa A Dera wMeada Aiwa: aor wa Ail cerraSt 12! 
Wiatsnoryy AMSA | aqaGat «WW Alaa wlda: 122! 
aeU cat arevil gqaenleddi vad da ad Wa wueemaraad 128 
aq Wl AQ aed ae: | sree wean: ai at 1zol 
SOTA araMecga: |aqy Stated aitet 9 aefagmetet: 12°! 
angisa AM ata A dea | fwd faapearsist Besayeas, 122 | 
a sega BA semisitie: i feat aaaaaea ad sant ac: | 
Sara Sora Hiatt faaend Z 1231

ud ad amada aaa FAISSEAT | AST CAT TOMA AAMT HTATATLOTU_ 1 2S | 
Wa fica ait aqat aerenaisara uieat art ofan oreada 124! 
UH WA Agate A a da fama ade faye andi waa: ud 126! 
um Ma Wad Wes Asad apd fag woAt waco 121

7

Skilled in the various methods of conciliation, Lord Sankarsana pacified those Gopis with

Sri Krsna s messages, which were most pleasing to their heart. (16) Balarama spent there 
the two months (of the vernal season, viz.,) Caitra and Vaigakha, entertaining the Gopis 
during the nights. (17) At that time a gentle wind wafted the fragrance of (the blooming) lilies, 
the gardens on the banks of the Yamuna were illumined by the rays of the full moon, and Sri 
Balarama sported in the midst of crowds of Gopis. (18)The celestial beverage called Varuni, 
sent by Varuna (the deity presiding over the waters), and flowing from the hollow of a tree, 
filled the whole forest with its smell. (19) Perceiving the smell of the stream of honey borne 
by the wind, Balarama went up to the tree and drank of it alongwith those women. (20) His 
exploits being sung by the Gopis (who surrounded Him), Balarama roamed about intoxicated 
through the woods with eyes Swimming in intoxication. (21) Adorned with a wreath of flowers 
and a necklace called Vaijayanti, (nay,) with an €ar-ring shining in one of His ears, and with 
His lotus-like face bright with smiles and decked with the dewy drops of sweat, the intoxicated 
Lord summoned the Yamuna to come near Him so as to enable Him to sport in her water. 
Taking Him to be intoxicated, the Yamuna (however) paid no heed to His command and did 
not come, whereupon Balarama got enraged, they say, and, dragging the river with the point 
of His plough, said, “O sinful one, since you have disobeyed Me and donotcome even though 
called by Me, | shall make you taste the fruit of your waywardness. With,the end of My plough, 
| shall split you into a hundred streams." (22—24) Thus threatened (by Balarama), the 
goddess presiding over the Yamuna fell on His feet and trembling with fear, said:— (25) “O 
Rama, the delighter of all, O long-armed one, | had forgotten Your strength, and was ignorant 
of Your transcendent glory. O Lord of the universe, (I now realize that) by a mere part 
manifestation (Sesa) of Yours, the whole universe is supported. O almighty Lord, O Soul of 
the universe, who are (so) fond of (Your) devotees, | take refuge in You; kindly (excuse me 
for my error and) give me freedom to flow." (26-27)

ad Sse AAA afadt war ae: fase wes aif: migiahaae zc! 
art 0 feet | afmeneditofenfrarat | yours Heretfor act cori: At AST 12S I 
aftral area fe Aer SS St ogd foal Alex Fa ANT: 1Z01 
sen eqead I GissHpad | aoe at Parada te 1281

wi wal fren amt wea TMi aa i waenfageere «= ATeeisistatfaanr 1321 
GSaeanseare: 1&4!

(Thus) entreated by her, the Lord Balarama thereupon released the Yamuna and entered

its waters alongwith the Gopis even as a leader of elephants would enter a stream (to sport) 
with his mates. (28) When having sported to His heart's content, Sri Balarama rose from the 
waters (of the Yamuna) Kanti, (an embodiment of Laksmi) presented Him with two pieces 
of cloth of blue colour, valuable ornaments and a shining necklace (of gold). (29) Putting on 
the two pieces of cloth, wearing the necklace and artistically decked with other gold 
Ornaments and painted with sandal-paste, He shone like Airavata (the white elephant of 
Indra, the lord of celestials). (80) Pariksit, even to this day the Yamuna is seen flowing 
through the course it took after being dragged by Balarama, as if proclaiming as a matter of 
fact the strength of Balarama (whois possessed of infinite prowess). (31) Charmed ae va 
Sweet qualities of the damsels of Vraja, Balarama lost all sense of time. In this way all the

nights of His enjoyment in Vraja passed as If they were (but) one night. (32)

Thus ends the sixty-fifth discourse entitled " Baladeva triumphantly diverts the course of the 
Yamuna," in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. Br

PE SSS

BA FeaaA sea:

Discourse LXVI

Paundraka and others killed

| My SAT 
Tc |OCTA COC UAS HTTIUfada | alaealselMeaM ad Hora safes 2 1 
a alaeal wWamadut safe: ist sedi weds sree 2 | 
ad A Metre: Horserace | SRHlal AM Aet AN Aespclsqat: | 3 | 
ad shade Med TAI HM BAe Weterceaci ¥ | 
aldcaisadiutisetchh Wa A AM: 1 BMqHae a q Mensa agi & | 
aie aaaidel Alene faut aad | cals at a aut at aa ate AaTearL | «I

Sri Suka began again : Pariksit, when Sri Balarama had gone to Nanda's Vraja, 
Paundraka, the ruler of Karissa, sent a messenger to Sri Krsna, saying, "| am Vasudeva’! 
Steeped as he was in ignorance, he was flattered by stupid people, who said, " You are the 
glorious Lord Vasudeva, protector of the universe, who have appeared on earth (for its 
protection)", and the fellow began to look upon himself as Vasudeva (the immortal Lord). (1-2) 
Just as a foolish boy set up by other boys as a king in sport would behave, so did the dull- 
witted fellow, unaware of the reality of Bhagavan SriKrsna, whose ways are inscrutable, sent 
his messenger to Dwaraka. (3) The messenger came to Dwaraka and delivered (the 
following) message of his king to Lord Sri Krsna of lotus-like eyes, who was seated in the 
council hall. (4) “Il alone am Vasudeva, and there is no other. | have come down on earth to 
bless all beings with my grace. You have falsely assumed that name, which you should now 
give up. (5) O scion of Yadu, abandon all my marks that you have adopted through (sheer) 
folly and come to me for shelter, or you should give me battle."(6)

My SavaA

wet dguivd uvenenediaa: stead: at seaduleqeed sv |

eae aad SSL Unga i scad ye faalia adaada fame | ¢ |

qa oder 86 eeadda: | afrera eae Ufa =RUl WAM! 8 |

_ Fa qed att | det! ents TEM saitqasrm | 120! 
ore Suka continued : Hearing this bragging of the dull-witted Paundraka, King Ugrasen@ 
and (all) others who were present in the assembly at that time loudly laughed. (7) When thell 
jokes were over, the Lord replied through the messenger (as follows): " O foolish one, ! shall 
(no doubt) discharge My (discus and other) insignia on you and (all) those associates c

yours, encouraged by whom you brag in this manner. (8) O fool, hidin ith which 
those lips (with W 
you are bragging) you will (then) lie down.dead on the ground, ets, buzzards:

vultures and Pines pie ts) birds, and (instead of giving shelter to Me,) you will serve 
as subsistence for dogs." (9) The messenger (returned) and conveyed the whole of this retort

to his master. Sri Krsna too (for His part) mounted His chariot and invaded Kaéi 
= , | asi (for the ruler 
of Karusa was then staying with his friend, the king of Kasi). (10)

augers = AgEINTAUENA TERA: | statfeoieat ay arent yee BTL 182 |

ee) ea teatatiia Uiisiatelsaarya | aaltfeonPaferahacaze, Gloss Bh: 192 
ag eferrarans sttacarelresaray | fasqrot ALeTTAUT STOTT 123 |

TAA vit car TEST | SARA ChTA(Husear_ | 2X |

ae gsi ae Plead at Ae ted farera yet eh: 1241

qertas: ae: aeafesrerdiat: | aifete: ufgdtattt: secret efetiegt 
PUR aealuscnentfaneralees Teresa kaa | 
Talerrnefaeade yet aM BA SYR YW Wil: 1201

ameter aeaalignentsrceptunaavSd: 
amt fad eae cAanmnelsd = yuditateaury 1c!

Having received the news of Sri Krsna's invasion, Paundraka, the great car-warrior, 
hastily sallied forth from the city with (an army consisting of) two Aksauhints; and his friend, 
the king of Kasi, followed him as a commander in the rear, O king, with (a subsidiary force 
of) three Aksauhinis. Paundraka could be (easily) distinguished by his conch, discus, 
sword and mace, the Sarnga bow and (the mark of) Srivatsa, bore a Kaustubha gem and 
was decked with a wreath of sylvan flowers. (11—13) He was clad in two pieces of yellow 
silk and bore the design of Garuda on his ensign, wore a priceless crown and brilliant 
crocodile-shaped ear-rings. (14) All this outfit was so artificial that he looked like an actor 
on the stage. Finding Paundraka closely imitating Him in dress, Lord Sri Krsna heartily 
laughed. (15) (Now) the enemies assailed Sri Krsna with their pikes, maces, iron clubs, 
lances, spears, darts, bludgeons, swords, PattiSas and arrows. (16) Like the fire raging at 
the time of universal destruction, which destroys all creatures severally, Sri Krsna utterly 
crushed with His mace, sword, discus and shafts that (joint) army of Paundraka and the 
king of Kasi, consisting (as it did) of elephants, chariots, horses and footmen. (17) The 
(whole) field was strewn with chariots and (dead bodies of) horses, elephants, men, 
donkeys and camels— cut to pieces by the discus of Sri Krsna—and looked as fearful as 
the place where Sankara carries on His deadly dance of destruction (at the end of a Kalpa).

Its sight afforded delight to the brave. (18) 
arene Ulosd Bite wt: dogs ae AAPL! GaTAAT ATT AITRTTOgSTA F 1k8 I 
corres A Uae BAT FAA! a BOT cise aie Ah Wy 1201

sft freer firtatiieheitqer loge! Rrisqae gH aaurat aa fir: 1221

ae aera: TNRST Soper Ube: | ata arfrgat erHrerrentie: 1221

ud mafcr gar wuss wae eft anernferd «— feeeifarenerya: 1291

a fier - UA R UW BEd Paalsvad 12x! 
Now Sri Krsna addressed Paundraka, (as follows) : " Hullo Paundraka, you asked Me

through the mouth of your messenger to give up the weapons (I carry on My person). I shall

accordingly discharge them on you. (1 9) | shall compel you to give up My name, which has

been falsely assumed by you, O ignorant one. You asked Me to take refuge in you. | would

Sl yess nce te nanastasstensseensesrsscasannnneenaecens! Dis. 66 
Luts 2

do so today, if | avoided a clash with you.” (20) Reproaching him thus, Sri k; 
shattered the chariot of Paundraka with His sharp arrows and lopped off his heaq ee 
His discus, (even) as Indra would knock down wings of a mouniain with his thunderbolt on 
Sri Krsna likewise severed the head of the king of Kasi from his body with His aro 
and caused it to (fly and) fall into the city of Kasi even as the wind would carry ae 
3 lotus-bud. (22) Thus putting an end to (both) Paundraka and his ally (the king of Kae 
who had been nursing enmity towards Him, Lord Sri Krsna returned to Dwaraka i 
Siddhas singing His stories, sweet as nectar. (23) Pariksit, Paundraka ever used ne 
think intensely of the Lord. All the ties of his Karma were cut asunder by this; and E 
he (constantly) remembered the Lord’s Form, when imitating Him, he attained the sare 
Form as His (after death). (24)

fr: ulacter Wight weHvscy | fafke oes at aeaihic Biggar Se: 1 | 
Ug: aaligradatear Atee: GAA: | UGA A SAT UShL Aer ATS WTSSL! VE | 
aahaurerest Ua: Hat dentate fag: 1 Fea figemt areretatt fg: 1 V1 
SOIT «AUTEN «eae | Ualeroitscarara | UAT START RI 
Widistaqe wade ame wa: i figeqattad a at aeitftanq 2<1 
atau utar ae: anges i afranfaertat a aia: waetda:1 301

aett ste tere HuSMaaasiaur: | AAA TaIVA ASN geet: 1321 
aelupetqushonea: | sufeted ofacnutt wit faepaftafora sacr1! 33

Wasa eT HMIAaiaary | BSaMae Gal Ydgitent Wael fagt: 1 3vl 
CARTAN STA ghahinea: | faciet dag: Ad aacle AMT Atl 341

aa: Wart vient Wad Wag: | Ale alle fAcicnyt Aet: Weed: WAI 3E | 
TA Mridaia geal tat A Mea | Ua: WMeeS A Ae cladeaet! 301

Seeing a human head with ear-rings lying at the entrance of the palace (in Kasi), the 
people wondered whose head it was, and how it came. (25) Recognizing (at last) that it 
was the head of their king (the ruler of Kasi), the queens, sons and relations of the king 
and the citizens wailed loudly saying, “O lord, O master, O king, alas, we are (all) 
undone.” (26) The king’s son, Sudaksina, performed the funeral rites to his father and 
resolved in his mind that he would repay the debt to his father by killing his slayer. With 
the help of his priest Sudaksina began to worship Sankara with the utmost concentration. (27-28) 
Pleased with his worship at Kasi, Lord Sankara offered him a boon. Sudaksina replied, : 
Lord, (if You are pleased with me) tell me by what means | can kill the slayer 
of my father. That is the only boon | seek from You.” (29) Sankara said, “ With the 
help of Brahmanas worship the sacred fire called Daksinagni, according to the Abhicara 
method (employed for malevolent purposes). That fire, accompanied by Pramathas 
(the attendants of Sankara) will accomplish your purpose (even) as a priest appointed 
to carry out one’s wishes. It will, however, be powerless against one who is devote 
to Brahmanas.” Thus commanded (by Lord Sankara), Sudaksina did as he was bid, 
observing strict discipline and directing the Abhicara force against Sri Krsna. (30-31) AS 
soon as the Abhicara was over, the god of fire emerged in person from the sacrificial plt 
assuming a very terrible form. His locks, moustaches and beard looked red like heaté 
copper; his eyes emitted Sparks of fire. (32) His (large and protruding) teeth and threatening 
eyebrows gave him a stern appearance; he was licking the corners of his mouth

Dis-.66 1 mwarss BOOK TEN 401

St Beir tr irirtrictririrtririce 
FNRI EAR BB Be rb et ef Src

with his tongue; his naked body threw out flames of fire. Flourishing a trident (in his hand)

he strode the earth with legs as tall as a palm tree. Making the earth tremble under his feet 
and burning the cardinal points, he rushed towards Dwaraka, followed by spectress. (33-34) 
At the sight of that AbhicaAra fire rushing towards them, the people of Dwaraka were all 
frightened, even as the deer get frightened at the sight of a forest conflagration. (85) They 
ran in consternation to the Lord, who was playing at dice in His court, and said. " O Ruler of 
the three worlds, protect us, O protect us, from the fire thatis about to consume the city." (36) 
Hearing of this distress of His people, and seeing (the cause of) their fear, Sri Krsna (the 
protector of His devotees) laughed loudly and heartily and said, "Do not be afraid, | shall 
protect you (from this danger)." (37) |

Mat Pat ueat fry: fag afseraet urefet UmANAIL 1321 
ad Geletfeniet geet | Seaceert «= See 
acs GH aeviiser Veet ath Aperanaranead 13° | 
Pune: whet: A wig az wae frac: | 
antreat uate gefant d akdwn anesd waaishtan: vol 
ah =a fanieeias anu agameann | 
ESE RUERGT DIST AAACAMATAM OTA 1S | 
qa aN aai fawitse gear ya: urelgoried HwOTenfysendT: 1s I 
Lord Sri Krsna is a witness of all that happens within and without all creatures. He at once 
came to know that it was the Krtya (a malevolent force) of Lord Siva (released from Kasi). 
He commanded His discus (SudarSana), that stood by His side, to nullify the Krtya. (38) 
Brilliant like millions of suns, and flaming forth like the fire of universal destruction, the discus 
SudarSana, the (favourite) missile of the Lord, lighted up heaven and earth as well as the 
intervening region and the (four) quarters with its lustre and forthwith subduéd the Abhicara 
fire. (9) Repulsed by the force of Sri Krsna's weapon, the magic fire known by the name of 
Krtya had its force blunted and, turning back, returned to Kasi and burnt up Sudaksina and 
his priests, by whom it had been released.(40) Following the Krtya, Sudarsana, the discus 
of Sri Krsna, entered Kasi and, reducing the whole city to ashes alongwith its high towers, 
assembly halls, houses, market-places, big gates, attics, granaries, treasuries, the stalls for 
elephants, horses and chariots and dining halls, returned to Dwaraka and stood once more 
by the side of Sri Krsna, who did everything as a matter of sport. (41-42) 
qa vUdearaa SqUSCHaAL | Aaa AT AOA, Teas: Ted 1x31 
sft serrad HEM URASe Sfecar | CTSA SATA WeSeeaet AMA sesteaHisea: 16! 
The man who hears attentively, or relates, the story of this exploit of the glorious Lord (Sri 
Krsna) is completely rid of all sins. (43)

xty-sixth di itled " d others killed (by Sri Krsna)", 
Thus ends the sixty-sixth discourse entitled " Paundraka an 2 : TSI 
in the par of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,

otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31g BAANpaasezara:

Discourse LXVII 
Dwivida killed (by Balarama)

WHAT 
ase Mga Wregqnd: | SAAT Fed Hada WY: 1g |

King Pariksit submitted : Lord Balarama is possessed of infinite glory; His Form ang 
virtues are unfathomable, His deeds are wonderful. | long to hear more of Him—what other 
feats He performed. (1)

Ser tr try,

MHyh Savraq 
Tea we aise fea aa am: | qilaataa: sa wen Fee atlar 2 | 
GQ: Hsu Hea ama wefagaq Gers weer aledesTy | 2 |

lad SAA eager aster SI, APTGAHMON ASTHSOMASATL | & |

SAAS pal AAA aeSp aM, Ad We: | & |

USa aaa Eq: eaves a: | Mifare araenado: Uarennia alent © |

OW mr fargdy gas gofea: | get yoo ta fi waa aati c 
Sri Suka replied : There was a certain monkey, Dwivida by name. He was a friend of 
Naraka, a counsellor of Sugriva and the powerful brother of Mainda. (2) He made havoc of 
the country by setting fire to and burning towns, villages, mines and cowherds' stations with 
a view to clearing his debt to his friend (by wreaking vengeance on his enemy). (3) 
Sometimes he pulled out hills and smashed with them whole territories, especially the 
territory of Anarta, where lived Sri Krsna, the Slayer of his friend.(4) Possessing (as he did) 
the strength of ten thousand elephants, the monkey now and then took his stand in mid- 
ocean and splashed such a volume of water with his hands as to submerge the territories 
adjoining the shore. (5) The villain used to knock down trees in the hermitages of great sages 
and profaned their sacrificial fires with his excrement and urine. (6) Just as a wasp imprisons 
the larva, even so the power-intoxicated monkey threw men and women into the valleys and

caves of mountains and blocked their mouths with (huge) rocks. (7) Thus he made havoc of

the entire land, and (whatis more) defiled even high- born women. (Onacertain day,) hearing 
very sweet music, he went to the Raivataka hill. (8)

ATER, aeat Wa yeHrferd| geshiaaate OOMAAAeT | S| 
Tet aeot uke delagmerea fama ager sfrafia anorti2o! 
Se: RIA: AIRATATAS: HU AM | ash fHofmomecamd wameatati2e! 
qa Ms Huda aoval snfaenoen: | ereren faseqdoecauhiel: 122! 
a Zara eafayara: aapeniah: | ates, wane arat weer a fartara: 1231 
qd WON Wed Hel AG: Tei at: 1a agra wai ufeamest alt: 12! 
Feral soa wet cH ee! ite ovat eel ararearenieada Ae, 124

7

i

ic. 67 
Dis. 67 ] BOOK TEN 403

oat AT AT as peat gq agtoh aR uaaeaet wen ec! 
wfastare wear rere TH Waorednietent «= fa RHETT 12 | 
fiftefar Te Fe AQ aaa «seat freaadisrar 1201 
ed Whee ae: AMSA! AISA VAT TY a fr arena 1221

GA SEL Sere AAA A: Ga: | atreper welt Gaara Preferred a 122 
AAS A eTeTae seardattd: | ad ad solar seen WAT: 123 1 
a ae Weds Whaat adie: | sna Vieohgat aa aererEEs 12x! 
areas of etal Maat quowge | waraaaE: aismda SE A124 | 
apm dt Ud weg: waret:iuda: gees am atari 126i 
Wagedl AAs: UY ARaft are aera qanafiom 1201 
wa fea fefag smeeitena deat amare: weuefseri2ci 
fa ASrad Fe URAee Sedat <a Sue felaeaet AM aasiwaiseana: 16191 
There he saw Balarama, the protector of the Yadus, most charming in every limb and 
decked with a garland of lotuses, standing in the midst of a bevy of young girls. (9) Drunk with 
Varuni, He was singing (beautifully) with eyes swimming in intoxication and with His glowing 
body looked like an elephant in rut. (10) Climbing up branches of trees the wicked monkey 
shook the trees and in order to attract notice loudly chattered.(11) Observing the impudence 
on the part of that monkey, the young girls, who were fond of fun and sportive by nature, loudly 
laughed. Being under the protection of Sri Balarama, they had no fear. (12) Under the very 
eyes of Balarama the monkey began to insult the girls by twisting his eyebrows, making wry 
faces and showing them his hind part. (13) Full of rage, Balarama, the foremost of warriors, 
hit him with a slab of stone; the crafty monkey (however) evaded it and (hastily coming down 
the tree) took up the pot of Varuni and defied Balarama by grinning at him and provoking him 
(thereby). The wicked monkey then smashed the pot of Varuni, tore the clothes of the women 
and caused (infinite) annoyance to Sri Balarama and, puffed up with pride, showed 
disrespect to Him. Observing such defiant attitude of his and remembering how he made 
havoc of the country, Balarama got enraged and took up (His weapons) the pestle and plough 
with intent to kill him. Dwivida also, being very powertul, lifted up a sal tree with one hand and 
tushing with (great) vehemence, hit Balarama with it on His head. The mighty Balarama, 
however, remained immovable like a rock and, holding up with one hand the tree even as 
it came flying towards his head, struck the monkey with His pestle called Sunanda. With his 
brain crushed by the pestle and covered with a stream of blood, Dwivida shone like a 
mountain covered with a solution of red chalk. But, unmindful of the stroke, he in extreme 
rage pulled out yet another tree and, removing all its leaves, hit Balarama with it violently. 
Balarama split the tree into a hundred pieces. The monkey struck Balarama with another in 
great rage; but the latter split that too into a hundred pieces. (14—21) Thus he fought on. 
Each time a tree was smashed (by Balarama), the monkey pulled out another. Ghee) 
uprooting the trees (one by one) he denuded the forest of its trees Of all sides. (22) Ae 
enraged monkey thereupon began to rain slabs of stone on Balarama; but these also le 
latter, as a matter of sport, reduced to powder with His pestle. (23) (Finally) clenching c 
arms, which were as long as a palm tree, the great monkey went up to Balarama and struc

et.”

5 fe

a ht 
ah

' \ ,? “ 
A he oe 
bes 
) tA: 
FQ S eee es

A.

y' ye mh 
5 
a.

i:

>

Him on the chest with both his fists. (24) (Thereupon) the Lord of the Yadus set aside hj 
pestle and plough and, full of rage, hit him with both His hands on the collar-bone, ang ‘he 
latter fell down (dead) vomiting blood. (25) Pariksit, like a ship rocking in water through the 
action of wind, the (whole) mountain with its peaks and trees shook as the monkey fel]. (06) 
In the heavens the gods raised shouts of victory, the Siddhas uttered greetings anq Qreat 
sages loudly said, ‘Well done, Well done!’ and they all showered flowers on Balarama. (27) 
Having thus put an end to Dwivida, who had been desolating the land, Lord Balarama 
returned to Dwaraka (His own city) amidst the praises and acclamations of the people. (28)

Thus ends the sixty-seventh discourse entitled "Dwivida killed (by Balarama)," in the latter 
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SIATSUSAa Sear:

Triumph of Sankarsana—in the form of dragging Hastinapura

My Jara

qed UW wea afaitsa: | aaaeMe Ara Wraaddaa: | 2 |

ara: pfu sadiddidisaasien: | meetin A: ACHAT ASML! 2 |

amad gadd fe paket qua: | asacsaeufad adr al wad Aer! 3 |

Py Yt seat aerite qua: 1 saeut: at aa yon sa Waa: | ¥ |

git pul: wet wkegchg: gale: arent ag qpeqeqaifed: | & | 
Sri Suka began again : Pariksit ! Samba, son of Jambavati, was (a great warrior, who 
was) always victorious in battle. He carried away Laksmana, Duryodhana's daughter, from 
an assembly (of kings) called for the choice of her partner by the princess herself. (1) The 
Kauravas were enraged at this. They said, " Setting us at naught, this unruly boy has forcibly 
taken away the girl, who did not even seek his hand. (2) Imprison the wayward boy. What 
would the Yadavas do, who rule the landconferred on them by us and which has been thriving 
through our grace. (3) If, on hearing of the captivity of the boy, the Vrsnis (venture to) come 
here, they will find their pride curbed and will be silenced in the same way as the senses 
thoroughly controlled (through Pranayama and other means) are easily tamed." (4) Resolving

thus, Karna, Sala, Bhurisrava, Yajnaketu, and Duryodhana proceeded to capture Samba 
with the approval of the elderly among the Kurus. (5)

“BrMad: arat mde AERa: ise eft wo aeit fae sao: | & | 
a a frgaa: Hatters frpia srftor: | saver east art: Horisea: aarfenel | 9 | 
wists: = pets | peltigne: iampermeferend: «fete: «ama! ¢ | 
faaped tfat aM dalt face aah: | auid wear arena yar |< | 
agian alert a ARAL aa | ASgraneder AASIAGSTaAT, 120!

aq ga fra aggeragi ear! The aN aH fatera: ITA 1221 
a Sea Tere es arat Sf | Sark we ara a wat afeishrary 1221 
Seeing the sons of Dhrtarastra (closely) pursuing him, Samba. a great car-warrior, took 
up a fine bow and singly stood defiant like a lion. (6) In their eagerness to capture him the 
Kaurava warriors advanced in great rage under the leadership of Karna, shouting ‘Stop, 
stop’, and approaching him, covered him up with (a shower of) arrows. (7) Pariksit, though 
yet a boy, Samba was a son of the incomprehensible Lord (Sri Krsna). Unjustly attacked by 
the Kurus, he resented it like a lion attacked by the smaller animals. (8) Twanging his splendid 
pow, he individually hit the six Kuru heroes—advancing against him in their chariots—with 
six arrows each at one and the same time. (9) With four arrows he hit the four horses (drawing 
the chariot of each warrior) and with one arrow each he hit the driver as well as the warrior 
himself. The enemies, who were (each) armed with a large bow, admired this exploit of 
Samba. (10) (All) the (six) Kuru warriors then (attacked him simultaneously and) deprived 
him of his chariot. Four of them killed his four horses, one in his turn killed his charioteer and 
the remaining one tore off his bow. (11) (Thus) depriving him of his chariot in the battle, the 
- Kurus bound Samba with difficulty and returned triumphantly to their city,carrying him and 
. Duryodhana’s daughter, Laksmana (with them). (12)

qegpe ARG US Fae: |e NSE | Upeneaselfem: 1231 
Grae F AWA: Va MSA | Aas HU Gil His HlotemE: 12x 1 
STATA BUTANE Waeaate | AIT: Poe AIA SA Ae: 1241 
Teal Tega Wal seceded: ist Sea FAIS = AYA 1 ke 
Pariksit, hearing of this from the lips of the (celestial) sage Narada, the Yadus felt greatly 
enraged and began their preparations, as directed by (their chief) Ugrasena, to march 
against the Kauravas. (13) Balarama, the Destroyer of the impurities of the Kali age did not 
however approve of a quarrel between the Kurus and the Yadus. Although the Yadava 
heroes had completed their preparations (for the fight). He pacified them and drove to 
Hastinapura in a chariot brilliant like the sun, accompanied by a number of Brahmanas and 
some elders of the Yadu race, like the moon in the midst of planets. (14-15) Reaching 
Hastinapura, Balarama stoppedin a garden outside the city and sent Uddhava to Dhrtarastra 
with intent to ascertain the intention of the Kauravas. (16) 
aishrasntaaa wel sot a afeat! gat a fafrag aATrTaasaic, 1291 
SsPrfterareud WT WH Pedal aaeieeantag: ad AGeuroTa: 1Rct 
qd Usa aa me a ACL AA A AHMAR: AOA: RAT AH 1k8 1 
SR Haller: Aa FET fanaa | oe TAT TASfagea «aa: 1201 
aan: farsa ae a stead SH: | eerste: Aa Huet ATACHATA 12k 
aa ai aga frarerin nities caer yet SAATAATATAT 12 | 
(Reaching the Kaurava court,) Uddhava duly saluted Dhrtarastra, Bhisma, Drona, 
Bahlika (Bhisma's uncle) and Duryodhana and informed them of Balarama's arrival. (17) The 
Kauravas were greatly delighted to hear of the arrival of Balarama, their best friend, and, 
treating Uddhava with honour, all went forth to receive Balarama, taking festal presents in 
their hands. (18) They received Balarama with due honours and offered Him Arghya (water

for washi ds with) and a cow; and such of them as knew His greatness saluted Him 
with thei Hesadieett Fae (19) When both parties had inquired after each other's welfare

sea renner Mee EERE RETREAT CIEE TCTE SECA SE RICHER EMEA BA egal IS § 
LL = 
and health and learnt that their mutual friends and relations were doing well, Balaram 
forthwith spoke these fearless words: (20) “Hear with an attentive mind whatthe king of kinge! 
the mighty Ugrasena, has enjoined you to do and carry it out without delay. (21) He Says: e 
| hear that many of you combined by unrighteous means to overpower Samba who foy ht 
single-handed respecting the laws of war, and that you have taken him prisoner. | haye 
however, tolerated this with intent to maintain harmony among-friends and relations 
(Therefore, do not extend the quarrel, release Samba from captivity and allow him to come 
to us with his newly wedded wife.)" (22)

ad: | geal aocate frarara: seatfre: 1231 
aa uefeae ere «eT | otrewag a a qHPetfay ew 
T aad Saal: FIARAR: | aed At Se EATAT: 1241 
Tre WAM A UU! fetter Wat «= ASAT 126 |

35 eMC ARG: «a: | efraTiarqa 
jssarareaarat «ifeOCSeaT CMa TTC ATT 1: 29 
mutes ersaifesronspaat: | sendaeeite faerie: 1221

Pariksit, enraged to hear these haughty words of Baladeva, inspired as they were with 
a sense of virility, strength and gallantry and (quite) becoming of His own power, the 
Kauravas replied (as follows): (23) "Oh, what a great wonder it is that by force of Time, so 
hard to overcome, the shoe actually aspires to mount the head, which is occupied by the 
crown. (24) Bound by conjugal ties and allowed to share our bed, seat and food, and favoured 
with a royal throne by us, the Yadavas were exalted to a position of equally with us. (25) They 
enjoy the use of a chowrie, fan, conch, white umbrella, crown, a royal seat and bed through 
_ our sufferance. (26) They should no longer be allowed to retain these royal insignia, which 
are proving adverse to the giver even as milk offered to a serpent. Elevated (in rank) through 
our grace, they have now shamelessly begun to command us. Whata pity ! (27) Just as a 
ram dare not seize the prey of a lion, how could even Indra (the celestial king) enjoy what 
is not offered to him by Bhisma, Drona, Arjuna and other Kuru chiefs ?"(28)

AT Fara

Sree aa agAe Ted ernest | ase we gaterraea: qeafser. 128 | 
Gol PRU Uae Beaarenhes Arye: | Stara HTN eet: WIA AE: 130! 
Ti AMM: Wed Aeeweea: 1 aat fe sar aS: UAAl oat sat 132!

Hel Aqd Gea HPO a plat wa: | aeafearenast —-afiresfsrerta: 132! 
aq ga wanda: cee: Get:1a umasa Weenie, ArAatsqat 133 | 
qe: «fees fayisiqureretchan: | aenreat «tenure «© weneanaatda: 12%! 
Gmissmad a urfterdisavefau: | ste qoad isa a Raerearaareur: 1341 
Ta Weg Maid sieareishasat ia arta fers sitet araufteser 136! 
Fee siat Sha meten arenes seared ae er 
Me Valse AA et: Hera: ssteea fare gard w 1301 
Yad pelted wavs gure: flrsisame: fas ad wa q wea: fe: 136! 
ae Wada mara aban sreregt fit wan: aw: Gearafeadt 13°

Pedigree, the stren ir ki 1 
Arjuna and others) and fortune had served to swell their ae She et ee 
courtesy to the winds and, uttering such harsh words within the hearing of Balarama 
returned to their city.(29) The infallible Balarama observed their discourtes : ir 
hes. Overwhelmed with indi ; sy ane heard thelk 
reproac! Meimed with indignation, and looking (quite) terrific, He burst into 
cosens and sa mee Certainly these wicked souls are not in favour of conciliation, 
elated aSINey ne witn pr ide of various kinds. Chastisement is undoubtedly the best means 
of softening such people, justasa Staff IS necessary to tame the beast. (31) Oh! having slowly 
pacified the Yadus, who were terribly excited, as well as Sri Krsna, who was full of rage, | 
came here seeking to conciliate them. (32) But these slow-witted and wicked fellows are bent 
on strife. (Hence) these proud people treated Me, though I was so inclined, scornfully and 
showered abuses on Me. (33) Indeed Ugrasena, whose behests are carried out even by 
Indra and the other guardians of the world, is no suzerain lord but a mere ruler of the Bhojas, 
Vrsnis and Andhakas. (34) Sri Krsna, who occupies the Sudharma hall and brought the 
celestial tree, viz., Parijata (from heaven) and enjoys it surely does not deserve the royal 
throne ! (35) Sri Krsna, whose feet are adored by Laksmi Herself, the mistress of the world, 
is certainly not entitled to bear the royal insignia ! (86) He, the dust of whose lotus -feet lends 
sanctity (even) to the sacred waters, which are resorted to by holy men,and is borne on their 
crowned heads not only by all the guardians of the world (the deities presiding over the 
various spheres of the universe), but even so by Brahma and Rudra, (Goddess) Laksmi and 
Myself, who are mere fractions of His fractions, is unworthy of a royal seat ! (37) Indeed, the 
Yadus rule over a territory bestowed on them by the Kurus ! We are ideed shoes, while the 
Kurus represent the head ! (38) Howis it possible for one, who is capable of dealing (proper) 
punishment to them, to put up with the harsh and incoherent words of these proud men who 
are intoxicated with power and are raving like madmen ? (39) | shall rid the earth of the Kurus 
today." With these words Balarama took up (His weapon) the plough, and got up enraged, 
as if He would burn (all) the three worlds. (40) With the point of His plough He lifted up the 
(whole) city of Hastinapura and began to drag it angrily with a view to throwing it into the 
Ganga. (41) 
seater oagmat aT Ud | SPAT HLA SATA: 12 1 
aa sRU way: Hera fasittada: | AeA Upa Ara Weld: AYA I1<3 | 
TA waa sad a faa aiden 7: Saat aque xxl 
feast aaat daftasa: | Genre mls slsdet daha fe sh 
ata ufigea sie yee fanit cee 
sat oa oa: owe sales: § Besfedta: afereror: 1a 
aaeashaahienst a gaat a Te fae wad aa Pearse: Ivo 
AA 89=—- Aa ATA, adshrentera | fared Tae Al AA ALOT We: 1se1 
Being dragged (into water), Hastinapura began to shake like a boat. When the Kauravas

observed that it was falling into the Ganga, they were seized with consternation. (42) Anxious 
to save their lives. they placed Samba and Laksmana at their head and, taking their families 
with them, sought the almighty Balarama Himself with joined palms for protection. (43) They

Said, "O Rama, the Delighter of all, You are (no other than) Sesa (the support of the world).

7

ft

Sa C~C~C~<“‘“‘:;O;*”*=<“‘“‘SOSOSC:*:S 
We did not know Your greatness. Be pleased (therefore) to forgive us our transgresq; 
foolish and evil-minded as we are. (44) You are the sole Cause of creation, continuance 
destruction (of the universe), (the substratum of all, though) resting on nothing but yan = 
being. Indeed, O Lord, sages speak of the three worlds as Your toys and Yourself ‘i a 
Player. (45) O Lord of infinite strength, possessed of a thousand heads! You alone Seat se 
weight of) the terrestrial globe on one of Your heads, without any effort, and at the timers 
final dissolution with draw the universe into Yourself and lie (on the causal waters) as the re 
remaining substance (Narayana) without a second. (46) Lord, You have assumed this a 
consisting of pure Sattva (goodness). Your anger is not prompted by hatred or malice Pe 
intended only to teach all and is directed towards the maintenance of the world order (47 
Hail to You, O Inner Controller of all created beings, O omnipotent and immutable Mak ? 
of the universe ! We have sought You as our Protector. Salutation be to You (again af

again)." (48) 
Sy SATA

TW wa: Aandunmedde: seed: Waa A APs at iver

ee: whee GEN weet a gees FAM Io

Wi wR Vann glade aedliat fennudtt asa gledacde: 1421

See A dd Wa WaM Aradds: | Gad: Ae: WTA Pelachareaa: 1421

dd: Sias: wat were: AAA Watheda: | 
aaa ACCS eT HS AAT 143 1 
stand a at Ud Bea Wafamaqiaqad = efarural TeTaAaTezad 14s 
PSUASa AAS AAISATA: 162 |

Sri Suka went on -Propitiated thus by the Kurus, who had got alarmed to find their city 
shaking and sought protection with Him, Balarama felt much pleased and promised them 
12 sa deaths them to shed their fear. (49) Duryodhana was (very) fond of his daughter 
(Laksmana). He gave away as a wedding present twelve hundred (young) elephants, each 
a2 years of age, ten thousand horses, six thousand gold chariots glowing like the sun, and 
as ousand maid-servants adorned with a gold necklace. (50-51) Accepting for His part all 
ae sae es and acclaimed by his friends and relations, Lord Balarama, the foremost of 
ek adus, departed with Samba and his bride. (52) Returning to His city (Dwaraka); 
Sais met (all) His devoted friends and relations and in the open court told the Yadava 
chiefs everything, viz., how he had dealt with the Kurus. (58) Even to this day Hastinapuré

appears fairly elevated towards the south and slopina d 102 
ens : own towards the G ; thereby) 
testifying to this (supreme) exploit of Balarama. (64) peoeloe: |

Mu aes the sixty-eighth discourse entitled " The Triumph of Sankarsana in the form of 
ggIng astinapura , In the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-samhita.

DTSNN EE ID

a StQTA: 
Discourse LXIX

A Glimpse into the household life of Sri Krsna 
° Sas 
Wh Pre eT wee a ati Heda agit a aa: ANE 1 et 
fad Sete EMT GT YR Tey awa far WE SaIaELI 2 |

saat | ekadi «= taftidgann | Uferctrenratast fessor 131 
aprenden: i gRig wrt: efiat deeds

sn Suka began again : Having heard that the demon Naraka had been killed and that 
Sri Krsna had singly married numerous girls, the sage Narada felt eager to see how the Lord 
lived with them (all). (1) He said to himself, "Oh, how wonderful itwas thatthe one Lord should 
with one personality marry sixteen thousand wives in separate houses all at once. (2) Thus 
full of curiosity and eager to see (this sport of) the Lord (with his own eyes), the divine sage 
came to Dwaraka, which was adorned with parks and gardens in full blossom and resounded 
with the warbling of birds and the humming of bees. (3) It was rendered noisy with the loud 
crackle of swans and cranes residing in ponds spread over with full-blown lotuses and lilies 
of various colours. (4) It was studded with nine lakhs of mansions built of crystal and silver, 
inlaid with shining emeralds and furnished with articles of gold and precious stones. (5) It 
looked charming with its well-defined roads and other thoroughfares, quadrangles and 
market-places, sheds for animals, temples and guild halls. Its roads, courtyards, lanes and 
thresholds of houses were (daily) sprinkled with water. The everflying flags and pennons

warded off sunshine. (6) 
Teraat osfineft adifewad: «et: wenlees aa aRT ere GRIT | Wo 
aa Weafe: Fee: weg fadgtenat at: ueiiat wad wedi ¢ | 
faye fagrermidgdncads: | Ssrttene: HST Alecdhasr e | 
fadfificar qaeMfaetafi: | ardrenmdgdugraatepe: 1201 
ariifaicnnudifa: yaraifinegds! yfs: wagqarcitrgranitrguse: 122 
FERRIC COCIGIC CRS Ui fafraertg — Rrafuerisg | 
yaa aa fafeaqeeemaittataite eget | Sag: 1221 
aha «- BAAUTeTaaaNeeeRaraaa || ETAT | 
fret cael SRST CaReUSA UTA UARelisTareMT 1231 
re id (ri ished) row of palaces of Lord Sri 
can ee Bciiiae nee of tage connie of ‘which Viswakarma 
(the celestialarchitect) had exhibited all his (architectural) skill. (7) The row was adorned with 
sixteen thousand (beautiful) mansions of Sri Krsna's consorts. Narada (at random) entered

a big palace out of these. (8) Supported on columns of coral, on excellent slabs of Vaidurya 
(the cat's eye gem) and walls of sapphire, it was provided with a floor-whose lustre never

i [565] B.M. Part II-—42 se

faded-paved with the same precious stone. (9) It was (further) furnished with cano ie 
made by ViSwakarma (himself), from which strings of pearls were hanging, as wey s 
with seats and beds made of ivory and inlaid with excellent gems. (10) It was attende ; 
by maid-servants adorned with gold necklaces, and dressed in fine clothes, and Man. 
servants wearing coats, turbans, fine clothes and jewelled ear-rings. (11) Dear Pariksit 
the darkness in the palace was dispelled by lustre of jewels serving as lights. Seeing 
fumes of burning aloe-wood issuing out of the air-holes, the peacocks on its Picturesque 
eaves screamed and danced under the impression that clouds were up. (12) Narada 
saw Sri Krsna (the Lord of Yadus) seated there together with the mistress of the house 
(Rukmini), who was (herself) fanning the Lord with a chowrie provided with a gold 
handle, although she was constantly waited upon by thousands of maid-servants, who 
were equal to her in virtue, beauty, age and neat dress. (13)

a alates War eater: stadsd : aH yar ans: |

sire eget «fiat fetteqea aelendifageat i ex

Ta aA dau: waged fasamaqenist aat ufate

Sdvaed sid AMA Yh ala acaorilsagadteaq ey -

aa savage: gue ara areal faferitfaqst

anahiane fidagaisar d wre war wad ara & fHq 281

Discerning the Devarsi, the almighty Lord (Sri Krsna), the foremost among the

supporters of virtue, immediately rose from the bed of Sri (Rukmint) and, bowing low with 
His head, adorned with a crown, at the feet of the sage with joined palms, installed him 
on His own seat.(14) (Pariksit,) Sri Krsna is the supreme Teacher of the world; having 
washed His feet the Ganga has become capable of purifying all. The Protector of holy 
men, He has earned the appropriate title of Brahmanya Deva by virtue of His (singular) 
devotion to the Brahmanas. The Lord (therefore) washed the feet of the Devarsi and 
bore that water on His head. (15) (Thereafter) the Lord, who was (no other than) the 
most ancient sage Narayana, the (eternal) companion of Nara, duly worshipped the 
celestial sage according to the prescribed rules (of worship) and, addressing him in

measured words sweet as nectar, humbly said, “ (Pray, tell Me,) My lord, what service 
we may render your holy self.” (16)

Mg Sara

“alee cata fasiishacctenea Tat sag Maly aa: GAA

Pita fe smicatrenmat eraat seme faa gs 2!

e dalsiranet saat 9 aenfeféf fafeammersn: |

PARP MaUTats mAs ae wa: eA ect

Narada replied : O almighty Lord of the universe, it is no wonder that You lové

all Your devotees and chastise the wicked. O glorious Lord, You have come down 
to earth of Your own accord for the supreme welfare of all as well as for the sake 
of maintaining and protecting the world. We know this full well. (17) (What a great 
fortune that) | have been enabled to day to enjoy the sight of Your (blessed) feet, 
which bring to mankind supreme peace and deliverance, which are ever contemplate 
at heart by Brahma and others possessed of infinite wisdom—the feet which 4! 
(as a matter of fact) like a rope with the help of which men fallen in the deep wel 
of worldly life may rise above it. (Kindly) bless me that (wherever | may be) thel! 
thought may (ever) haunt me and | may go about contemplating on them. (

pis. 69 |

aaa, 1G POICM: A ARG: | aearcens arrarnfafaccanr 122 1

De ai FRM Sater Be 1a y fafa sere qoiraMe YE 18 | 
Maes Mes CIEE UMS ys | adlsaier, Wscgss SAEMAL 123 | 
Yew a Sear Vata: | sisted fase arf yerarastirer 12% 
ary Pa Set FE aT wae often | aeaafraatg 124 
sears wa: wt fread TRESS ws Waa A ares: 1261 
ward a sleiratatisieentee: | seater wl | ARENA STaL 1219 | 
garag Teena sat TM: BOs: | SAN at Ase aA 1c! 
wd Man waited Baa wei ant ent dancer a paferri2et 
arerdaaaea Get Wed: GOL ase Wea anf aril: aadar igo 
gad fare fi ahi area dere gots ae war farant wat frat. 1321 
Wont gfeqot a ares faequeoaq acters: meuaat = faufaft: 1321 
TANT AaARAT Telear | ater antaera Aei alent fafafet 133 | 
sid Aner, car, wil cadet: i gdad whe ei ponmuorfef: ravi 
ard Wet ai waned Ae wd dd: Wa Ae wld aegga: 1341 
sTernlag THM: Geees lade «= aA. Ama YET 1361

Dear Pariksit, then in order to ascertain the power of Yogamaya (divine glory) of the Lord 
of all masters of Yoga Narada entered the mansion of another consort of Sri Krsna. (19) 
(There) he saw Sri Krsna (engaged in) playing at dice with His beloved consort and Uddhava. 
There also the Lord stood up (at the sight of the sage), offered him a seat and worshipped 
him with supreme devotion. (20) Then, like one who was unaware of the sage's arrival, He 
Said, "When did you come ? You are (established in the Self and) perfect, whereas we are 
imperfect beings. What service can we render to you ? (21) Allthe same, Osage, (be pleased 
to) command us and bless our (human) birth." Narada, however, was astonished (when he 
heard this) and, silently rising (from his seat) moved to another mansion. (22) There too he 
Saw Sri Krsna fondling His infant sons. Again, in another house he found the Lord preparing 
for His bath. (23) (In this way the Devarsi found the Lord engaged in different activities, all 
at once, in all the different mansions). If here He was engaged in pouring oblations in the 
Sacrificial fire, there He was propitiating God through the five-fold daily sacrifices; some- 
where He was feeding the Brahmanas, while elsewhere He was partaking of the remaining 
food (Himself). (24) Here He was performing Sandhya, and there the silent Japa of Gayatri. 
Here the elder brother of Gada was performing various tricks of fence with the sword and 
shield, and there He was riding on horses, elephants and chariots. Here He was resting on 
His bed, and was being eulogized by bards. (25-26) In one mansion, He was conferring with 
Uddhava andothercounsellors, andin another sporting in water surrounded by courtesans. (27) 
At one place He was gifting well-adorned cows to Brahmanas and listening to the recitation 
of auspicious Itinasas and Puranas. (28) Inone mansion He was making merry and indulging 
_ in light talk with His beloved consort, and in another He was found engaged in the careful

a

observance of Dharma. At a third place Narade found him (engaged in) devising wa 
means of accumulating wealth, and at another (in) enjoying the pleasures of sense pe 
for a householder. (29) At one place, the Devarsi saw Him seated all by 
contemplating on the Supreme Person beyond Prakrti, and at another doing service to th 
elders by offering them the desired objects of enjoyment and worship. (30) At one place e 
found Sri Krsna preparing for war against some enemies, and at another discussing a 
of peace. Here the Devarsi saw Him devising-with Balarama the ways and means of ensuring 
the well-being of the virtuous, and there performing with grandeur the wedding with dye 
ceremony of sons and daughters with brides and bridegrooms worthy of them.(31-32) Hera 
he found Him conducting festivities on a large scale while sending off a married girl (to he, 
husband) and receiving another (on return from her husband's house). People wondereg 
to see these grand festal activities of Bhagavan Sri Krsna (the Lord of masters of Yoga). (33) 
Somewhere he saw Him offering worship to (the various) gods, his own rays, by means of 
grand sacrifices, and elsewhere observing piety through the construction of wells, gardens 
and temples etc., for public good. (34) Here he found Him riding on a horse born in the Indus 
valley, followed by prominent Yadavas, in pursuit of game and killing animals fit for sacrifice 
in the course of such chase. (35) At one place he saw Sri Krsna (the Master of Yoga) moving 
incognito among the people as well as in the mansions of the palace etc., for ascertaining - 
the inward feelings of their inmates as well as of the people. (36)

Iara «= MBlehal «SCAR: «= eafaa Uaaled clea arate wer 1301 
facia arma eda sift ofa arama 3 mata § vactefaaa4 13cl 
Asie Ai ca Giehiet AMASSAr! wae dated Glet Yeates 1381 
Having witnessed the display of wonderful powers of Yoga by Sri Krsna, though following 
the ways of a human being, Narada spoke to Him as though laughing heartily. (37) O Master 
of Yoga, we know (the secret of) Your worderful powers of Yoga which cannot be easily seen 
even by wielders of Maya (like Brahma) and which have been revealed to our mind through 
the worship of Your lotus-feet. (38) Pray, give me leave, O Lord, to go, so that | may move

about the (fourteen) worlds flooded with Your glory, singing loudly the story of Your pastimes, 
which is capable of purifying the (whole) world. (39)

MTT FATA 
Set eda awe smal aaquifedr | afesarieetnfraniea: ua at faa: 1¥o! 
The Lord replied : O sage, | am not only the Teacher of Dharma, but | practise it Mysell, 
and lend countenance to (those who practise) it. | follow the path of Dharma in order to teach

- the world (by My example). (Therefore,) do not get perplexed, My son, (at the sight of this 
My Yogamaya). (40) get perp , My a g 
WeyH SaTI

Fae Geni Wea Wem aa adiey wat aaaf @ 1%! 
PUMA arate ldeder safaxye faferat sacnide: |<?! 
sademeny = eS ha | Mey GMs: MaEMae, aat 1S 
Wa ayqeeediagadaet «6aRauisRaswar 4 wdlaarfer: | 
TSF ‘SS TaeagAMi slsalecaUavETags: 1v¥ |

YS ang 
rMitteg 
Himse

a O :

staid Suka went on: Thus, they say, the Devarsi saw one and the same SiKrsna (present 
in all the mansions of His consorts) performing the pious duties of householders which lead 
to thelr purification. (41 ) Seeing again and again, the vast display of the wonderful Yogic power 
of Sri Krsna, who had infinite prowess, the curious sage was filled with astonishment.(42) 
Duly honoured by Sri Krsna who (behaved as though He) made much of (the first three 
objects of human pursult viz.,) Dharma (virtue), Artha (wealth) and Kama (enjoyment of life), 
the Devarsi felt (much) delighted and went away constantly thinking of Him alone. (43) For 
the good of the world O dear one, Lord Narayana takes the help of His (inconceivable) 
Yogamaya and begins to sport as a human being. Greeted with their bashful looks and 
friendly smiles by (more than) sixteen thousand noble wives, the Lord thus delightfully spent 
His days (at Dwaraka). (44) O Pariksit ! he who for his part celebrates the inimitable exploits 
performed by Sri Krsna—who is the (supreme) Cause of the evolution,continuance and 
dissolution of the universe—or heave of them, or views with approbation their singing and 
hearing, attains (loving) devotion to the almighty Lord, the Bestower of Liberation. (45)

Thus ends the sixty-ninth discourse entitled, "A Glimpse into the household life of Sri Krsna," 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita

eh f= et f.u et f.2 
PIONEER I

Discourse LXX 
Sri Krsna's Daily Routine; Kings taken captive by Jarasandha 
send their Messenger to Sri Krsna 
Sige Sara

sau «HEC HASNT! Yeltnvss: ufaiaterent feaxegqu: 1 | 
qe Pt alae ara i WacaioghsoT =| -Aatetarafea: | 2 | 
Ged a q aaif anqereiaetsan oResmfagesd Brerstext aT | 3 | 
Mel Yet sea adage Ata: | eat TAA SIG AAA: ULI X |

we wie wie = Refine |

ARISTA aAae waknhticfaantara iy | & |

aagaseTeme 4 aeaifater «fated = UREN ara |

aa wears ail eel Ae Ss aad: 1 & | 
sR adfaarssert: § HOU: | Carr a gar arated array | 9 | 
Saat sein weit skewer! wafeiat Yet Aaa YaTTA | < 
cal | WURGUAT atafiatie: el Aegdtea fassat ag ag fet fet 1 < | 
Tamang «oN «Aaa: apap Ge «=—|- AAR Io! 
aa «yaa ReenfayUT| arene: «= eileideererTT{eo: 1881

smear «asset, | Waufasdam: | armiaa adaniat ukragenfom | 
TANT Net: Slat: NAST AAA ST 1221

Gamat for aRrgerert: | yea: Nepdiahtga At: SIT 18R 1

dad Yt sala Ue WATE Gilaeddh sonerafierdisaa: ext

qatar Ufver wt URaaaeed| eae: alisha ATER: 1841

firisagretot =9—«—|- Usitesneitfarc: | rege faget Premencderet WA AA: 126 |

Sri Suka began again : As the dawn approached, Sri Krsna's wives each sleeping with 
the arms of her husband about her neck would reproach the cocks that crowed for fear of 
being separated from Him. (1) Roused from sleep by the breeze blowing through the 
Mandara grove in the midst of humming bees, birds sang loudly like bards as if in order to 
wake up Sri Krsna. (2) Clasped between His arms Rukmini would not welcome this sacred 
hour for fear of being torn away from His embrace. (3) Waking up about two hours and a half 
before sunrise, Sri Krsna would first wash His hands and feet and rinse His mouth, and with 
a serene mind meditate on the Self beyond (the realm of) Prakrti, thatis one without a second, 
self-luminous and indestructible, which is by virtue of its own nature eternally free from the 
taintof Avidya (nescience), which goes by the name of Brahma, whose existence and blissful 
nature are indicated by His own potencies (under the names of Brahma, Visnu and Rudra) 
that are responsible for the appearance (maintenance) and destruction of the universe. (4-5) 
After this Sri Krsna (the foremost among the righteous) would take a plunge bath in pure 
water, puton two (clean) pieces of cloth, perform according to the injunctions of the scriptures 
Sandhya and other (obligatory) rites and having poured oblations into the sacred fire, would 
silently repeat the (sacred) Gayatri-Mantra. (6) He would stand before the rising sun and offer 
prayers to the sun-god and handfuls of water to the gods, Rsis and manes, His own rays. 
Then having worshipped the elders of His family as well as Brahmanas with due ceremony, 
the vigilant Lord would give away from day to day, to well-adorned Brahmanas together with 
silk clothes, deer-skin and sesamum seeds, thirteen thousand and eighty-four freshly calved 
and beautifully caparisoned cows, docile by nature, yielding abundant milk and accompanied 
with their calf, with their horns plated with gold, and hoofs with silver, and with their necks 
decked with pearl necklaces. (7--9) He would then salute cows, Brahmanas, gods, elders, 
preceptors and all created beings, who were but manifestations of His own Self, and would 
duly touch auspicious things. (10) He would then adorn Himself, the one ornament of the 
human world, with clothes and ornaments, peculiarly His own, as well as with excellent 
garlands and pigments. (11) (Then,) looking into (liquid) ghee and a mirror, He would (first) 
have a look at the cows and bulls, Brahmana and (images of) gods. Thereafter He would take 
delight in causing boons to be conferred on all classes of people dwelling in the city and in 
the gynaeceum and gratifying His other subjects by granting their desires. (12) Presenting 
first (of all) the Brahmanas, (then) His friends and relations, (then) His ministers an 
counsellors, and (then) His consorts with garlands, betel leaves and pigments, He would last 
of all accept them for Himself. (13) By that time His charioteer, (Daruka) would bring His most 
wonderful chariot drawn by Sugriva and other horses and, saluting the Lord, would stand 
before Him. (14) Holding the charioteer's hands in His own hand, Sri Krsna would then 
‘(proceed to) mount the chariot accompanied by Satyaki and Uddhava, even as the sun 
ascends the eastern hills. (15) Watched with bashful and affectionate glances by the ladies 
of the gynaeceum and reluctantly permitted by them to go, the Lord would smile at them (for 
a moment) and, thus captivating their heart, would sally forth (to the Council Hall). (16)

aie aa wedienfa: uftarta: | wfage afsfaert a wee wea: 1201

Seated there certain Brahmanas, skilled in exposition, would expound Vedic Mantras, while 
others would narrate the stories of ancient kings of sacred renown. (21)

aah: Geet 8 -_ Ustaiedisgdesia: | fagnftdt «aad sete: safata: 1221 
a AAA POT UA selaties: 1 UaMMdae Sa Sea aN 1 23 | 
aoa fefasa qa aaft a aa: isa segiearaaad of) Piast esi 
FN POA WAV! ad Al Awol amt Varia: goers: 1241 
wil facia: pale Wad: wdved weed vaca al 
Taq awake wade daketafer alse A 12E 1 
Sih VUderier: Heald: Aan Goma AA: | 
afd wdemicata earie fee at sa: Wepesia aa fal: 1291 
waif qe Ud Wee Yet Yt ag: | 
frat daft We wettest fReamestaqaueda alae 1221 
AA MATH MUTA HEAT Seg AAA AMA HATTA | 
Qa yyRsqragearctet faye ele sat Arafsaret: 1291 
ata aa fama seta Wal Fa Ge Yaad | 
qaat Ssild alsita da faetfe 1301 
(One day) O king, a certain person, never seen before, made his appearance there. He 
Was announced to the Lord by the porters (on duty) and ushered into His presence. (22) The 
Man bowed to Sri Krsna, the Supreme Lord, with joined palms and communicated to Him the 
Suffering of certain kings caused by their incarceration at the hands of Jarasandha. (23) 
(Pariksit,) twenty thousand and odd kings who did not pay homage to him;during his 
(€xpeditions for) the conquest of the (four) quarters, had been forcibly detained by,him at (his 
Capital) Girivraja (the modern Giridih). (24) (The new comer conveyed their message to Sri 
fsna in the following words—)" O Krsna, the Embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, 
WnNOse personality is immeasurable and who destroy the fear of those who have taken refuge 
In You |! we, who are (yet) possessed of a differential outlook and are afraid of (the cycle of) 
birth and death, resort to You for protection.(25) (O Lord !) the generality of people on earth

Be Be Be Be Be Be RRR ERE ERE RE RE RE REE REE EERE Re Be eR Me Re Be A Be Be Be Ae He Hr Be Me Me Me Br He Br Be Ae Br Be He Ar Wr Ar Br Br Ar Ar Hr Hr Hr Be Be Mr Br Wr Kr er wr Brat Re fe Seg

are intensely addicted to prohibited acts or those actuated by self-interest and ara 
indifferent to Your worship, which is the only auspicious act enjoined on them by Yoy 
(Dogging their foot-steps) in the form of all powerful and ever vigilant Time in the 
meantime (however,) You suddenly uproot their hope of life.. We bow to You (as 
such).(26) You are the Lord of the Universe, who have appeared on earth with Your part 
manifestation (viz., Balarama) for protecting the virtuous and chastising the wicked. 9 
Lord, we are (therefore) at a loss to understand how anyone other than You (be it 
Jarasandha or anyone else) can transgress Your command (and tyrannize over us), 
Nor do we understand how men who have taken refuge in You (like us) can reap the 
fruit of their past actions (in the form of suffering). (27) O Lord, (we are aware that) the 
joy of rulership is dependent on others and is as unreal as a dream. (Moreover,) it is with 
this body, which is virtually dead and is subject to constant fear, that we bear (so many) 
burdens (of the world), having abandoned the joy existing in the self and obtained from 
You by disinterested people. Foolish as we are,-we are suffering in this world due to 
Your Maya. (28) O Lord, Your feet remove the grief of those who fall at them. Therefore, 
kindly release us, who are bound with the rope of Karma in the form of this Jarasandha. 
Possessing the strength of ten thousand elephants himself he has imprisoned us kings 
in his palace even as the lion would round up (a flock of) sheep. (29) O wielder of the 
discus, You fought Jarasandha eighteen times, vanquishing him in all battles except one. 
We know that Your power and strength are unlimited; and yet, behaving as You did like 
a human being, You allowed Yourself to be defeated by him once. This has aggravated 
his insolence. He now persecutes us knowing us to be Your servants. O invincible Lord, 
now do whatever You deem fit under the circumstances.” (30)

qd sald 
sid | ATS «|S NaevieHTefeUT: | Waa: Wego? A cart wt faeiaari 321 
The messenger said : (Lord,) with words these the kings imprisoned by Jarasandha

have sought shelter under Your feet, eager to see You. May those helpless kings be 
blessed (with Your presence). (31) 
Mya Faq

Wigt gaedla cafe: armed: | feud figserm wreudia aor wWa:13z

da gem Wa PO: Adeilhyawear: | dag Shae: gilt qava: Urq Yar! 331

asta fata parka | aut qydatad: sega ada AP! By

att Rage chert Aaa | AY Yar ad cea Used WUT: 1 But

a fe dstated faisacciieiveragy | sr geome qe usar faatiaar| 36 |

Sri Suka resumed : (Pariksit!) when the messenger of the kings was thus 
delivering the message (of the kings), the celestial sage (Narada) appeared (on the 
scene) wearing a mass of golden matted locks, and dazzling like the sun. (82) Seeing 
the sage the almighty Sri Krsna, the suzerain Lord’ of all the worlds, rose (from His 
seat) with His councillors and attendants and joyfully bowed to the Devarsi with His 
head bent low. (33) The Devarsi having taken his seat, the Lord worshipped him with 
due honour and, bringing delight to the sage with His reverence spoke to him in the 
following sweet words. (34) “O sage, are all the three worlds now free from fear? 
Your constantly going about the-three worlds surely constitutes a great gain to us 
(inasmuch as we receive all the news of the world through you). (35) Nothing in (all) 
the worlds of God’s creation is unknown to you. We, therefore, enquire of you what 
the Pandavas and others intend to do (at present).” (36)

MARE SarT

qa wat at ae gaa me fat faague ae: |

we Yad: waheidaiassedt a ASHATT 1 39 |

acted chiseled are ated meade «gat «= rasa: |

aq «fae «= aetSCSseaIaTOTIaTA 131

vies a: eet «= fattemt «6a sadsasiaerescha: |

Clore: asda sae ant welisel 
aaa «= A RSI UG: Uqgdae set a faaittad xo! 
aed at AS Usa Wesa: | oRAgTe Fale waMqaledn xe! 
der, ta mat Vet A ques: i fea: atea way aarfaa: xe! 
TAU Hla AMI GaSe: | a | eae) fepaanfsrafala: ws

care fafa aa: sft tara yet a a yaaagee fefaar

Telfeedtta fafa sirtadtt arent wea Ae amg att faa xx

Sri Narada replied : O all-pervading Infinite Lord, You are such a great magician that 
even conjurers like Brahma (the creator of the world) are unable to penetrate (the veil of) Your 
Maya. Lord, You abide in all created beings by virtue of Your (inscrutable) potencies even 
as fire remains latent in every log of wood. | have witnessed Your Maya more than once, 
hence Your inquiry about the Pandavas does not appear to me as something out of the 
common. (37) (Lord,) You bring forth and destroy this universe by Your own Maya; and by 
Your Maya it appears as existent (though without any reality). Who can know Your intentions 
full well ? You are inconceivable by nature; my salutation be to You. (38) (Tied down to the 
body) the soul moves on the whirligig of birth and death and knows not the way to deliverance 
from this sheath, the source of (all) evil. Descending on earth in so many Forms by way of 
sport, You kindle the lamp of Your glory (with the help of which he may free himself from the 
bondage of the body). Lord, | resort to You for protection. (39) The Supreme Spirit as You 
are, You nevertheless imitate the ways of the human world; therefore | shall communicate 
to You what Your cousin and loving devotee, king Yudhisthira, intends to do. (40) The 
Pandava king enjoys on this very earth all the enjoyments of the abode of Brahma (the 
highest Paradise). He is (absolutely) desireless. And yet he would worship You through the 
supreme. sacrifice known as Rajasuya. May You be pleased to give Your consent to his 
Proposal. (41) Eager to see You, the (principal) gods, Rsis and illustrious kings too will 
assemble in that grand sacrifice. (42) Lord, You are an embodiment of the Supreme Spirit; 
even the low-born are hallowed by hearing of Your glories, singing Your praises and 
contemplating on Your virtues, to say nothing of those who see and touch Your person. (43) 
Lord, whose very presence on this earth constitutes a blessing for the three worlds. Your 
spotless glory envelops all the quarters and is diffused on earth, in heaven as well as in the 
Subterranean regions, even as the waters washing Your feet hallow the (entire) universe 
under the name of Mandakini in heaven, Bhogavati in the subterranean regions and the

Ganga on earth. (44) 
Hh Sara

wt 860 agmmagyeq —_s faferfiwat | ave: Gel: Se Yaa Me ala: 14

Sri Suka went on: (Pariksit !) the clansmen of Sri Krsna, assembled there, seized as

= © —" 
eee a .

Be We Ke We We Be We Ke Be Mr Ke Ke Ke Br Be Kr He We We Ke He Ke Ke We He Be He Be We Br Ke Ke Hr Hr Hr

they were with the desire to conquer Jarasandha, did not receive with approbation the Words 
of the sage. Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva), smilingly spoke to His devotee 
Uddhava in sweet words (as below). (45)

STATA 
a f a: ui aq: qeqordicaiad ide AAs Aes: HAM adie 
The glorious Lord said : (Uddhava !) you are Our disinterested friend and know the 
secret of what should be decided upon through deliberation. Indeed you are our supreme 
eye (as it were). Now tell us what should be done under the circumstances. We (fully) rely

on you and shall act upon your advice. (46)

saumttadt wat adaata qrraq i fest Rraissaa sga: Ways ive!

Sa SEA ASM URASS Alecal qa SAT WEA Tafaaasear: |\90 | 
Questioned thus by the Master, who, though omniscient, was behaving like an ignorant 
man, Uddhava received His command with his head bent low and replied (as below). (47)

Thus ends the seventieth discourse bearing on the deliberations about the Lord's departure 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great.and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SAPP TT

Discourse LXXI

Sri Krsna goes to Indraprastha 
AYP SAA 
_ saat herarenved CaNSgaSHa | MIA AAAI POT aA veafa: 1 gt 
Sri Suka began again : (Pariksit !) hearing these words (of the Lord), Uddhava who was

possessed of great wisdom, considered the statement of the celestial sage Narada and the 
opinion of the councillors as well as of Sri Krsna (Himself), and spoke thus. (1)

SET SA

ageyon ca Uldel aged iad dqgaae war a awifeomi 2 | 
asa Usigea )«fegqeestit §«fatti amt sarge sues adil wal 2 | 
sere aA weet eta afer are aa mere Ul war faqs: | ¥ | 
a a dest wnt amare asi afer aaet wht aaa faa & | 
ea AF _ Met ar elaitfeoiga: | weodtswafeiat fast wearer aisha |G 
waar Tat od faa gale: leer a aaa heat aa afreti | 
it weer feeenifrtert: i fewansd: ads arerrefturera | ¢ |

Tard ft ferret yey cat wat wagqaemrefatant a

Was genudsteesi: fois meron wt ad a1 et 
Seas: et atatoenead | ra: urefaatear da aria: wd: 120!

Uddhava submitted : Lord, as recommended by the Devarsi, You should (certainly)

help Your cousin, who intends to perform the Rajastya sacrifice, and should also protect 
those who seek Your protection. (2) A Rajasuya sacrifice (however) is capable of being

erformed, O almighty Lord ! only by one who has conquered all the quarters. | am 
therefore driven to the conclusion that both these objects, can be gained by the 
overthrow of Jarasandha. (3) Indeed great will be our advantage, O Protector of cows, 
if we simply succeed In accomplishing this; and Your restoring the imprisoned kings to 
freedom will bring glory to You. (4) Possessing (as he does) the strength of ten thousand 
elephants, king Jarasandha is as a matter of fact not very easy to resist even for giants 
other than Bhima, who is his equal in strength. (5) He should, however, be vanquished 
in a duel and not otherwise; for he has an army consisting of a hundred Aksauhinis. He 
is a devotee of the Brahmanas and never spurns the request of Brahmanas. (6) 
(Therefore,) let Bhima approach him in the guise of a Brahmana and ask of him the 
boon of a single combat. In Your presence he will no doubt succeed in killing him in a 
duel. (7) Lord, You are the almighty, formless Time. The creation and destruction of the 
universe take place through Your power. Brahma and Sankara are mere instruments (in 
carrying out the design). (8) (After the destruction of Jarasandha) the consorts of the 
kings (imprisoned by him) would sing in their (respective) homes of Your glorious act of 
destroying their common enemy and bringing about the release of their (respective) 
husbands (who are dear to them as their own selves), even as the cowherdesses (of 
Vraja) sing of Your having delivered them (from the clutches of the demon Sankhacida), 
the sages who have taken refuge in You celebrate the rescue of the king of elephants 
and of Sita (the Daughter of king Janaka), and we sing of Your having released Your 
parents (from Karmsa’s captivity). (9) Thus, O Krsna, the destruction of Jarasandha will 
serve many a great purpose. As the merits of the imprisoned kings and the sins of 
Jarasandha are going to bear fruit thereby, the performance of the RajasUya sacrifice 
is in a large measure liked by You also. (10)

MY FAA 
Seda «OUCH I caledaqaisas «HT | ARTISTA 221 
VMN WAIN War sala: | YM qlee Wey fay: 1 2! 
Prbrearettery Carl AQ Tassel | RENAE gst A AET

faightaad ait welenfa: afrafaiiigenfty: 101 
ait ubiguiaad wufsa: wore d da faauq fagaati 
Frerer aqeera ertATERTETT Aepracrahttg ahaa: | 2 1

Sri Suka went on : Pariksit, the aforesaid counsel of Uddhava was faultless and good 
in @very respect. The Devarsi, the elderly Yadavas and Sri Krsna too approved of it. (11) 
Now, with the approval of elders (Vasudeva and others) the almighty Lord Sri Krsna

\

they were with the desire to conquer Jarasandha, did not receive with approbation the wor. 
of the sage. Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva), smilingly spoke to His devotee 
Uddhava in sweet words (as below). (45)

MATA 
a f& a: at aa: qenoriciad dat ABA AE: HAM aise 
The glorious Lord said : (Uddhava !) you are Our disinterested friend and know the 
secret of what should be decided upon through deliberation. Indeed you are our supreme 
eye (as it were). Now tell us what should be done under the circumstances. We (fully) rely 
on you and shall act upon your advice. (46)

squmbadt wal ads grad i fieat freatssema sga: saad Ive 
Sa Sertad AEM URS Afeara SAA SHUTS ATE AalaaASeas: V0 | 
Questioned thus by the Master, who, though omniscient, was behaving like an ignorant 
man, Uddhava received His command with his head bent low and replied (as below). (47)

Thus ends the seventieth discourse bearing on the deliberations about the Lord's departure 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great.and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ISS aes

BAAHAGAaaASeATA:

Discourse LXXIl

Sri Krsna goes to Indraprastha 
Sh Sara 
Saethararenuea cadegaSaAc | IAA AAA HOTA aA Asafa: |e |

Sri Suka began again : (Pariksit !) hearing these words (of the Lord), Uddhava who was 
possessed of great wisdom, considered the statement of the celestial sage Narada and the 
opinion of the councillors as well as of Sri Krsna (Himself), and spoke thus. (1)

SEA SATA

agryon ca Ulael aededa ia dq war a =aeufeona i 2 | 
wea wide fogs fadtiamt samgara svereit udl ai 3 
aes A deat gata fees as aa mere wat aa faqs: | x | 
a a geet wn armgqa adi afm ae att anes fat & | 
aa Aq ste or wmaitfecitga: | wewatsateidl aad cement afefer | & | 
meee Tat at Fuad gale: iehreat a wea RA aa alma | 
Aft our «= fameriftert: i feoanst: ardsy aresereforaa | ¢ |

Tard a facet Wey cat Ui magqaemrefetent = |

Tags gedsiercsia: fois wero wat ad aie | 
Sideaas: et | yetatceead | sa: urenfeaaha aa aaa: wd: 120!

Uddhava submitted : Lord, as recommended by the Devarsi, You should (certainly)

help Your cousin, who intends to perform the Rajasuya sacrifice, and should also protect 
those who seek Your protection. (2) A Rajastya sacrifice (however) is capable of being

erformed, O almighty Lord ! only by one who has conquered all the quarters. | am 
therefore driven to the conclusion that both these objects, can be gained by the 
overthrow of. Jarasandha. (3) Indeed great will be our advantage, O Protector of cows, 
if we simply succeed In accomplishing this; and Your restoring the imprisoned kings to 
freedom will bring glory to You. (4) Possessing (as he does) the strength of ten thousand 
elephanis, king Jarasandha is as a matter of fact not very easy to resist even for giants 
other than Bhima, who is his equal in strength. (5) He should, however, be vanquished 
in a duel and not otherwise; for he has an army consisting of a hundred Aksauhinis. He 
is a devotee of the Brahmanas and never spurns the request of Brahmanas. (6) 
(Therefore,) let Bhima approach him in the guise of a Brahmana and ask of him the 
boon of a single combat. In Your presence he will no doubt succeed in killing him in a 
duel. (7) Lord, You are the almighty, formless Time. The creation and destruction of the 
universe take place through Your power. Brahma and Sankara are mere instruments (in 
carrying out the design). (8) (After the destruction of Jarasandha) the consorts of the 
kings (imprisoned by him) would sing in their (respective) homes of Your glorious act of 
destroying their common enemy and bringing about the release of their (respective) 
husbands (who are dear to them as their own selves), even as the cowherdesses (of 
Vraja) sing of Your having delivered them (from the clutches of the demon Sankhactda), 
the sages who have taken refuge in You celebrate the rescue of the king of elephants 
and of Sita (the Daughter of king Janaka), and we sing of Your having released Your 
parents (from Karnsa’s captivity). (9) Thus, O Krsna, the destruction of Jarasandha will 
serve many a great purpose. As the merits of the imprisoned kings and the sins of 
Jarasandha are going to bear fruit thereby, the performance of the Rajasuya sacrifice 
is in a large measure liked by You also. (10)

Sri Suka went on: Pariksit, the aforesaid counsel of Uddhava was faultless and good 
In every respect. The Devarsi, the elderly Yadavas and Sri Krsna too approved of it. (11) 
Now, with the approval of elders (Vasudeva and others) the almighty Lord Sri Krsna

\

through the kingdoms of Paficala and Matsya and finally reached Indraprastha. (22) Pariksit, 
the sight of Sri Krsna is a rare boon. king Yudhisthira was delighted to hear the news of His 
arrival and marched out of the city with his priests, friends and relations. (23) Amidst the 
singing of auspicious songs, sounds of trumpets and other musical instruments, and loud 
recitation of the Vedas by Brahmanas, he went forth with great zeal to receive the Lord, just 
as the senses begin to function as soon as the life-breath returns. (24) At the sight of Sri 
Krsna, whom he had seen after a long time, the heart of Yudhisthira overflowed with emotion 
and he embraced the Lord, his most beloved friend, again and again.(25) Encircling with his 
arms the person of Sri Krsna, the sacred abode of Laksmi (the goddess of beauty), the king 
was rid of all evils and felt extremely delighted. With tears in his eyes and hair standing on 
end, he forgot all about this delusive world. (26) Bhima too was transported with joy when 
he embraced his dear cousin with a broad smile on his lips and his heart overwhelmed with 
an outburst of emotion. Similarly, Arjuna and the twins, Nakula and Sahadeva, with profuse 
tears of joy, embraced the immortal Lord, their best friend and well-wisher. (27) Embraced 
by Arjuna (for a second time), and hailed by Nakula and Sahadeva (the twin brothers), Sri 
Krsna Himself bowed to the Brahmanas and the elder (among the Kurus) in the order of their 
age and seniority. (28) Honoured by the Kurus, Srfjayas and Kaikayas, the Lord also duly 
returned them honours. SUutas (chroniclers), Magadhas (panegyrists), Gandharvas 
(songsters), bards and court jesters sang and danced to the accompaniment of musical 
instruments, such as Mrdangas, conchs, tabors, lutes, drums and trumpets and the 
Brahmanas uttered their praises. (29-30) Thus surrounded by friends and well-wishers, the 
blessed Lord, the foremost among those of sacred renown, entered the decorated city 
amidst the praises and acclamations of the people. (31)

Gfmaal «oahu 9 varedafsaeast: aaendurguign: |

quaenneal weeiews aaa Wit: HRMtaas 133 
wa 40 feral Ree efaseteacatgqnearen: | 
wen fagsa weal udigg ded a8 aqdada: w ats 13x 
afer, Gage sArRafeaha: Ft Tatqrsa TeleecT: | 
vat faett patie germ faqqecradiiad 1341 
aa: faa: uf fter agrauetene aelgueel: feereretats: | 
qaaat USA oecReMlelaa HARON AAA Aaa 13K | 
wT aaa ak | A_@Uoa: | Ag: erat Hoa Avge wta: 13091 
The roads of the city of Indraprastha were sprinkled with the juice flowing from the 
temples of elephants in rut as well as scented water, wondertul many-coloured flags flapped 
(at every step), temporary arches of gold were erected and gold pots filled with water were 
Placed (at the entrance of houses). Having washed and scented themselves and putting on 
New garments, ornaments and garlands, the citizens, men and women, came out of their 
- houses and crowded the streets. (32) Lights were kindled and offerings of flowers made in 
front of all houses: and scented fumes escaped from the lattices of their windows presenting 
an agreeable sight. The houses were decorated with buntings and domes of gold with silver

bases adorned every house-top. Bhagavan Sri Krsna observed this beauty of the Kaurava 
Capitalas He proceeded through its streets. (33) On hearing of His arrival, damsels hurriedly

came out into the streets to see the one attraction of all human eyes, abandoning their 
household works and leaving their respective husbands in their beds. As they came out in 
haste the plaits of their hair and the knots of their dress got loosened on account of their 
ardent desire to see Him. (34) The roads were crowded with elephants, horses, chariots ang 
pedestrians. The women, therefore, saw Sri Krsna and His consorts from the tops of their 
houses, showered flowers on Him and mentally embracing Him greeted Him with Smiling 
looks. (85) Seeing the consorts of Sri Krsna accompanying their husband on the road even 
as the stars surround the moon, the women said to themselves: “We wonder what 
meritorious deeds were performed by these ladies whereby the Best of Persons, Sri Krsna, 
constantly delights their eyes with His winsome smiles and sportful glances." (36) Here ang 
there prominent and sinless citizens and leaders of tradeguilds met Him with auspicious 
articles in their hands and offered Him worship. (37) 
SUA: We Were: THeMerels: laaraegud: owfaee waar 3c! 
yar fanaa wid Het fyatae Sater wg aa owe 13¢1 
Wee Jeadta eaddeted: | geal afaad Hea Waleed WU: Ivo! 
faqgarieatatt POIAHAMAA | AA A POA Ws AA aitatad: SQ. 
WA UsliaM HON HOI Aaa: | stad Sao Peat Ast aaah Aa 121 
colferat feraterat at Seat Arahat Gey | SAMA Ae ATA SLT: 13 | 
qa faa mht sada ads aaa ae’ a Ad Aaq xv! 
Wife weet af— wedge: | arate aa a ua fear aM Hat isu! 
saa aidtearar Ue: frafrentiari fae wae wea wed: 16! 
Sf SA AMTad ASI TRAE Gears SATAY SATE POTATO ATA HAAATAISeATA: 1198 | 
Welcomed by the women of the palace with eyes blooming with joy and excited with 
emotion, Bhagavan Sri Krsna entered the king's palace. (38) When Kunti saw her brother's 
son, Sri Krsna, the Lord of the three worlds, her heart was filled with delight. Rising from her 
couch alongwith her daughter-in-law, Draupadi, she gave Him a hearty embrace. (39) King 
Yudhisthira was beside himself with joy on having brought (with him) Sri Krsna, the Supreme 
Ruler of the gods, within his palace and, full of reverence, did not know how to proceed with 
His worship. (40) Sri Krsna bowed to His aunt and other elderly women, and was in His turn 
saluted by Draupadi and His sister Subhadra, O King! (41) Under the direction of her mother _ 
in-law, Draupadi, honoured Rukmini, Satyabhama, Bhadra, Jambavati, Kalindi, Mitravinda, 
Laksmana, the devoted Satya and other consorts of Sri Krsna, who had accompanied them, 
_ by offering them costumes, garlands and other articles of beauty. (42-43) The virtuous King 
Yudhisthira comfortably lodged Bhagavan SriKrsna with His army, attendants, ministers and 
consorts with elaborate arrangements for the supply of fresh articles (for their use). (44) 
Alongwith Arjuna, Sri Krsna propitiated the god of fire by offering to him the Khandava forest 
and rescued Maya, the demon, who in his turn constructed a wonderful assembly hall for the 
King. (45) In order to please Yudhisthira, the Lord spent several months at Indraprastha.

There He occasionally went out with Arjuna for excursion in his chariot followed by a number 
of warriors. (46)

Thus ends the seventy-first discourse entitled "Sri Krsna's visit to Indraprastha, ” 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Dis. 72 | BOOK TEN 423

sty Teen faraiseara:

Discourse LXX]]

Jarasandha killed

ART SAA 
wa © Serer STi afta: | arent abadsauiqnia afefer: 1 2 | 
ard: GeqeEs Whisker: 1 sata Bernsen F121

Sri Suka began again : Pariksit, one day, King Yudhisthira, while seated in his court 
surrounded by sages, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas, his own brothers (Bhima and others), 
preceptors, elders of the race, clansmen and relations as well as his kinsmen, addressed 
Bhagavan Sri Krsna indeed within their hearing (as follows). (1-2)

Ta Faq 
eat Wee wea eet: | aed faydiiadead aed a: TA 2 | 
aie siard ok Ya aha areas weal quai 
facha a Hae damataremad afe a sift gar area i x | 
Wd taed NadsUNacdaywate wad ole UG: | 
Q ai Ustad + aera araaar Fst yeaia fast Hegaarry! & | 
aA Wa: wurnenata UM Adie: AAea: MTA: | 
aaant amika A yee: Aarqeagqedt a feudatsz «€ |

King Yudhisthira submitted : Govinda ! through the performance of the sovereign 
sacrifice, Rajasuya, | intend to worship You as well as the gods, who are but Your part 
manifestations. Kindly accomplish this desire of mine, O Lord ! (3) The pair of wooden 
sandals You wear under Your lotus-like feet destroy all evil. Those holy persons who 
constantly worship them, meditate on them and extol them obtain release from the bondage 
of mundane existence. They get even worldly boons, if they seek for them. Others, however, 
do not get either. (4) O God of gods, let these men of the world directly perceive the glory 
Of worshipping Your lotus-like feet. Lord, kindly demonstrate to the Kuru and Srnjaya chiefs 
the destinies of those who worship and those who do not worship You. (5) Lord, You are the 
Self of all, the Supreme Brahma, being of the nature of self-enjoyment and looking on all with 
an equal eye; the cognition of ‘Self and ‘not Self' does not exist In You. Those who worship 
You win Your favour even as persons betaking themselves to the wishyielding tree gain their 
object. The degree of success attained by them is commensurate with the amount of service 
they have put forth and does not point to any perversity on Your part. (6)

wen, craft wa waar wae | Heat aa a aifiotery Aaeerte | 9 | 
saftnt fran agerafi 7: sai aaa oyarardiftad: 9 sHdsat| ¢ | 
fafa quit walt Heat A Id at MATE adeaaeta «= Alesha! S| 
wt a waa TS RTCA: | Hartt Ase Geta A sTaAA: ol 
4 wit a aver aaa Bram fayfattratfiadd eatsit faq unisia: 1981 |

The glorious Lord said : O King, your resolution is excellent. Through the performance

a

a a rr = A

of the Rajasuya sacrifice, your auspicious fame will extend to all the three world. (7) This 
sovereign sacrifice, O king, is welcomed by the sages, manes, gods, all your'friends ang 
relations including Myself, and, in fact, by all beings. (8) Conquering all the kings and bringing 
the world under your control, collect all necessary things and then perform the great 
sacrifice.(9) O king, these brothers of yours are born of deities (like Indra, the wind-god ang 
others), who are guardians of the world. You yourself are a man of wisdom and self-contro| 
and have conquered Me by your virtues. Those who have not controlled their mind and 
senses cannot win Me. (10) Even the greatest of gods in this world cannot expect to 
overpower My devotee by means of his energy, glory, splendour and supernatural powers,

much less any earthly being. (11) 
HR SAAT

Fara wmagd sia: Heemtaras: | oq fefasisgarn feeqasiag ied 122 | 
Geed alauramiead de Gara: fet sdreat Apeqckat dere | 
TTS Galak Aca: Sheha: Us Asch: 123 1

a faster FOR a sisigiesa sista sterdarra RR Sauteed eI 
Fad weet yUdetadt ek: 1 ares Aa seat Aart FIek! 
West: RIN selogeraa:isgqfitast ad geswadl ad: 12h 
a Tassadar Wey yeaa selva Ana Wren HAallafsa: ie 
ter, aguas, aMat AMA aa: Wass VE A Ga ad Haase 121 
fe que fataaont feeacnreaarer(t: | fs a ca Achar oH: Ut: GAaielary 128 | 
Shea BW Pat Wa aan gar atfelit aa He: G area: Mea VUas: lol 
thas wea seoqh: farfadie: | ane: qual agal weyaul Ya TWat: 1221

Sri Suka continued : Pariksit, hearing these words of the Almighty Lord, King -

Yudhisthira was extremely delighted. His face became cheerful like a fresh-blown lotus. He 
commissioned all his brothers to conquer the earth. Bhagavan Sri Krsna infused His energy 
into the Pandavas and made them unconquerable. (12) King Yudhisthira sent his youngest 
brother Sahadeva alongwith Srfjaya warriors to conquer the southern regions; he deputed 
Nakula alongwith the Matsyas to the west, Arjuna and the Kekayas to the north, and Bhima, 
accompanied by the Madras, to the east. (13) O King, conquering all the kings by dint of their 
prowess, these warriors brought untold riches from the various quarters to king Yudhisthira 
who was preparing for the sacrifice. (14) When Yudhisthira heard that Jarasandha remained 
unsubdued, he became moody and began to muse. Bhagavan SrikKrsna then laid before him 
the plan suggested by Uddhava: so the tradition goes. Thereupon Bhimasena, Arjuna and 
Bhagavan Sri Krsna assumed the guise of Brahmanas and went to Girivraja (the modern 
Giridih), the capital of Jarasandha. (15-16) King Jarasandha was a devotee of the Brahmanas 
and scrupulous in the observance of the sacred duty of a householder. The three Ksatriyas 
disguised as Brahmanas went to Jarasandha's palace at the hour appointed for the 
entertainment of unexpected guests. There they made their request to Jarasandha as 
follows. (17) “O king, may you be blessed. Know us (three) to be your guests come from 4 
long distance. We have come with a definite purpose: therefore, please grant us OUI 
request.(18) O king, a forbearing person can bear anything; the wicked can do-anything; (in 
fact, there is nothing which he will regard as prohibited); and a generous donor will not 
hesitate to give away anything. And none is foreign to a man of undifferentiating outlook. (1 9) 
Ifa capable men, through his mortal body, does not earn enduring fame, worthy of being sung

men of aie ae to be pitied and censured. (20) Kings HariScandra and 
Rantideva, S!bl, an : % I, the sage Mudgala (who lived on grains gleaned from the fields), 
the famous pigeon oO t € legend (who gave up his life for the sake of a fowler) and the fowler 
who sacrificed his life in imitation of the pigeon's self-sacrificing act), and many more 
attained lasting happiness through the transient body and its belongings." (21)

Nh SAA

TERA ETAT | Wray faqa esyatafadad 1221

raat eat mee fare 1 cart fafa as strearafa aeasny 123 t

aed gat aifeiicirm feeaeneet | teraie sifsrentr fares faeyat 12%

Ba fetta fare fesratttt | atafa wet sere arefaroitstr Sent] 121

sitaat sterorata eat -ael: ameeri at uaa jet faqe oat: 1261

aerate: Te = PMOINAqaler| 2 fas frat art cerenarsnistt a: 1201 
Sri Suka went on : Pariksit, from their tone, appearance and forearms bearing scars 
caused by the friction of bow-strings, Jarasandha came to know that the newcomers were 
no Brahmanas, but Ksatriyas come in the guise of Brahmanas. He had a hazy notion that 
he had seen them somewhere before. (22) But he reflected, “Though Ksatriyas, they have 
taken this guise of Brahmanas (out of fear for Me).When they have gone to the length of 
seeking a gift from me, | shall give them even this body though difficult to part with. (23) God 
Visnu, appearing in the guise of a Brahmana, deprived Bali of his lordly position; and yet the 
unsullied fame of Bali is sung extensively in all directions. (24) Itis true, Visnu had assumed 
that diminutive form of a Brahmana in order to return the ruling authority to its rightful owner 
Indra. Bali had come to know it and was opposed by Sukra, his preceptor; and yet he gave 
away the earth. (25) This body is sure to perish one day. A Ksatriya who does not endeavour 
to attain extensive fame through it, and does not live for the sake of the Brahmanas alone, 
lives in vain." (26) (Pariksit), Jarasandha was a liberal-minded king. Reflecting thus, he said 
to Sri Krsna, Arjuna and Bhimasena, disguised as Brahmanas, as follows:— Brahmanas,

seek whatever you desire; | am prepared to give you everything, even my head.” (27)

Ga a ak wis ge ae veel Gael aad el Wert AaaligM: 1221 
a gale: ue Wa Tar! smaaiged at pet site at RIA 1ze1 
wanaat wet were: St ara: | ane arafeet weal Fe ae aa a: 1201 
a war sfeon aed afr fagactar nat SAT Aaa AAR BOT Ad: 1321 
art q aaa qed afte a A wa: | arab 7 Aaa Shey AiGeTset AA 132 
saat sfin@ara rama Wed? wart! feta aera sim Yue ae: 133 
a: at ws dt daaeatat i sugdrncarat warat wigdet ax! 
Hosen fafrarfit wet afyota lard: AUT Ae Acar eégut: 1g 
WaAeeersiect aap: reat: farrat Us acetal efet: 1361 
AURA sRaediscenfertanteste | 
eee Hqeditarcaia alqa=al: 13191 
zai a, yeaariaariare wat ABA ST |

Beaeda: TEAR AA RATA AAA ASAT AMSA: 1321 
qa sew: aaterancetsa: | Pfedeayg Genatorstsarsa 13 1 
wi waders get: wafaafa: fen fete Yeafaft fetgat: vol 
The glorious Lord said : " O great king, we are no Brahmanas seeking food from you, 
We have come here in search of a combat. If it pleases you, grant us the boon of a single 
combat with you. (28) Thatis Bhima son of Kunti, he is his younger brother, Arjuna, and know 
Me to be their cousin, Krsna, your former adversary." (29) Hearing these words of Sri Krsna, 
Jarasandha laughed loudly and, filled with rage, said, “ If you seek a combat, fools, | Shall 
certainly offer fight with you. (30) But, Krsna, | shall not fight with you. You are a coward and 
rose balance of mind in battle. Afraid of me you abandoned your city, Mathura, and took 
shelter in the sea. (31) As for Arjuna, he is no warrior. He is junior to me in age and has no 
great prowess either. He is, therefore, no match for me. Bhima (alone) is equal in strength 
to me." (32) With these words Jarasandha gave a huge mace to Bhimasena, and himself 
taking up another, came out of the city. (33) Going to the arena these two warriors who were 
furious in battle, closed with and struck each other with their respective maces, which were 
as hard as the thunderbolt. (84) They began to move right and left, manoeuvring for position 
with such adroitness that they looked like two actors playing at fight on a public stage. (35) 
When they hurled their maces at each other, the rattling noise resembled the clap of thunder 
or the sound of impact between the tusks of two fighting tuskers. (86) Just as when two 
elephants burning with race fight with each other, with twigs of the sun-plant and the twigs 
are reduced to powder, evenso the maces of the two warriors hurled with the full force of their 
arms against each other's shoulders, hips, feet, hands, thighs and collar-bones, were 
reduced to pulp. (37) Thus when their maces fe!l broken, the two warriors full of rage struck 
each other with their fists as hard as steel. As they fought like two elephants, the blows they 
dealt at each other with their palms produced a sound as sharp as the clap of thunder. (38) 
Pariksit, Jarasandha and Bhimasena were equally matched so far as training, strength and 
vigour were concerned and both fought with unabated violence; yet their contest remained 
undecided. (39) Though engaged in a mortal fight during the day-time, they lived as friends 
during the nights. In ihis way twenty-seven days passed. (40)

Und Wed A We Wr gale: 14 anise sraet field afer area xe! 
wig fage sift a sai wets Ba Asrarferdaaghk: 1<2! 
Aisr-aiaetrare aaeamaesia: |eatarara «Ss fa@ed:«SOleafaalSs aT. «13 | 
aq, tage vere Ula: sett at: 1 Wetat ules: aa UAaTATaA Yao IX 
Wh Ue Uelssmta cata el A: 1 Wed: wear areata Aer: 1¥4l 
Wenulelequurenfeguatitac | Ucnsteferyentt stencs aaa: Ue: 1¥G! 
weet «= ered TA Gsremaqdin «=o ofteg «= wage Iv 
Wea Re MMe YMA: | snafigetaren ane oft wy: | 
TSA UIA, Gea! AMAA B 1X1 
Sit Arerad Fe Wee Seda ares Saas Seas am feaafsantseara: 162! 
Pariksit, on the twenty-eighth day Bhima said to his cousin, Sri Krsna, "Krsna, lam unable 
to overthrow Jarasandhain a duel." (41) SriKrsna, who knew the secret of Jarasandha's birth

and death, (viz. ,) how the demoness Jara joined his body divided into two and conferred life 
on him, considered the matter and comforting Bhimasena infused His own strength into the

pis. 73 ] BOOK TEN 427

latter. (42) Having hit upon the plan of overthrowing the enemy, Sri Krsna, whose insight was 
infallible, took up a twig and split it into two by way of a signal to demonstrate to Bhimasena 
how to do it. (43) The foremost warrior of enormous strength, Bhima, understood what was 
tobe conveyed to him and taking hold of Jarasandha by the feet threw him on the ground.(44) 
Pressing a foot of the enemy with one foot, he took hold of the other with both his hands, and 
split him into two from the anus, as a huge elephant splits up a twig. (45) The people saw the 
two halves of Jarasandha's person each with one foot, one thigh, one testicle, one hip, half 
the back and one breast; one shoulder, one arm, one eye, one eyebrow and one ear. (46) 
Great was the outcry among his subjects when Jarasandha, the king of Magadha, fell. 
Bhagavan Sri Krsna and Arjuna greeted Bhimasena by embracing him. (47) The Almighty 
Lord, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, is the life-giver of all creatures: no one can fathom His greatness. 
Having installed Jarasandha's son, Sahadeva, on the throne of Magadha, he set at liberty 
all the kings who had been imprisoned by Jarasandha. (48)

Thus ends the seventy-second discourse entitled "Jarasandha killed", in the latter 
half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31g Frafadarseara:

Sri Krsna and others return to Indraprastha 
Sy SaTaI

aaa 2 wars otea afte fafstar: 1a frter fitswar afear near: | g | 
aren: ended: waleaftenfein: aed sagas «deel 2 I 
sta adele darimievteor aesadadet CpraatHplisey | 3 | 
Usleed TETAS OTC AAA | fenttegnenechen leg argal tere, 1X1 
gmemrna fadid aqme fad ga aanat feed ga Rear & | 
fir ga wea wre ga aie: i sotqenor «= ye: | reat: 1 & I 
PMA aaae leet eA: | saratqedtcnsr id: sieieat FT: 1 9 |

Sri Suka began again : Pariksit, Jarasandha had subdued in battle without much effort 
twenty thousand and eight hundred Ksatriya princes and had confined them in a place 
Surrounded by mountains on all sides. Released by Bhagavan Sri Krsna, they came out of 
their Captivity with unclean bodies and dirty clothes. (1) They had been emaciated with 
hunger and their faces were lank. The long confinement had considerably reduced their 
weight. Coming out of the prison, they saw Lord Sri Krsna standing before them. Having a 
complexion dark as the cloud, cladin yellow silken robes and possessed of fourarms, holding 
a lotus in one hand and wielding the mace, conch and discus with others, bearing the mark 
of Srivatsa (a curl of hair) on the breast, with eyes reddish like the interior of a lotus, with a 
lovely and cheerful face, adorned with glowing ear-rings shaped like the alligator, and decked 
with a crown, a necklace of pearls, bracelets and girdle and a pair of armlets, the jewel 
Kaustubha shining in His neck and a garland of sylvan flowers hanging on His breast, the 
Sight of the Lord kept them spellbound. They seemed to drink Him with their eyes, lick Him 
With their tongues, inhale Him with their nose and embrace Him with their arms. All their sins

were washed away at His very sight. They bowed to the Lord, touching. His blessed feet with 
their heads. (2—6) The joy derived through Bhagavan Sri Krsna's sight removed the languor 
caused by their confinement. With joined palms, they offered their praises to the Lord in the

following words. (7) UST a:

an 0 haa (Tee | Sore a: Hert Pafeoorqeneega: | ct 
330 qaqa «Te HEMET | Stqyel Aa Wad Ua Usegfefelat ie | 
aaeduaast 2a Fa feed Fa: 1 aamifedishar Aad Aaelsaem: 1k01 
WIG AM Set AT SHIA Ua aes AGT ae Mat 1881

at out 86 simerpepat «= rite etter: I

Ha: 3a: Sl stameson: wat Ae eel sda: 122

q wa HOT Wiktear eedatdor faced: Sra: |

Set dat wadsqarua faascuiscit eA 71e31

at A We BNghretd eA Wad Vad Sat Yar

soft weame fat farms Sa a oltte7 ex 
aq a: Galena a a awed: iafada a fame aeaenhhe ie 
FON age RA UII Maes Were AA AA: 12a I

The kings prayed : O God of gods, remover of the distress of those who take refuge in 
You, O Imperishable Lord, we offer our salutations to You. Disgusted with the bitter 
experience of this fearful scourge of transmigration, we seek refuge in You; pray protect 
us.(8) Krsna, we have no grudge against Jarasandha; in fact, it was through Your grace that 
we were deprived of our kingdoms. (9) Puffed up with the pride of sovereignty and power, 
a king is generally deprived of true happiness; for, deluded by Your Maya, he comes to regard 
worldly fortune as permanent. (10) Just as the ignorant take the mirage for a sheet of water, 
even so the unwise attached to the senses regard the ever changing Maya as reality. (11) 
Lord, blinded by the intoxication of wealth and power, at one time we vied with one another 
in our lust for conquering the world and mercilessly brought about the destruction of our own 
people in pursuing our mad projects. We were so arrogant that we took no notice of You 
standing before us as Death itself. (12) Krsna, mysterious are the ways of Time. Its potency 
is unfathomable; for it is one of Your many forms. It has deprived us of our fortune, and our 
pride has been shattered through Your grace. We now contemplate on Your sacred feet. (13) 
Lord, we no longer seek the boon of sovereignty enjoyable through this ever decaying body, 
the nursery of ailments. We have realized that the pleasures of sovereignty are like a mirage- 
Nor do we crave for the posthumous enjoyments of heaven which sound attractive only to 
the ear. (14) Pray tell us now the means whereby we may constantly remember You lotus- 
like feet, even though we may have to undergo a series of births. (15) Krsna, You have 
descended on this earth through the agency of Vasudeva. You destroy the sins of those who 
come in contact with You and bring them deliverance. You are the Supreme Spirit. You 
exterminate the sufferings of those who bend low before You. O Govinda, the protector Of 
cows, we Offer our obeisances to You. (16)

Mah Sa 
aaa «=| War Usifimerert: | are qeoreara sua: seers FIAT 1291

$ri Suka resumed: Pariksit, when the 
words the merciful Lord, who affords shelt 
accents as below. (17)

kings now released from captivity praised in those 
er to those who seek it, He replied to them in sweet

fem aaa yo Heard FaAaaUT: | Sree usa sated JOT 123 I 
cet Fe ST Tet TRIS | sittate fete: WIT FaSAAAT: 120 | 
wat Ute faa Celera! at aeriisedteint: wor efor zeit 1221 
tad: IMMA TA ga Aaa wag om a dant afar faker 1221 
STATA = ARITA «tae: | TETAS AA: WS AMA Hel STA 1231

Bhagavan Sri Krsna said : As desired by you, O kings, you will henceforth entertain 
unwavering devotion to Me, the Universal Lord, who am the very Self of all. (18) You deserve 
congratulation, O kings, for your resolution, and what you say is certainly true. For | have 
seen that excess of pride of wealth and power makes people mad. (19) Haihaya, Nahusa, 
Vena, Ravana, Narakasura and many other gods, demons and kings fell from their position 
through the intoxication of wealth and power. (20) Know that the body and everything 
connected with it is perishable inasmuch as it is subject to birth. Therefore, do not get 
attached to them. Carefully controlling your mind and senses, worship Me through sacrifices 
and protect your subjects in the righteous way. (21) Beget children for the continuity of the 
family line, and not for enjoyment, and accepting with an equable mind, as a boon from Me, 
whatever experiences come to your lot in the shape of birth and death, pleasure and pain, 
gain and loss etc., live in the world with your mind devoted to Me. (22) Remain indifferent to 
the body and everything connected therewith, take delight in the Self, practise Bhajana and 
observe religious vows. Thus fixing your mind steadily on Me, you will in the end attain to me,

the Supreme Spirit.(23 
P Bes) My SAA

satlexa FAM. Hit War FAA: | AT Adah Fear, Raat AsteHsiet 12x 1

qual ome «| WeRA RT | ARR rata: Afacat: 1241

Wate aaa Geld Akos! ams fafaddmtergeredalfad: 1261

X uf warea Uae years: | feagatfa: and sige Tea Aa: 1RWot

WH | «ReMANa «Afererara ye! ore Gadalad: Seg AAAI 1221

qo Wa Wa: He HA GACT | AGEs aed: Hethl A area: 1281

we: seplawaed AeqETa SAA | AMAA UTA Ate: 120 | 
Sti Suka went on: Pariksit, thus instructing the kings, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the almighty 
Lord of the universe, detailed a number of attendants, men and women, to give them a 
bath.(24) He then got Sahadeva, son of Jarasandha, to honour the kings by offering them 
- Wearing apparel, ornaments, garlands, sandal-paste and other things worthy of royal use.(25) 
After they had finished their bath and adorned themselves they were entertained with 
excellent dishes and other luxuries—such as betel leaves etc.,—worthy of kings. (26) Thus 
treated with due honour by Bhagavan SriKrsnaand rid of their suffering, the kings shone with 
their brilliant ear-rings like the planets at the end of the rainy season. (27) The Lord then 
Provided them all with chariots adorned with jewels and gold and drawn by good horses,

‘cheered them with sweet words and sent them away to their respective territories. (28) Thus 
delivered from their calamity by the high-souled Sri Krsna, the kings left for their capitals 
contemplating on the Lord, His virtues and noble deeds. (29) Reaching their kingdoms, the 
related to their subjects the benevolent doings of the Supreme Person and diligently followeg 
His injunctions in their daily lives. (30)

Seki ould 4 wimaaa sara: 1 creisat daa: sand, Gade gira: 1321 
Tal AY GWSal eM aaAstana: | ead: Yel geal AGaTae: 1321 
Tea 896 iidaa Seated: WARY APT Be UST AAAI: 1331 
sana «|OUR MIATSfastaeal: | CAAA aU Aaqsds 13x | 
fra taster «| Shale ana! Street Gar TUT Ararat fersrsq 1341 
sf SHErTaa HEM URASS Sedat eae SaTes HoT raafassiseara: 1193 | 
Pariksit, thus having Jarasandha killed by Bhimasena, and being duly honoured by

Jarasandha's son, Sahadeva, SriKrsna, accompanied by Bhima and Arjuna, departed (for 
Indraprastha). (31) On reaching the outskirts of the city, the three victorious heroes blew 
their respective conchs, bringing joy to their friends and sorrow to their enemies. (32) The 
people of Indraprastha were extremely delighted at heart to hear the sound and concluded 
at once that Jarasandha had been killed and that King Yudhisthira had well-nigh achieved 
his object. (83) There Bhimasena, Arjuna and Sri Krsna bowed to King Yudhisthira and 
related to him all that they had done. (34) Overwhelmed with emotion at the exceptional

favour shown to him by Bhagavan Sri Krsna, King Yudhisthira shed tears of joy and could 
not speak a word. (35)

Thus ends the seventy-third discourse, bearing on the return of Sri Krsna and others (to 
Indraprastha), in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS my

AA Aq: Ay lada sears: 
Discourse LXXIV 
SiSupala killed (by Sri Krsna)

ARIA SAA 
wT gfe wn serra feet: eer aque a ser aera | 2 |

Sri Suka began again: Pariksit, Yudhisthira was highly delighted to hear of J arasandhas 
fall and of the supreme glory of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, and spoke to Him as follows. (1)

SeBx Sarz 
4 Wectemha: at clare: tage gos weet firdarenaq 2 | 
a warnieraant darren easqaret WeRMeadasaay | 2 | 
4 @Gawlehae ae: we: ladda Act gat a gat wa: 1 xX | 
4 4 asia tort wari mea 1a daft a arate: uqaritra aaa | 4 |

——_

King Yudhisthira submitted : Krsna, L 
éankara, and guardians of the world like Indra 
they obtain the rare privilege of receiving it. (

ords of the three worlds like Brahma and 
5 aes heads to Your command whenever 
Intinite Lord, though extr mble and 
wretched, we are conceited enough to regard ourselves as kings a vilers Youn of 
degrading us) You Submit to our authority and Carry out our commands. O lotus-eyed Lord, 
this iS nothing but Imitation on Your part of the ways of men. (3) Just as the brilliance of the 
sun is neither enhanced Nor suffers diminution with the ascent or decline of the sun, even 
SO Your doings In no Way exalt You or detract from Your glory. For You are the Supreme 
Spirit, the one Apsolute without a second. (4) O unconquerable Lord, thoughts of diversity 
like "| and Mine’ and “Thou and Thine" obtain only among the ignorant. Such crooked notions 
of difference do not find place even in Your devotees, much less in You. Whatever You do 
is, therefore, nothing but Your Sport. (5)

Mylh Sara 
Sea Aa Hes ast Berl a Faheawt: | Heated: Ureil AIO Welaea: 1 GI 
srt 86: «= AAifadisfaa: | afaseeraa: qual Baa: masfad: 1 9 | 
fama armca: gafasia: maids: ment af agreqea wa alc 
svat Heal ahalt Wat wrela sgh: | aise Aseret aiaalsHaawt: |e | 
STeMeTAT «= ATA SUTSIUHUTea: | es: 9 ead «= fageat «= AeTAfa: 1g0t 
wero: | atta aa: Yel Ualesera: 1 AAA: TAUAAT Wel THcal FT 1ke!

Sri Suka resumed : Saying so, and with Bhagavan Sri Krsna's concurrence, King 
Yudhisthira invited at an hour propitious for the sacrifice Brahmanas versed in the Vedas and 
proficient in the Vedic ritual to officiate as priests etc., at the sacrifice. (6) They were Sri 
Krsnadwaipayana Vyasa, Bharadwaja, Sumantu, Gautama, Asita, Vasistha, Cyavana, 
Kanva, Maitreya, Kavasa, Trita, Viswamitra, Vamadeva, Sumati, Jaimini, Kratu, Paila, 
Paragara, Garga and Vaigampayana, Atharva, Kasyapa, Dhaumya, Parasurama, Sukracarya, 
Asuri, Vitihotra, Madhutchanda, Virasena and Akrtavrana. (7—9) Besides these, he also 
invited Dronacarya, Bhisma, Krpacarya and others, (as well as) Dhrtarastra with all his sons

and the noble-minded Vidura to come and help in the performance. (1 0) In order to witness 
the great sacrifice many princes with their ministers and chief officers, Brahmanas,

Ksatriyas, Vaigyas and Stdras, arrived at Indraprastha, O king ! (11)

qa aad AIA: Alege: | HET aA Bea clerarasimt FIA 1RRI

Sm: fincloeun ae aM Gaigaeat leat fatterradaa: 1231

ann: faereral faeneerem: | great aaah | ATenaCENOT: 12

Tamg wed Uses Aaa UsAe Tag: A Ue: UMgHTaT 4 124

ARR oo qTer «GoM: | SST ARIS Aster aaaata: |

wera faferad, sreacararaa: 12et

Gaserataret A, HEA! SSE, ARITA, eT, HATE: | Rot 
agian the priests ploughed the one, as the soerfcer. (12) The utensils used 
In this sacrifice were all made of gold as they were in the sacrifice performed by Varuna in 
ancient times. Brahma, Sankara, Indra and other guardians of the world, Siddhas and

Gandharvas with their retinues, Vidyadharas and Nagas, sages, Yaksas and Raksasas, 
irds, Kinnaras. Caranas and powertul princes with their queens—all came to attend the

Rajasuya sacrifice of King Yudhisthira at his invitation. (13—15) All of them admitted without 
any hesitation that he was qualified to perform the same. Fortoa devotee of SriKrsna nothing 
is impossible of achievement. Then the priests, who were as glorious as the gods, conducted 
for the king the Rajasuya sacrifice according to the scriptural ordinance, as in ancient times 
the gods did for Varuna. (16) On the day fixed for extracting the Soma juice, the king 
honoured the blessed priests as well as the supervisors of the performance with due

attention. (17) z

aeuendoné «A faqerd: AMIE: | AePtar «—«_- Weare 181

sea GAA: A Wa Aad Ua: 1 wT aA sam: wal agenesis: 1ee1 
aerate fast smaas 9 aelcent: | sifamedal Aa: Ghel API AM: 1201 
Uh Ualigdtalsaradareatte «ANA! STeIsSHTISTS: TAM: Yaa FAA: 121

fafa malitt waaq aederi¢ed aed ad: set eaifeser 122

aR AMA AeA saat aA wd Ad AayAMNeMAE Aa 123

SSAA VRAIS, Tat Heung watad| teal Wes: He AY Alesha AAA: 1241

seat fesitd Us Bhal Ble AMS | Aheaaysies std: = oTafa|es: 1261

qed: fara clawed: aud: AMSMe-apsalsdedel 1201

ala: widentgrasfauisr deter: | atéferaraqguriatt aratend, GAaagA 1 2C1

Sa Ud dea ad moat sa: iaat wala Age fda: yerqwe: 121 
Now, the members of the assembly proceeded to consider who was worthy of receiving 
the first place of honour, but could not come to any decision for want of unanimity. Thereupon 
Sahadeva addressed the assembly in the following words: (18) "In my opinion Bhagavan Sri 
Krsna, the crown-jewel of the Yadus, is the best man in this assembly and deserve the first 
place of honour. For all the gods as well as Time, Space,Wealth and Whatever other things 
there are in this world—all are but He. (19) The whole universe is His manifestation. The 
sacrifices are He, He is Fire, He is the oblations, He is revealed in the form of the Mantras. 
The path of Knowledge and the path of Action both lead to Him. (20) Members of this august 
assembly, Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the one Absolute without a second; the whole universe is 
His body. Though self-dependent and unborn, He creates, protects and destroys the 
universe by His own will. (21) Through His grace people perform various acts in the world 
and pursue the fourfold object of life, viz., Dharma (virtue), Artha (worldly prosperity), Kama 
(worldly enjoyment) and Moksa (liberation). (22) Therefore, | propose that foremost honour 
should be offered to Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the greatest of the great. Through honouring Him, 
we shall have honoured all beings as well as our own self. (23) He who seeks that his gifts 
should embrace infinity, should make them to Sri Krsna, who is the Self of all beings and 
views, none as other than Himself, who is absolutely unruffled and perfect in everyway." (24) 
Pariksit ! Sahadeva, who was aware of Bhagavan Sri Krsna's greatness, became silent after 
Saying this. All good people in the assembly were pleased to hear this, and applauded him 
saying, ‘well said, well said’. (25) Hearing this ejaculation of the Brahmanas and ascertaining 
the general sense of the members of the assembly, King Yudhisthira was extremely 
delighted and with a heart overwhelmed with emotion, honoured Sri Krsna by offering Him 
the worship due to the First Man in the assembly. (26) In great joy he washed the feet of $1 
Krsna and together with his consort (Draupadi), brothers, ministers and other members Of 
his family, bore on his head the drops of that water, which purify the world. (27) Then he

presented the Lord with robes of yellow silk and ornaments. His eyes being full of tears at 
the time, he could not even distinctly see the Form of the Lord. (28) Seeing Him thus 
honoured, all those present in the assembly joined their palms in reverence, with shouts of 
‘Namo Namah’ (Salutations) and Jaya-Jaya' (Victory to You), and showers of flowers fell on 
Him from the heavens. (29)

ga Pera arelags: eiisgena = qperqurauiaenaaey: | 
skera argenre weet deraa saa aeewasia: 1301

sat ea: Ie sit Gad sala: | agra ae afgatmaraatatierd qT 13g

qa uatael Set WI wed ore aeweda: Bt HO aa Mise 1321

caste «AIA feetetenetar| UE, EIST Glos gir 133 |

aed «= Te: «= PEO: ae aie: Wet Baal mend ax

aaa fe He WH Uhadfeepai quamMd Wa wal mews 13E!

sated, wa #feadssgadaqi agg ater aed aaa: oT: 1301

Wanrerasstot = AMT ABA Ses: | Aare feHfse craraen fae: Rraread_ 1361

Waa seal sae ad aurea: mot faera fig: aousfed sar ise

feat | WTadl: STUART UL SAQA all dat arated &: Sista area: Gated: sol 
_Pariksit, Sisupala heard all this from his seat in the assembly. Enraged at the glorification 
of SriKrsna, he rose from his seat and holding up his arm in great indignation fearlessly spoke 
these harsh words with reference to Sri Krsna. (30) He said, “Leaders of this House, the 
pronouncement of the Vedas that Time is God is quite true; for Time is inviolable, its decree 
cannot be revoked. (This has been made perfectly clear by the proceedings of this 
assembly.) (For) we have seen how even the (hardened) reason of wise and elderly people 
can be misled by the prattlings of children. (31) Remember, you are the best judge to decide 
who is worthy to receive the honour of first place in this assembly. Therefore, please do not 
accept as gospel truth Sahadeva's childish talk that Krsna is worthy of that honour. (32) There 
are present here men of great austerity, learning and sacred vows, men who have wiped out 
their sins through wisdom, great sages who are established in Brahma and adored even by 
the greatest of gods. (33) Ignoring the leaders of this assembly, how can this cowherd, a 
disgrace to his clan and family, be considered worthy of receiving this honour ? Does the crow 
deserve to receive a sacrificial oblation ? (34) He owns no Varna (caste), or ASrama (stage 
Of life), and does not possess nobility of birth; he is beyond the pale of all Dharmas (sacred 
laws) and acts wantonly both against the Vedic injunctions and established usage. Moreover 
he is devoid of all virtues. Under the circumstances, how can he deserve the honour of first 
Place ? (35) You are aware that his clan is under the curse of Yayati, and has, therefore, been 
boycotted by all good people. Moreover, they are all given to unauthorized drinking. How can 
he, therefore, be entitled to receive the honour of first place ? (36) Abandoning Mathura and 
other sacred places (inhabited by Brahmanical sages), they have resorted to a fortified place 
in the sea, destitute of Brahmanas devoted to the Vedas. When they come out of their 
fortifications, they harass all creatures like pirates." (37) Pariksit, all the merits of Sisupala 
had been exhausted. That is why he uttered these and similar harsh words with reference 
to Sri Krsna. But just as the lion does not heed the jackal's howls, even so the Almighty Lord

did not say a wordin reply to Sisupala. (38) But the vilification of the Lord became unbearable 
to the audience, some of whom closed their ears and indignantly left the Hall censuring

Re Re Ree Re ERE RRR RE RR RE RE RR ER RT RT Re ERE RT BEE AT Re Re REM Be Be Re Be BT Me EAE BT ST We We We We Be Be Me Ke We We We We We We We We Ke Me We We We We We We We We SERRE He He te Hr a,

Sisupala for his unjustifiable remarks. (39) (There was reason for this.) For, Pariksit, he who 
on hearing aspersions cast upon God or upon His devotee, does not leave the spot, loses 
his merit and goes down to hell. (40) é 
ad: UWSaa: wel AeMhenrgsa: | sagen: wy: Proefsraraa: ise 1 
TS «TR | etreadoih) ata waiter, Ua: Aala ANA Isa I 
qa war, AM fare wa ca RR: areas Sermad feat: 1w31 
see: FIGTECISATL ATS BA AEM Ta TS Egasifferctferot: iw 
aeleet etd waftataeanaraar | Tzaat Paya cha Yar eA 1s 
AAA TUITE fara | asters areal Bat fF WaMu vg | 
sshasa: Wacenal efaunt fagemerd! da aya faftauhsayetene ive |

Now, the Pandavas, Matsyas, Kaikayas and Srnjayas stood up in rage with uplifted 
weapons, determined to make short work of SiSupala. (41) Undaunted by the threat, the latter 
took up his sword and shield and rebuked the princes who sided with Sri Krsna in the assembly. 
(42) (Observing both the sides prepared for a combat,) Bhagavan Sri Krsna stood up and 
pacified the rulers who sided with Him, and exhibiting some anger out off with His sharp-edged 
discus the head of SiSupala, who had in the meantime swooped on Him. (43) Great and 
tumultuous was the uproar in the assembly when Sisgupala fell down dead. The princes who 
followed him took to their heels to save their lives. (44) Just as a meteor dropping from the sky 
gets absorbed into the earth, even so all people witnessed a column of light emanating from 
SiSupala's body enter Sri Krsna and merge into Him. (45) Pariksit, contemplating on the Lord 
with thoughts of hatred and anger fostered for three consecutive lives, Sisupala became one 
with Him, and was restored to his original place as an attendant of the Lord. Thus itis the thought 
of the individual which determines his future state. (46) After Sisupala's deliverance, Emperor 
Yudhisthira gave sacrificial fees ona liberal scale to the priests and supervisors of the sacrifice 
and honoured all who attended it. Thereafter he performed ablutions betokening the comple- 
tion of the sacrifice, according to the scriptural injunctions. (47)

aaa hd Ua: HPO arate: i sara afafearan Welachwafaa: ix!

Aa SARTAT Waa: | at AU: ATM: Wat eaatga: 1x8 
atid aq wa a agaeqi aqusafadisia farsa va: WA: 14ol

Way Ad Ul Weascindeaamsa wt Parfsa sue 
Ta Mh: ad QAAAGE: | Hol mq aA ead: Wana aqdal 142! 
Seq wd ais 9 pepe! ata Ge fer aHlat SBT Uoggae aL 143 |

Pariksit, having thus brought the Rajasuya sacrifice of Yudhisthira to a successful 
conclusion, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the Supreme Lord of all masters of Yoga, spent some 
months at Indraprastha at the request of His friends and relations. (48) Then the Almighty 
Lord took leave of Yudhisthira, who was reluctant to allow Him to go, and left for Dwaraka 
with His consorts and ministers. (49) Pariksit, | have already narrated to you at considerable 
length (in Skandha VII) how under the curse of Sanaka and his brothers Jaya and Vijaya, the 
two attendants of the Lord at Vaikuntha, had to take repeated births on earth. (50) Having 
finished the ablutions at the close of the Rajastya sacrifice, Yudhisthira shone like Indra (the 
king of gods) in the assembly of Brahmanas and Ksatriyas. (51) Honoured by Yudhisthira

all the gods, men and ethereal beings gladly returned to their respective abodes glorifying .

Bhagavan Sri Krsna and the sacrifice performed by King Yudhisthira. (52) Duryodhana alone

Ee

of all those who had attended the sacrifice could not bear the sight of the vast fortune and 
royal splendour of the Pandavas. For he was sinful and quarrelsome by nature, a veritable 
cancer in the body of the Kuru race, brought into being for its destruction. (53)

ae widde fae: ant decent ume frat a adar: Sse 14s 1 
gf ASMA FSG IRAE erat RAY saTe rarest a aaeaafretsears: how

Pariksit, anyone who sings of this sport of Bhagavan Sri Krsna relating to the destruction 
of Sisupala and Jarasandha, the release of the imprisoned kings and performance of the 
Rajasuya sacrifice by Yudhisthira, will be freed of all sin. (54)

Thus ends the seventy-fourth discourse entitled Sisupala killed (by Sri Krsna), in the 
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Discourse LXXV 
Duryodhana’'s Humiliation 
weaved 
Shida = SBT Temata | aa YRiat HEA Feat A AAMT: | kt 
gateri asifeat Uae: wea: AU: | git Ad A Aaa OTSA | 2

The king (Pariksit) submitted : Holy sage you told me just now that all the kings, sages 
and gods who had assembled there rejoiced at the grand success of the Rajasuya sacrifice 
performed by Yudhisthira and that Duryodhana was the only exception in this matter. O 
worshipful one, please tell me the reason of this. (1-2)

HATA

framers XACT CMe: | area: URaatat Tae NASM: | 2 |

sit) wemaemat eaeaa: Gale: | Aeete eT Aet see I x |

Trem fey: wer: Teles aal ges eu aa Ae: 1 & |

qaert faut alee fagued: | atelenga qa a A Gdedied: | & |

frei wea amedg & aqisada w uta ua: fraferatda: 10 | 
SriSuka replied : Pariksit, your grandfather, Yudhisthira, was a great soul. Bound tohim 
with ties of affection all his relations took upon themselves some form of service or other 
during the sacrifice. (3) Bhima was placed in charge of the kitchen, Duryodhana was master 
Of the treasury, Sahadeva was entrusted with the duty of honouring the guests; while Nakula 
had the charge of procuring supplies. (4) Arjuna waited upon the elders, and Sri Krsna took 
upon Himself the duty of washing the feet of the guests. Draupadi attended to the work of 
S€rving food, while the magnanimous Karna was entrusted with the duty of bestowing 
Gifts.(5) Similarly Satyaki, Vikarna, Hardikya, Vidura, Bharisrava and the other sons of 
Bahlika, Santardana and others were entrusted with one duty or other. All of them

endeavoured to perform their respective duties to the satisfaction of Yudhisthira. (6-7)

mares «Gey «fey | GaaeAeurefaronfe: | 
Ja a wreqads sfas amedeaayaaut Ar ¢ |

Weg aig wuss rch aT: latfeanttr fafeorfat Aagwayetcad 1 e | 
qiet AqEST Waal FN Wi anders A fearyai2o 
fam ETAT: \eogadedar frdq eeprom: 1281

qq aAaTalsigpechanlae: lama Yat Axtdsarga: 1221

AeA gtss1 TAA | cahsagreTakdsd: qerafaur: 1231

eget AT Tah Teese: | fafeareiishifiaret fasrgfelfaet TH: 1 ex

; a: lgtsaisa: stern fastgatrarfia: 1241 
Pariksit ! after the priests and supervisors of the sacrifice, men of learning, friends and 
relations had been duly honoured with sweet words, rich presents and sacrificial fees and 
SiSupala had entered the feet of the Lord, Yudhisthira went to the Ganga to perform the 
concluding ablutions. (8) While the ceremony was being so performed, various instruments 
of music like the Mrdanga, conch, drum, kettledrum, tabor and trumpet were played upon. (9) 
The courtesans danced in great joy, the songsters sang in batches. The sound of the Vina, 
flute and cymbals reached the heavens. (10) Adorned with necklaces of gold, the Yadava, 
Smjaya, Kamboja, Kuru, Kekaya and KoSala kings, with flags of various colours waving in 
the air, followed Yudhisthira to the Ganga shaking the earth with their armies consisting of 
fully accoutred foot-soldiers, elephants, chariots and horses. (11-12) Supervisors of the 
Sacrifice, priests and learned Brahmanas proceeded chanting the Vedic hymns in loud 
intonations. The gods, Rsis, manes and Gandharvas showered flowers on the procession 
from the heavens and sang Yudhisthira's praises. (13) Men and women of the city adorned 
with scents, garlands, beautiful clothes and ornaments (came out on the public roads and) 
sported on, smearing and sprinkling one another with liquids of various kinds. (14) The 
courtesans smeared the men with oil, milk, butter, scented water, turmeric powder, saffron

paste, and were themselves smeared over by men in return. It was thus that they amused 
themselves. (15)

Ue quvmqusede eat am fafa fanaatfeer: | 
a Wgedaa: ukiteam: ustserafnacea fats: 121 
a atid wae fara: fear faqansedtenem: | 
TRAST: ae aepletrat fethtat:-1 201

Justas celestial ladies thronged in the sky in their beautiful aerial cars (to see this festivity 
on earth), (even) so the ladies of the royal House of Indraprastha, curious to have a look at 
the grand procession, came out (in beautiful palanquins and other vehicles) guarded by foot- 
soldiers Bhagavan Sri Krsna, together with His companions, sprinkled water (of various 
colours on them), which made their faces, bloom in bashful smiles, thus heightening their 
beauty. (16) Sprinkled with water the clothes of the queens got wet, so that their limbs 
including their breasts, thighs and hips could be seen through. They also took up syringes 
filled with coloured water and threw jets of water on their brothers-in-law and their friends: 
In the flurry of the moment their braids got loosened and flowers dropped therefrom. Pariksit, 
the sight of this lovely and innocent sport on their part brought impious thoughts in the min@ 
of people possessed of impure hearts. (17) |

a Gals YAATSS: Tex VEAATOAA | Sere taueier: famerfa: HUSA 1221 
cetaTageaseT A Tafa: | aE aMarsgisat We HOTA 1k

| SASSI Waal a: ogEasifer §«6eaftifaqurran: 1201 
weer dd: wt aug au: | mera aa: et ela faeaerL 122 | 
aay Ustet att after ga: | Rahat RAMS ATTA ALOT: 121 
aig = Pegeisaia ada: aritest qaearma anrauadt qa: 1231

at ST: Wet | aftigquemenwivegeqpeneetann: | 
areas Psetionqyparsa: hintaca fay: 12x!

Seated in his chariot drawn by the best horses and decked with gold necklaces, Emperor 
Yudhisthira with Draupadi and other consorts looked as if the great sacrifice Rajasuya with 
the attendant rituals had assumed human forms. (18) After the ritual known by the name 
Patni-Samyaja and the rites connected with the concluding ablutions had been over, the king 
performed Acamana (sipped water born the palm of his hand), and, as directed by priests, 
bathed in the Ganga alongwith Draupadi.(19) At that time the drums of celestials sounded 
in the heavens joined with the sounding of drums by men; and the gods. Rsis, manes and 
men showered flowers. (20) After the Emperor had finished his ablutions, people belonging 
to all castes and stages Of life took their dips in the Ganga; for a bath at that time rids even 
the most sinful of their sins forthwith. (21) Then Yudhisthira put a piece of new silk cloth round 
his loins and another round his shoulders and adorning himself with ornaments, he honoured 
the priests and supervisors of the sacrifice as well as other Brahmanas with gifts of cloth and 
ornaments. (22) Pariksit, a sincere devotee of God, the Emperor saw God in every being and 
honoured all his relations and kinsmen, brother princes, friends and well-wishers, and other 
ordinary folk again and again. (23) Wearing jewelled ear-rings, garlands of flowers, turbans, 
long coats, pieces of silk and costly necklaces of pearls all these people looked like gods 
come down on earth. And the women looked exceptionally charming with the beauty of their 
faces enhanced by their ear-rings and their overhanging locks, and with the zones of gold 
lying round their hips. (24)

aahdst ueleiient: Wee Aglaia: | Heathaaa Us A PATA: 1241 
Zafiftqumh ade: Tyee Ba aa Re! 
sherri TITIMGTAL| Fagard, Sale: faq Aaisyd ae 1201 
ad afefsd weet FEAT | SUT HATHA POT AA ARTI: 12C1 
ware dig ~waalatdisagt: | WRT AANA Uracil HarVqreiry 12F I

i wm ada waameviadl get dart elie Adak: Ro!

Pariksit, all those who had assembled there—priests ot high character, supervisors of the 
Sacrifice well-versed in the Vedas, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, princes, 
gods, Rsis, manes and members of other classes of beings, Indra and the other protectors 
of the world with their attendants—now took leave of Yudhisthira, and returned to their 
respective abodes, receiving appropriate honours from the Emperor. (25-26) Just as a

Mortal would never feel satisfied with a drink of nectar, So they did not get tired of praising 
the grand success of the Rajasuya sacrifice performed by the saintly King Yudhisthira, who =

omy

Cd

was a great devotee of God. (27) The Emperor lovingly detained his kinsmen, friendsand .

a et

aS a4 ; * 7 ae nt ava 53 rt oY = a9 Of es 
relations and also Bhagavan Sri Krsna at his capital, for he could not even bear the idea of — = 
their separation. (28) Sending away Samba, his other sons as well as the princi Je | Yadava 2: al 
ra 2 LS e <a ay a)

1 q a 
a nS pad ee ‘ 
x . — > , eA SS 
~ - E bard ‘eet = . 
aa RA ee ee

carne 4 
— oe 
—

x 
= 
~2 
in tA

“~~

- 
Oe - “* %— fn 
<> et End ge 
a ee met, 
oo a eee 
~. 2p ee ; 
* 4 _* a ae * ~~ Sis “_) oe “ 
Re Ig amr re 
ee 
-_ che a ¥ .

: a .< 
- ‘ oe > 
ms oor, 3 _ =

We We Ree We Ke Wee Fr He Be Be BT Se Bs Be Seep 
endeavoured to perform their respective duties to the satisfaction of Yudhisthira. (6-7)

mares «8 Pery fasy Tyaerevrafaronts:

aa ad aad was apedeaayaaat rE! ¢ | 
qegag uaa nga: latest fafaartr Aquasyetcad 1 e | 
Tiel FAGEST Wat ql Ay: i aonayaataedst A fearyerdieo 
fareasadinmihaercara st: | Boganesyn Peg eaeaTiort: 1291

eg BaAH asthe ahaa: laud Yad Axtdsamgta: 1221

Teeth PasST aaa | catsfaprearateagya: aerafear: 123 |

Seg FT Aa Wereanysuradt: | fafa siatteren fastgfefaet Ta: 1 ext

conn 7 lufaiée: sfoaret fastgatrartia: 194 
Pariksit ! after the priests and supervisors of the sacrifice, men of learning, friends and 
relations had been duly honoured with sweet words, rich presents and sacrificial fees and 
SiSupala had entered the feet of the Lord, Yudhisthira went to the Ganga to perform the 
concluding ablutions. (8) While the ceremony was being so performed, various instruments 
of music like the Mrdanga, conch, drum, kettledrum, tabor and trumpet were played upon.(9) 
The courtesans danced in great joy, the songsters sang in batches. The sound of the Vina, 
flute and cymbals reached the heavens. (10) Adorned with necklaces of gold, the Yadava, 
Srhjaya, Kamboja, Kuru, Kekaya and KoSala kings, with flags of various colours waving in 
the air, followed Yudhisthira to the Ganga shaking the earth with their armies consisting of 
fully accoutred foot-soldiers, elephants, chariots and horses. (11-12) Supervisors of the 
Sacrifice, priests and learned Brahmanas proceeded chanting the Vedic hymns in loud 
intonations. The gods, Rsis, manes and Gandharvas showered flowers on the procession 
from the heavens and sang Yudhisthira's praises. (13) Men and women of the city adorned 
with scents, garlands, beautiful clothes and ornaments (came out on the public roads and) 
sported on, smearing and sprinkling one another with liquids of various kinds. (14) The 
courtesans smeared the men with oil, milk, butter, scented water, turmeric powder, saffron

paste, and were themselves smeared over by men in return. It was thus that they amused 
themselves. (15)

Ta Warivmgqueetia eat am fafa fanaatiees: | 
mT Ugedakat: uktftemmn: wslserafanasea faty: 1261 
a edd aa fatreddif: fears faqanaeeteren: | 
AGRA: ast aepiofirat uate: 201

Just as celestial ladies throngedin the sky in their beautiful aerial cars (to see this festivily 
on earth), (even) so the ladies of the royal House of Indraprastha, curious to have a look al 
the grand procession, came out (in beautiful palanquins and other vehicles) guarded by foot 
soldiers Bhagavan Sri Krsna, together with His companions, sprinkled water (of various 
colours on them), which made their faces, bloom in bashful smiles, thus heightening their 
beauty. (16) Sprinkled with water the clothes of the queens got wet, so that their limbs 
including their breasts, thighs and hips could be seen through. They also took up syringes 
filled with coloured water and threw jets of water on their brothers-in-law and their friends: 
In the flurry of the moment their braids got loosened and flowers dropped therefrom. Pariksit, 
the sight of this lovely and innocent sport on their part brought impious thoughts in the mind 
of people possessed of impure hearts. (17)

Dis. Ue eer te BOOK TEN 437

BAI REE RR BORA BE SERB BARBER EER BERR PENA R RRA RAC RTS 
@ Was WIATSSs: Ted varies ataa wuelhi: frais: aaqafsa ect 
faantiayeastea > Tat: | eae Basis Be HEA 1281 
erga: Ma ade: qeasifer § eafdfaqamar: 1201 
wae dd: ad anism TU: | Heroraafa aa: wel Aela fens 122 | 
ar TarTet ate after Moga: | wkaraeeawneartea aa: 1221 
peer, eagecisais her: | arian Gaara ARTA FT: 1231

ad ST: et afiiguemenwitrngaqnemereten: | 
| ares PwIUNShTeTsaeaisya: htntaoa fata: 12¥1

Seated in his chariot drawn by the best horses and decked with gold necklaces, Emperor 
Yudhisthira with Draupadi and other consorts looked as if the great sacrifice Rajasuya with 
the attendant rituals had assumed human forms. (18) After the ritual known by the name 
Patni-Samyaja and the rites connected with the concluding ablutions had been over, the king 
performed Acamana (sipped water born the palm of his hand), and, as directed by priests, 
bathed in the Ganga alongwith Draupadi.(19) At that time the drums of celestials sounded 
in the heavens joined with the sounding of drums by men; and the gods. Rsis, manes and 
men showered flowers. (20) After the Emperor had finished his ablutions, people belonging 
to all castes and stages Of life took their dips in the Ganga; for a bath at that time rids even 
the most sinful of their sins forthwith. (21) Then Yudhisthira put a piece of new silk cloth round 
his loins and another round his shoulders and adorning himself with ornaments, he honoured 
the priests and supervisors of the sacrifice as well as other Brahmanas with gifts of cloth and 
ornaments. (22) Pariksit, a sincere devotee of God, the Emperor saw Godin every being and 
honoured all his relations and kinsmen, brother princes, friends and well-wishers, and other 
ordinary folk again and again. (23) Wearing jewelled ear-rings, garlands of flowers, turbans, 
long coats, pieces of silk and costly necklaces of pearls all these people looked like gods 
come down on earth. And the women looked exceptionally charming with the beauty of their 
faces enhanced by their ear-rings and their overhanging locks, and with the zones of gold

lying round their hips. (24) 
sada Heeiet: Weel Aglatfen: | Taahrataege Usit A AAMT: 1241 
fafifaqunht awe: Te yea wer = aq{T ze! 
Chena Tee | UTA! Aaa, Seiad: a Asya Aart 1291 
cat Qf Ue qeaaharaar| HOT Maa HOT AT ANTAL: 12C 
wary dag AANA: | TUM ACARI APACS Pac 12k I 
sa oun oagd §«aaemeian deat ald Getredig Uda: 1Z01

Pariksit, all those who had assembled there—priests of high character, supervisors of the 
Sacrifice well-versed in the Vedas, Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras, princes, 
gods, Rsis, manes and members of other classes of beings, Indra and the other protectors 
of the world with their attendants—now took leave of Yudhisthira, and returned to their 
respective abodes, receiving appropriate honours from the Emperor. (25-26) Just as a 
Mortal would never feel satisfied with a drink of nectar, so they did not get tired of praising 
the grand success of the Rajasuya sacrifice performed by the saintly King Yudhisthira, who 
Was a great devotee of God. (27) The Emperor lovingly detained his kinsmen, friends and 
relations and also Bhagavan Sri Krsna at his capital, for he could not even bear the idea of 
their Separation. (28) Sending away Samba, his other sons as well as the principal Yadava

warriors to Dwaraka, the Almighty Lord stayed there with a view to pleasing the king. (29) 
Thus having realized with the help of Sri Krsna, the long-cherished ambition of performin 
the Rajasuya sacrifice, which was as difficult to realize as It Is to cross of ocean, Yudhisthira 
now heaved a sigh of relief. (30) . 
Ura deal diet gale: Bra ada wig Aled areqae: 1381

ahr Raehssseeiaia fasnka fers fasgeiagar: |

ae: Ud gestae set faameca: petisded 132!

afi agadiiedtaea stuiisrtor each: auras

On a certain day, Duryodhana felt greatly troubled at heart at the sight of Yudhisthira's

splendour in his palace and the greatness attained by him, a great devotee of God, through 
the performance of the Rajasuya sacrifice. (81) The palace contained all the wealth and royal 
splendours of earthly monarchs, demon kings and lords of celestials, got together by the 
demon Maya, who had built it. Queen Draupadi waited upon her consorts with all these 
materials and it was mainly due to his attachment for her that Duryodhana was filled with 
jealousy. (32) More than a thousand consorts of Bhagavan Sri Krsna lived in that palace at 
the time. The anklets at their feet charmingly jingled when they walked with slow paces on 
account of their bulky hips. They were slender-waisted and the saffron on their breast made

their white necklace of pearls appear red. Rocking ear-rings and flowing locks enhanced the 
beauty of their faces. (33)

aaa wage aie easel qdisqsiceaiis peta waaxer 13x 
add: mist Aenea dala l aap we: waama afefs: 1341 
wa ae Ut uit wig fatten =afagefaee: fara oar 36! 
Wesel Tard Ws Aa WOM | He A Wedd Urat Aaarafantfed: 131

wera ie ger feat quaaisat | Harta sae wat Heqatfadt: 1321

a aifsdisardet eat Sdeoq fren quif saat asTea.

Geld «eg: AMY «Sagas «= STIL

aya Gai warm yat wt agferdtisinia wt aagar 3c 
Uristfed USM ad "sisete mei gale set werga eed ixol 
ad AASMad AQ Tee Seda a Saas gaeaAAyS ae GaaafraHseaa: 14!

In a part of the Hall constructed by Maya, Emperor Yudhisthira, invested with imperial 
glory, was once seated on a throne of gold. Surrounded by his brother and kinsmen, and his 
guide, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, and extolled by bards, he looked like Indra. (34-35) Proud 
Duryodhana accompanied by his brothers appeared there, sword in hand, with a crown on 
his head and a necklace hanging on his breast. He angrily scolded the guards at the gate 
as he entered. (36) Deluded by the superb skill of Maya, he drew up his skirts mistaking 4 
certain part of the floor for a sheet of water: and proceeding further he stumbled into wate! 
mistaking it for the bare floor. (87) Dear Pariksit ! Bhima, the royal ladies and other princes 
laughed when they saw him fall, notwithstanding Yudhisthira's remonstrances, being 
encouraged by a gesture from Sri Krsna. (38) Duryodhana was abashed at this discomfiture- 
Burning with rage, and with his face cast down, he silently left the Hall and immediately

pis. 76

BOOK TEN 439

eparted for Hastinapura. The incident raised a 
yudhisthira felt perturbed over it as it were. Bhag

the incident, intent as He was upon relieving the burden of the earth. In fact, it was His 
enchanting look which threw Duryodhana into confusion and brought about the incident. (39) 
Pariksit, you asked me on this occasion how at the great Rajasuya sacrifice Duryodhana 
developed his intense ill-will against the Pandavas. | have told you the secret of it. (40)

cry of dismay from all good people and 
avan Sri Krsna, however, kept quiet over

Thus ends the seventy-fifth discourse entitled " Duryodhana's Humiliation” in the 
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

IIS mes

Salva's Encounter with the Yadavas 
sis 3214 
saraety wT yy aaigd qaimlemenke ae alsafadd: 1 2 | 
Argieda: weal Sfaenvgge sd: | aefuifia: Get see | 2 1 
Wied: Wagan Waal AAayysL! Vatedt ant Hie uted aA azad | 3 | 
git Ye: sia aa uit SYA! sma TI Wea ape Aa! ¥ | 
aera AMT = SATA: athe ea AIRUTAITA| & | 
CoAT TAAL | ANE HA at a ae gfeorsiteors | & | 
aa fiftenest wa: uae: 1 gt fata mea wemiuaaea © | 
Q eal HM a ates aaa! sat gad Meat at qferpd GEL! C |

Sri Suka began again : Pariksit, now hear the story of still another wonderful achievement 
of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, who had sportfully assumed a human semblance. This relates to the 
death of Salva, owner of the celebrated aerial car called Saubha. (1) Salva was a friend of 
Sisupala and accompanied the latter (as a member of the bridegroom's party) for his 
(proposed) wedding with Rukmini. At that time he, alongwith Jarasandha and others, was 
completely routed in battle by the Yadus. (2) Within the hearing of all the princes (assembled 
there) Salva took a vow saying, "! shall rid the earth of the Yadavas; you will then witness 
my prowess." (3) Pariksit, having thus pledged himself, the fool began to worship the'god of 
gods, Sankara, taking by way of nourishment only a handful of dust once a day. (4) At the 
End of a year the almighty Spouse of Uma, Lord Sankara, (who is propitiated very soon), 
Offered to confer a boon on Salva, who had sought his protection. (5) Salva requested the 
Lord to confer on him an aerial car which could be taken wherever he liked, and which could 
Not be broken by the gods, Asuras, men, Gandharvas and Raksasas, and which would be 
a terror to the Yadus. (6) Sankara said, “Be it so !" Under his command, the demon Maya, 
Who could (easily) bring about the fall of an enemy's stronghold, constructed an aerial car, 
Called Saubha, which was made of steel, and handed it over fo Salva. It was not a car, but 
city in miniature. (7) Full of darkness within, it was inaccessible (to others). It could be taken 
Wherever one liked. Obtaining this car, Salva proceeded against Dwaraka remembering the

Old grudge against the Yadus. (8)

—— ae

a

SAAR AATA RELA AAA LAL AAAS LE LLL LL ALS SLES LSE SS SS SE SSS STS Te TR RR Bie 
fel Qa wea awe weadsigd avatvegqeria a wae 1 31 
agua = grifor wreleleiedtioent: | fer, a feared: Beaqgea: 120) 
falel SUISAa: Al STARA: | MAUS AHA WHAISAHTAT FEST: 188 | 
saint Maa HT ATM VAI BW Usha aM A 1e21 
SER MTL Stat STATA FST: ST: 1 AT ABSA AT TATE ARAM: 1.23 | 
IAGSARAOI ANAS: elas: elidel glee Was BHanit ex 
sat lCT.CwsC gem: frac |S TS tetTTTGITIAAH: 1eut 
ad: saga Gi aeamt aay: weiamgqut faa ameter ea) 
ais dtaaaatar ferret sfemuitaa: | av AIeIEaTATa ARI AA SATU: 1201 
frena usfdeen wuiggtqe: | aaa eafsriiores at: aaa: 1eci 
SaMstseateea Aer i aaiheariga are frist: eet 
deg Wed al seNe Neel ag ad yar: wd wUeitar: 1201 
aeetned dq aad A A Radi nama wapd gelmet wT IRI 
epiae Yat cafe Salta Pea es Sphere | SteTeeIsharS, MAA Ast Ae LARA 12 | 
a aaueetd wal: aedfteh: | Meaetdteisqad WM, Mata: 1231

\ Gerais: saMealsqeed oath: 1261

Pariksit, Salva besieged the city with a large army and engaged himself in the wholesale 
destruction of its gardens and parks, the gateways with their massive superstructures, the 
mansions with their upper chambers and compound wall and the places of recreation. 
Volleys of destructive weapons rained from that huge aerial car. (9-10) Blocks of stone, trees, 
thunderbolts serpents and hailstones were showered on the city, and a fearful tornado was 
letloose over it, filling the quarters with dust. (11) Justas in the days of yore the earth suffered 
under the scourge of the demon Tripura, even so the city of Dwaraka was subjected to untold 
suffering by Salva's aerial car, Saubha. The people could not find respite (even for a 
moment). (12) Observing the distress of the people, the renowned warrior, Bhagavan 
Pradyumna, mounted his chariot and cheered them by saying ‘Fear not’. (13) Satyaki, 
Carudesna, Samba, Akrira and his younger brothers, Krtavarma, Bhanuvinda, Gada, 
Suka, Sarana and many other big generals followed him with mighty bows in their hands. 
They were all protected with armours and Were guarded by chariots, elephants, horses and 
foot-soldiers. (14-15) Just as in the days of yore there was a bitter conflict between the 
Devas and Asuras, even so a fierce and thrilling battle ensued between the soldiers of 
salva and the Yadavas. (16) With the help of his celestial weapons Pradyumna broke in 
an instant the magic spell of Salva, the owner of Saubha, even as the sun dispels the 
darkness of the night. (17) With twenty-five arrows having feathers of gold andiron tips and 
with the knots of their wood well polished, he pierced the commander-in-chief of Salva s 
army. (18) With a hundred more he struck Salva (himself) and discharged one arrow each 
at his soldiers, ten each at his charioteers and three each at his horses. (19) Seeing this 
great and wonderful feat of arms exhibited by the valiant Pradyumna, the soldiers on bot 
sides admired him. (Pariksit,) the aerial.car of Salva constructed by Maya contained Sue 
magical contrivances that now it appeared as many, and now as only one, now it appeare 
in the sky, and now disappeared altogether. The Yadavas, therefore, found it difficult to 
discover where it was at a particular moment. (20-21) Now it descended on the ground,

pis. 76 ] BOOK TEN 441

ER A DAB Be Be i Se i te i ef ri i i ter tof tf tc efter ft 
now flew into the air, NOW perched on the summit of a hill, and now began to float on water. 
Like a rotating firebrand it went round and round hardly stopping at any point. (22) 
Wherever Salva with his car and soldiers came within their sight, the generals of the 
Yadava army showered their arrows on them. (23) Struck by those arrows, which burned 
like the sun and fire and were unapproachable like venomous snakes, Salva's floating city 
and army sustained a severe blow, and Salva himself fainted. (24) :

3 WMieM: 1A AA Wi WM BW rHgaheriaa: 1241

MCAT FAR A ee eA fSa: | arate Teen leat career Sates at 126 |

waa Tee Silaawreafean stare we Gat aise arenes: 1291

carat det ariel: anferdia! sat sree ga ae wretscedony 1221

1 agi Se Med: ged wees: | fee va gates Ear wafenfearad, 128 |

fee 4 aeastage feat wacharel | Gel SSM: USRIA: AAT 1Z01

ar A nated erat aq: | get Hel Het a dad: Heat Wa 13k 
(Pariksit,) the Yadava warriors too were equally harassed by the volleys of arms showered 
by the generals of Salva's army; but they did not abandon their respective positions on the 
battle-field; for they thought that death in battle would secure happiness in the other world, 
whereas victory would establish their supremacy on the earth. (25) (Pariksit), there was a 
minister of Salva (anda mighty warrior) Dyuman by name, to whom Pradyumna had previously 
dealt severe blows; he now suddenly attacked Pradyumna with a steel mace and striking a 
heavy blow with it gave a loud roar. (26) The blow smashed the chest of Pradyumna, the 
chastiser of foes. Thereupon Daruka's son, his charioteer, knowing the canons of warfare, 
carried him away from the field. (27) Regaining consciousness after about an hour, Pradyumna 
said to his charioteer, " Oh, charioteer, you have done me a disservice by removing me from 
the field of battle. (28) No one born in Yadu's race except me is known to have abandoned the 
battle-field. You are a weak-minded charioteer: you have certainly wronged me. (29) What 
reply befitting my position shall | give to my uncle, Sri Balarama, and my father, Sr Krsna, when 
| see them and when they question me, now that I have cleverly managed to flee away from 
the battle-field? (30) My sisters-in-law will laugh at me and openly say, ‘Please do tell us, O

warrior, how you lost your manliness in the encounter with your enemy’. (31)

UReara 
nt fasnaaissqe added fadti ga: papi Tae We GN wit 1321 
Wie fae q Wa HaMarfedt Te! SagS: wt Afesct Eat Ed: 1331 
sft sitrerrad Fe UTS Seca PHA SHUT VATS VeRTaATAISeA: Se | 
The charioteer replied : O long-lived one, | did all this knowingly, considering it to be 
the proper duty of a charioteer. Lord, the rule of battle is that the charioteer should come to 
the rescue of the warrior when the latter's life is in danger, and similarly the warrior should

save the life of the charioteer in peril. (82) Cognizant of this rule, | removed you from the 
battle-field when | found that, struck by the enemy with a mace, you had sustained a fatal

Injury and fainted. (33)

Thus ends the seventy-sixth discourse, bearing on the (Yadus'’) encounter with Salva, 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 
e GIRS 
[565] B.M. Part lI—43

Salva's Deliverance 
ay Java

a qaaysa ale fect qdenlen: | Aa At EAA: wa aheale ae! 2

fe SAI gat weleavitaa: shea velar: war! 2 |

adhisat qe Giaet aetd | wat age hq a MUM St re 1 8 |

TeeIahparaen «wg: 4 ataadderida: aga asa: ad dean: | x |

TG wat meant feaatamiqg Poem ayyedraur! & | 
Sri Suka began again : (Pariksit), Pradyumna now washed his hands and face, put on 
his armour, took up the bow and spoke to his charioteer thus, "Take me (once more) to the 
warrior, Dyuman." (1) Dyuman was at that time playing havoc with the Yadava army. First 
checking his depredations Pradyumna smilingly assailed Dyuman with eight shafts. (2) With 
four he struck his four horses, with one the charioteer, and with one shaft each he tore off 
Dyuman's bow and banner and with the remaining one he struck down Dyuman's head. (3) 
Gada, Satyaki, Samba and others began to mow down the army of Salva. The inmates of 
the aerial car, Saubha, with their necks severed from their bodies, dropped one by one into 
the sea. (4) Thus the Yadava army and the army of Salva began to strike one another, and

a fierce hand-to-hand fight raged between them for twenty-seven days and nights (without 
break). (5)

Sed: PO Bet smgqiusgasa fad Rr a aed ¢ | 
Seer iss aaa gar fafearaaeani asa gradi aati © | 
ame 40 eed «= otrdfasniaga: iusrseuaiian FA wa: at AAI cl 
aeat dd Hea GM Mee GRAV UH A Aleadust UW alech Se chala: |e | 
WH wa A Ua Wealden a1 ase A wade araet alsa gol 
saad «= WaT eens: | fea CEQ: Wa A at VrSonqay 122! 
Meas POM BANAT: | Wed HOGA Ahn wiarar Wer 122 
| Tadd AN Alenia Wars wraaail fear: AR: Aldon: BaahasaAc 123 | 
a a Sisatafdeen al: Bist aa wa! afaecrcte: W wl sa weafe: ev 
Wea: VU ct: Hel HIM Whyte: fate wargend wMgAaTagry |e! 
Ceant Ageia Yat aa wea i fata alaageditene wardari2e! 
Gam YS A: AQMiduial edaarl! wa: a aurea aa aarfed: WaT 129! 
¢ ae ffadattousanhaaiaaagaam ale fapedaraa: 12¢!

Having been invited by Yudhisthira, Bhagavan Sri Krsna was at that time staying al 
Indraprastha. Now that the Rajastya sacrifice had been concluded and Sisupala had been 
killed, Sri Krsna took leave of the elderly Kurus and Rsis, Kunti and the Pandavas, 2" 
proceeded to Dwaraka. On His way He observed frightful omens. (6-7) He therefore, S@! 
to Himself, “| came away hither with My revered brother, Sri Balarama; the kings in alliance? 
with SiSupala must have surely availed themselves of the opportunity to attack Dwaraka."(8)

; 
f

Reaching there, He found His People in a sad plight. Entrusting Balarama with the work of 
defending the city and, observing Salva and his aerial car, Saubha, He said to (His 
charioteer), Daruka, (as follows).(9) "Take My chariot with great despatch to Salva, owner 
of the aerial car, Saubha. Take care that you do not get frightened; for he is a warrior skilled 
in the use of magic." (1 0) Thus instructed, Daruka mounted the chariot and drove it to the 
pattle-field. As soon as Sri Krsna entered the field of battle, warriors on both sides recognized 
Him from the emblem of Garuda borne on His banner. (1 1) (Pariksit !) Salva's army had 
mostly been extirpated. Observing Sri Krsna on the battle-field, Salva discharged a terrible 
lance aimed at His charioteer. With a terrible noise it rushed through the air with great speed 
like a meteor ilumining the quarters. Bhagavan Sri Krsna tore that lance into a hundred pieces 
with his arrows, hit Salva with sixteen shafts and pierced the aerial car Saubha, that was 
wheeling in the sky, with volleys of arrows, even as the sun fills the space with his rays. (42—14) 
Inthe meantime Salva hit Sri Krsna in the left arm with an arrow. The Sarnga bow which was 
being held by that arm fell from Sri Krsna's hand. It was a wonderful feat on the part of 
Salva.(15) Aloud outcry of wonder and fear rose from beings who watched the conflict (from 
the sky or from the ground). Salva now gave a loud roar and said to Sri Krsna:— (16) "O 
deluded fool, you carried away before our very eyes the fiance of our friend and brother, 
Sisupala, and killed him in an assembly, when he was off his guard. (17) | know you regard 
yourself as invincible. But if you stand before me in this fight today, | shall, with my sharp 
arrows, send you to the region from where people do not return." (18)

qn M HUA We A Raed | wed aaah BI AT A seme: 1281 
SUae Wiawoed Ne Waal ads wal Wel: A AH adage lol 
Terat «= Ofaaquiat «= eae at Yad ST Gee: Rereqa | 
Va Nisdiseitiad Acal We Gal HELI 
FO HM neat feat a fqaae | aaeatia: weds thet aT aA: 1221 
Fara fairer qe araet senft wa: | faearent quit Sate aHTe Mepat AAT 1231 
ee wana fama quae: | Meatedaarta: tar tacatiata: 121 
Sf gant wae ase sehen: \aaeataria Get Mey : 12h! 
we a wha aat aeaive siete aferet dtacaisaiziad oe atfea 121 
we fieiet meet welaragge: | sepa RR sree et att aarfagd 1291 
adt ued | Nepguge: «Sa TT TTT: | 
aequaKedeerg «|= at A BMT Wafer 1261 
awa mi a fig: wen sae oie aAURER | 
ma am ara fq awernetea fede: 1291 
Bhagavan Sri Krsna replied : " O fool, in vain do you brag. You do not perceive Death 
Slanding before you. True heroes do not waste their words, but exhibit their prowess in 
battle." (19) Saying this, Bhagavan Sri Krsna in great rage struck Salva with tremendous 
‘force on the collar-bone with His mace. It made Salva shake from head to foot and vomit 
blood. (20) When the mace returned to the Lord, Salva for his part (suddenly) disappeared. 
Then after an hour a certain person came in, bowed with is head bent low to Sri Krsna and

Ursting into tears, said—" | have brought a message from Devaki. (21) She says, "O Krsna 
of mighty arms. most devoted to parents, Your father has been captured and carried away

a tee 
See

-

> ae

—_-~ 
-

a a

a ae Se

mae

by Salva, just as a butcher drags an animal to be slaughtered. " (22) Hearing this unpleasant 
news, Bhagavan Sri Krsna exhibited the play of human emotions. Troubled at heart and full 
of compassion and filial affection like an ordinary human being, He said: (23) " How is it that 
My Brother, who cannotbe subdued or daunted even by gods or Asuras, has been overcome 
by Salva, who though a pygmy before Him has succeeded in carrying away our father 2 
Indeed, Providence is all-powerful." (24) While Sri Krsna was saying this, Salva made higs 
appearance before Him holding Vasudeva as it were, and said to Him (as follows): (25) "q 
fool, here is your father who has brought you into being and for whom you live. | shall Slay 
him before your eyes. Save him, if you can. " (26) Uttering this threat, that master of magic, 
Salva cut off the head of that (seeming) Vasudeva and, taking it with him, withdrew into his 
aerial car, Saubha, which stood near him in the air. (27) (Pariksit !) Bhagavan Sri Krsna is 
the embodiment of perfect wisdom by nature and has limitless power. Due to affection for 
his father, He remained plunged in sorrow, like an ordinary human being, for a moment. But. 
presently He understood that it was nothing but an illusion created by Salva, who was taught 
this artby the Asura named Maya. (28) As He fully recovered from the spell of Maya, SriKrsna 
found that both the messenger and the body of His father had vanished from the battle-field 
like visions seen ina dream. Observing Salva at this momentin his flying aerial car, the Lord 
resolved to kill him. (29) 
Ua aca Use maa: & a Aad: 1 ad warn faeeda Td A Wed l301 
H Bede Aa a wt a aga: 1H waraitedaqaaradaaaited: 1321 
Aaea at isicdalsseaiaelay feararenntaqdae_| 
Ord Wellaaadaat apdl A We: WAR Wea: 1321

Pariksit, this is the version of a few Rsis, who do not care so much for consistency. Surely 
they forget that such statements with reference to Bhagavan Sri Krsna contradict their own 
statements made on other occasions. (30) Grief, infatuation, attachment and fear—these 
find place only in the ignorant. They cannot be attributed to Bhagavan Sri Krsna ( the Perfect 
Being), the embodiment of peffect knowledge, wisdom and glory. (31) The greatest of sages 
worship the lotus-like feet of Bhagavan Sri Krsna and thereby attain the knowledge of the 
Self, which roots out ignorance existing from time without beginning in the form of

identification of the self with the body and gain infinite spiritual glory. How can the Lord, who 
is the sole refuge of such sages, be subject to delusion ? (32)

aq weal: yweeddiistar aed at: silfecetam: | 
faqeattte ad aq: fermi att a aarien eet Zz 1331 
a POR fagvic wa aa Neat agent 
fagea dq Weert Neyer seaisaqAVTE BAT 1Sy | 
ortad: We TI ae Yet feat wiser 
ama Weare Gaehatad frwe avt ah satearas: 134! 
Sex dia fax: wuss fetter yeofeat aft: | 
aa qa aM Yea YA eet «eee. qu, 1381 
afer Fufit wat at a ne witeienat wa fafa daretfta: | 
Rea Had saa SAAT 1319 | 
sf Sead Aq GRAge Beda cara See Psat aa waaahraniseara: Now!

| 
|

6 Krsna; possessed of unfailing prowess, pierced Salva with a shower of arrows and broke 
into pieces his armour, bow and the jewel on his head. With the mace, the Lord smashed 
Salva s aerial car, Saubha. (33) Struck by the powerful blow of Sri Krsna's mace, the car 
proke into a thousand pleces and fell into the ocean. Leaving the car ‘Salva dropped down 
on land and taking up his mace rushed headlong at Sri Krsna. (34) When the Lord saw him 
advancing towards Him, He cut off with a spear the arm with which he held the mace. Then

with a view to killing Salva, the Lord took up His wonderful discus dazzling like the sun at 
the time of universal destruction. Holding the discus in His hand, Sri Krsna vied in splendour 
with the Eastern Hill bearing the sun on its peak. (35) With that discus Sri Krsna lopped off 
the head, adorned with a crown and ear-rings, of that repository of Maya, Salva, even as (in 
the days of yore) Indra with his thunderbolt cut off the head of Vrtrasura. The fall of Salva in 
battle raised an outcry of distress among his men. (36) Pariksit, the gods sounded their drums 
inheaven when the wicked Salva was struck down, andhis aerial carwas smashedto pieces. 
Now came the turn of Dantavaktra, another friend of Sigupala, who marched in great rage 
against Sri Krsna to avenge the death of his friends, Sisupala and Salva. (37)

y of (destructive) weapons; but

Thus ends the severty-seventh discourse entitled " The Deliverance of Salva," in the 
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS es

STIs ay fads sear:

Deliverance of Dantavaktra and Viduratha; Suta killed by 
Sri Balarama during His Pilgrimage

sity Sart 
Armee ace duements gia: tama a gat uNleretea |e 
Ua: Wart: Maal TET: MHL Tq AE Here SAGA | 2 | 
ad AMSSHAMINT TSA AT: | STAYS TA PON: FAY Aa Te | BI 
Tera «ares yee Me gia: | fepe fast ware Wa efeae aa: | | 
@ mae a: pen fraget fratafa atest wea we afel ame! 4 | 
Teiqvaqagt faarott faade: |aeaaR eat aft egat aari < | 
Ud waged aad: Het deta fara! Wear asraid faeaq aed a: 19 1 
Tenfiedsast aA ale AEGE: | PONS ASL TSM Aaa KATA |S 
Tetifitaeca sgn Stet FUT | Wares Haase Va AAG A: 1 F | 
Wa: Banat sata: FroreMfaragl| Tac Baya aM cela F101 
Sti Suka began again : Dantavaktra was a great friend of Sisupala, Salva and

Paundraka, who had met their death at the hands of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. In order to avenge 
Cir death the fool appeared all alone to fight Sri Krsna. Full of rage he (neither took an army

nora chariot with him and) came armed with nothing but a mace. But he was so powerful that 
the earth shook under his feet when he proceeded on foot to meet Sri Krsna in battle. (1-2) 
Seeing him advance in that manner, Bhagavan Sri Krsna promptly took up His own mace 
and, leaping down from His chariot, intercepted Dantavaktra even as the shore checks the 
advancing sea. (3) Raising his mace, Dantavaktra, the arrogant king of Karusa, said to 
Bhagavan SriKrsna, "lam glad, | am, indeed, lucky, O Krsna, that you have appeared before 
my eyes today. (4) Even though you are my cousin, you have killed my friends and seek my 
life, too. Therefore, O fool, | shall make short work of you with this mace which is as hard as 
the thunderbolt. (5) Though a relation of mine, you are my enemy like a disease in one's body. 
Devoted as | am to my friends, | can discharge my debts to them only by putting an end to 
you.” (6) Pariksit, thus pricking Bhagavan Sri Krsna with unkind words even as a tamer pricks 
an elephant with his goad, Dantavaktra struck Sri Krsna on the head with his mace and 
roared like a lion. (7) But Sri Krsna, the ornament of Yadu's race, remained quite unshaken 
by the shock, and with His own heavy mace known by the name of Kaumodaki struck in His 
turn a severe blow on Dantavaktra's chest, which split the latter's heart. Vomiting blood 
through the mouth, Dantavaktra fell down dead on the ground with dishevelled hair and 
outstretched arms and legs. (8-9) Pariksit, just as it happened when Sisupala fell, a very 
subtle ray of light emanated from the body of Dantavaktra and entered that of Sri Krsna in 
an astonishing way before the eyes of all. (10)

faq dasa Widaitenuftga: | simrescfrarhargegaaedistateay 188

wa add: FAH ari At ae wre afetle AMIS 1e21

Wd Ud a Med a adaet Be eat =O afawereiifSa: «qua: 1231

afafa: freaditerament: | stent: faquuldet: feared: ext

saitaartasta: Haivatta: taqs 4 gfwmatfddsnsanat ariel

tT aR: Ret waned: i sat wgesat faffat sadifa a: 1261 
. Dantavaktra had a brother, Viddratha by name. Overwhelmed with grief at the death of 
his brother, he appeared, panting (with rage) on the spot with a sword and shield in his hands, 
intent on killing Sri Krsna. (11) Pariksit, as he rushed at Him, Sri Krsna with His sharp-edged 
discus lopped of Viduratha’s head armed with a crown and ear-rings. (12) Thus putting an 
end to Salva, with his famous aerial car Saubha, as well as Dantavaktra and his younger 
brother Viduratha, who could not be easily encountered by others, Bhagavan Sri Krsna 
returned in triumph to Dwaraka. Men and gods extolled Him at the time for His extraordinary 
feat of arms. (Greatest of ) sages, Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyadharas, great serpents (like 
Vasuki), Apsaras, the manes, Yaksas, Kinnaras and Caranas all showered flowers on Him 
and sang of His victory. The city was decorated to commemorate His triumph over His 
enemies and principal Yadava warriors followed Him in procession as He entered the 
city. (18—-15) Pariksit, the Master of Yoga and almighty Ruler of the universe, Sri Krsna, thus

enacts various sports in the world. To the ignorant He appeared now and then as the 
vanquished. But as a matter of fact, He always wins. (16)

Sal Gelert WA: HR AE avEd: | dlalfdowaa ne: yasl fas 1201 
eet Tea eel caittiqarar| aeadt osfmetd gat srelordga: 12¢1 
Wen 86 fergenfetaed |= Genin faenes menial a ace ot aad 128! 
ay ata Tg A OUR Af aa owe: wanda 120! 
waa «86 at attain: 1 atfitrer Gerard sureitena ara 12!

asta: walan: qeraaiiae: ited aed: farerdard 1221 
aT aa UMS ATAU | Sea a ars Pigqenrar ale Brera: 123 1 
Pee sree sider: | doeettar asda gfe: 1x1 
maiad wat reste ag ai atrergquenm eriemenfor ada: 1241 
serenade «qe fusca: 1a aoa waha wt aem@arfina: 1261

udeat fe olesitaaan war aa: | azar a enfeatsed fe oraiemisferent: 1201 
wager wear Martsagenefa i sift a Hanser Heated WA: 1221 
eld aed: ad Wra: feanmat: isa: agdet tanenha aa: wet 1221 
3TeI Tea CAs | SIMA Mae Aad Gal AAT 1301 
sidan Ta eT ata wadl Areas fremen: 1321 
Gade ae: Wed Glenadiaketa wdalewtndenelstatatled: 1321

Sri Balarama presently heard of the preparations of the Kurus for war with the Pandavas. 
He desired to remain neutral and therefore left Dwaraka on the pretext of going out for a dip 
in sacred waters. (17) He first wentto Prabhasa, took a plunge inthe sea there and propitiated 
the gods, Rsis and manes by offering them water and human beings by feeding them. Thus, 
accompanied by (some) Brahmanas, He proceeded along the bank of the Saraswati in an 
upward journey, in the course of which He visited Prthudaka, Bindusara, Tritakupa, 
Sudarsana, Visala, Brahmatirtha, Cakratirtha and the spot where the Saraswati turns 
towards the east. (18-19) Thereafter, passing through the important places on the Jamuna 
and the Ganga, He came to Naimisaranya, where the sages were holding a religious 
concourse. They had taken a vow of prolonged Satsanga. (20) When they saw Sri Balarama 
in their midst, the sages rose from their seats, welcomed Him, bowed to Him or blessed Him, 
according as it became their position, and worshipped Him. (21) Honoured thus, when He 
had taken His seat alongwith His followers, Sri Balarama observed Romaharsana, the 
disciple of the great sage Vyasa, seated on the elevated seat meant for one who holds a 
discourse. (22) Though a Sita by caste, he occupied a seat higher than the Brahmanas and 
neither rose from his seat, nor bowed to Him with joined palms. Getting angry at the sight, 
Sri Balarama said to the Brahmanas there. (23) "How has this Suta, born as he is of an illegal 
union, viz., of a Ksatriya father and a Brahmana mother, taken into his head to occupy a seat 
higher than the Brahmanas and custodians of law like ourselves. The fool, therefore, 
deserves to be done to death. (24) Being a disciple of the great sage Vyasa, under whom 
he has studied all the books on law, including the Itinasas and Puranas, he cannot plead 
ignorance either.(25) Uncultured and arrogant, he falsely pretends to be a learned man. 
Since he has not been able to discipline his self, the instruction he has received is just like 
the part played by an actor on the stage. It can do no good to him not to anybody else. (26) 
Those who make a show of righteousness, though not actually righteous, are more sinful 
than the unrighteous and deserve death at My hands. It is precisely for killing such people 
that | have descended on earth." (27) Being ona pilgrimage, Sri Balarama had desisted even 
from the work of slaying the unrighteous in battle. Yet, with these words He struck the Stta

‘with the end of a Kuga grass, which He held in His hand, which caused the instantaneous

death of the Suta. This was how it was destined to be; nobody could avertit. (28) Allthe sages 
Cried out in distress when they saw the Suta fall before them. Addressing Sri Balarama, who 
Was another manifestation of the Supreme Deity, they said, "O Lord, You have committed 
an unrighteous act. (29) It was we who offered him the elevated seat of a Brahmana and

vouchsafed him an unwearied existence for the time this assembly remained in session. (30) 
Thus You have unknowingly perpetrated an act which is equivalent to killing a Brahmana 
We know You are a master of Yoga and transcend the authority of the Vedas. (31) But Yo, 
have descended on earth in order to purify the world. Should You of Your own accord Make 
some expiation for the sin of killing a Brahmana, You will thereby set a noble example before

the world." (32) 
STAT TATA 
ara aafide slniqdenraan | faa: set met aarla ¢ faeitaary 133 | 
adnate 0 a oTenfad aaa aa Tea alae lax) 
Bhagavan Sri Balarama said : | shall certainly make some atonement for this sin in 
order to teach a lesson to the world. Please lay down the best form of expiation for Me. (33) 
Through Yogamaya | can also vouchsafe to him a renewed span of long life, energy and

soundness of body and the senses and whatever else you desire. Tell me, what can | do for 
him? (34)

RIT HW: 
aa da de qaketata al aM Ade ae: del aa wa fasta 1341

The Sages said : (Lord Balarama!) kindly devise some means by which the infallibility 
of Your weapon and Your prowess, and the inevitability of his death may not be compromised 
and the boon granted by us may also be vindicated. (35)

fe a: art qAaet sce Hawa | sinqacaufaia aa A faraat qe: 1301 
Bhagavan Sri Balarama said : Worshipful sages, the Vedas declare that one's own self 
is reborn as the son. Therefore, in place of Romaharsana, his son will expound the Puranas 
to you. | shall endow him with long life, energy and soundness of the body and the 
senses.(36) If you desire anything else, pray tell me, | shall forthwith grantit. And please think

over and tell me what will be the most appropriate expiation for the sin | have unknowingly 
committed. (For you know the subject full well. )(37)

RIT HT:

Fae Ud Ut aedet aM aMa:ia eaaft a: aad udfor adfot 3c!

a UM Sie dele da: WNT a1 qaaiirdavqaaaisaor «=: 39

was Ut at ute aanfed: | ata gles Arareieert faqgara iso!

The Sages said : (Lord Balarama!) there is a terrible demon, Balwala by name, son of 
llwala, who comes here on every full-moon and new moon day, and outrages the sanctity 
of our gathering. (38) He throws on us piths, blood, faeces, urine, wine and flesh. O Lord of 
the Yadus, be pleased to putan endto that monster. You will have thereby rendered the most

valuable service to us. (39) Then, for twelve months, please traverse the whole length ar 
breadth of Bharatavarsa with a serene mind and take a plunge in its holy waters. That

pis. 79 ]

pring you purification from this sin. (40)

Thus ends the seventy-eighth discourse entitled "A Prelude to the Destruction of Balwala," 
forming part of the narrative of Baladeva in the latter half of Book 
Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
Known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

IIS

BTDAATa aaa Sez:

An account of Balarama's Pilgrimage 
SR Sara 
dd: Uduanrgd seus: ulgqador: 1 iat ary UM Gre” Ada: 1 2 | 
aarsHeee au aeaded fafafiad i a1s1ae Asatte MASACAT WSIAR | Bel 
a faster ge fiaeradtaaq canara = eBirypctqer. | 3 | 
Wa Was Wa: weeaaMia aA caer aA quiqudeg: |x | 
TPA CTA Aras Wea | yee Hal A Helae Aca: 1 & | 
asada ya ARinscisdh WASH Tse set AM asedlseu: 1 & 1 
Ga wat wi yarafaamfkre: | sateen yas gqaw fage aa | 9 1. 
aseait ante SearanoMrasss | Wares area feet fears aI S|

Sri Suka began again : Pariksit, on the next full-moon day a violent storm broke over 
the place, covering all with dust and bringing the foul odour of pus from all sides. Next, there 
was a shower of urine and faeces on the sacrificial ground, caused by Balwala, who himself 
afterwards appeared with a trident in his hand. (1-2) Possessed of a dark gigantic body, he 
looked like a heap of soot. His hair, moustachés and beard had the colour of red-hot copper 
and his face with protruding teeth and (contracted) eyebrows looked most terrible. Seeing 
the demon, Balarama thought of His celebrated pestle, which shatters the columns of the 
enemy's army, and His well-known plough, which subdues the demons; and both these 
Weapons instantaneously presented themselves before Him. (8-4) With the end of His 
Plough Balarama drew down Balwala coursing in the air, and full of rage struck that (sworn) 
enemy of the Brahmanas on the head with His pestle. (5) With his forehead split open the 
demon, bleeding profusely, fell on the ground, uttering a helpless cry, and looked like a 
mountain peak struck down with lightning and ejecting red streams (of molten character). (6) 
The blessed sages (of Naimisaranya) applauded Balarama (for this action), pronounced 
their unfailing benedictions on Him and sprinkled (holy) waters over His head even as the 
gods sprinkled water over their ruler Indra on his having killed the demon Vrtra. (7) (Then) 
they presented Balarama with a pair of excellent pieces of cloth and ornaments and a

Cautiful Vaijayanti garland of never-fading lotuses. (8)

ag avaqa: alfrahiea ae: lara Warne ad: ANTAL |S 1 
wea wa WaT G: | Ala GAA Cale SMTA Forestry, 120! 
vitret srosait errant farcrent Stor orga: | eA TeaT AGA TET TRTATTERGH 12 |

~ gE eeeEeEeEE—E—EE—E as 
o.° —=*

saa AesIst US oapiitarel ai aaa? aut amt stare am: iee: 
re BI dal wa: siete firenmanisfasy verve apg age sy: 13) 
amar ot ait aad a aha! sikeret Herqua aa afafed aft: rex) 
wag et: At afaot aay aa as ATTA ASAI 18 | 
wage «= sia EON I PMT ATI AeA A Hore 18g | 
Tra Wadd AWepaiwar alae aria aAlsclaq | 
fat da HUA EN eat caat a: 1201 
qa: Weare wsrereqaan! fay: afatedt an eraragic Tara 1 8c

Now, with the permission of the sages of Naimisaranya, Balarama together with His

Brahmana companions went to the Kausiki river, and after bathing in that river went to the 
lake from which the Sarayu emanates. (9) Following the downward course of the Sarayd, He 
thence came to Prayaga. After taking His bath there and propitiating the gods, Rsis and 
manes by offering water to them, He went to the hermitage of the sage Pulaha. (10) (Then) 
he bathed in the Gomati, Gandaki, Vipasa and Sona rivers and, visiting Gaya, worshipped 
the manes (according to the instructions of His father Sri Vasudeva). From Gaya He went 
to the mouth of the Ganga where He took a bath (and performed other religious rites).( Then) 
He went to the Mahendra Hill, where He saw and paid His respects to the sage Parasurama. 
Having bathed in the seven branches of the Godavari and in the Vena and Bhimarathi rivers 
as well as in the Pampa lake, He paid a visit to the shrine of Lord Kartikeya and (thence) 
proceeded to Srigaila, the abode of Lord Siva (known by the name of Mallikarjuna). From Srigaila 
He went to see the most holy mountain-peak of Venkata in the Dravida territory. (1 1—13) 
(Then) passing through Siva-Kafici and Visnu-Kafici and after taking a bath in the holy 
Kaveri, He reached the most sacred site of Sriratga where Bhagavan Visnu (eternally) 
dwells. (14) From there He went to visit the Rsabha Hill, sacred to Lord Visnu, and the 
southern Mathura and thence proceeded to the dam across the sea at Rameswara, visitors 
to which are purged (even) of their greatest sins. (15) There Balarama gifted ten thousand 
cows to the Brahmanas. (Then) after taking a bath in the Krtamala and Tamrapanrni rivers, 
He went to the Malaya mountain. It is one of the seven principal ranges of mountains of 
Bharatavarsa. (16) Greeting and bowing to the sage Agastya reSiding there, and receiving 
his blessings and permission, He went to the southern sea and visited (the shrine of) 
Goddess Durga (at Kanyakumari) known by the name of Kanya. (17) Next He went to the 
Phalguna Tirtha (AnantaSayana) and the great lake of Paficapsarasa, another abode of Lord 
Visnu. There after bathing in its holy waters, He gave away ten thousand cows (to the 
Brahmanas). (18)

ads Ta are” frre menue raat aired ax giz: 12¢!

sat goreit <Br EIMIEC RUIT§ ae: | aa arent Pafdearqaegearest quschy, | 20 |

siaza tara aa Aifeerdt Gitingiieiqgesa «ose | ARTA 122 |

qa fest: Her peaeadgti ada wt AY wi ya: 122!

a (dingaierariqnat «= qeainfaianer fad om Agta: 123! 
Then Lord Balarama visited the principalities of Kerala and Trigarta, and (from there He) 
went to Gokarna, sacred to Siva, where Bhagavan Sankara is eternally present. (19) Thence

He visited (the shrine of) Goddess Parvati (known by the name of Arya) located in an islan@ 
after which He went to Surparaka. Then after bathing in the Tapti, Payosni and Nirvindhy4

rivers, He entered the Dandaka forest. (20) (From there) He went to the bank of the Narbada, 
where stands the city of Mahismati, and after bathing in the Manutirtha returned to 
Prabhasa.(21) There He heard from the mouth of Brahmanas that in the historic fight 
between the Kurus and the Pandavas (almost) all the Ksatriyas had lost their lives. He felt. 
that the burden of the earth had been (greatly) relieved (by that terrible war). (22) On the day 
Bhima and Duryodhana were engagedin asingle combat with their maces on the battle-field, 
Sri Balarama reached Kuruksetra to prevent their fight. (23)

garg @ gt at semiratt aftarenndqui fa fatter: 12 
Teron Sut ET ttet fewdfiot i muse fafeeniin aeafeenae 1241 
qat qeaaet aht 2 mm 2 Galax | Ue SUT AA aces Rraranfeten 126 | 
wees Fat: waaAdidal: 1a wad walsat at facet Wi: 1201 
a meet eget «asia stqeremaret gen cept 1221 
fs daqrart wat gradi aati saearfef: sidaifafa: agar: 12¢1 
aq Uae aqueisasme ae meg cai: adhiquifaetrrey 1301 
wat feRieians swarm, ane fay: | atarerae fauna faat fae: 1321 
BUSAa yaaa Wits qeadd: | Wt Vediceaerg: Fara: TRaeacha: 1321 
rare ASM ARMA: Isa Ae ara fe 1331 
asyent wae anfvrgaarior: | at were frat: a afadt wa 131 
ofa saerrad AS URS Seca AHA TASCAM ASAT AMHR ATASEATA: 198 |

Yudhisthira, for his part, Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhagavan Sri Krsna and Arjuna, all bowed 
to Him, as soon as they saw Him, and stood silent anxious to know the mission which had 
brought Him there. (24) Bhima and Duryodhana, burning with rage, were then performing, 
mace in hand, their wonderful manoeuvres with a view to overthrowing one another. Seeing 
them thus engaged, Balarama said. (25) "King Duryodhana and Bhimasena, both of you are 
(renowned) warriors equally matched in strength. If Bhimasena is superior in strength, 
Duryodhana is more skilful in wielding the mace. (26) To my mind, neither of you is likely to 
win or be vanquished, since: you possess equal energy. Therefore, let this useless fight 
cease." (27) Though this advice of Sri Balarama was salutary (to both), the enmity which they 
bore to each other was so deep-seated that they could not accept the same. They could not 
forget the offensive words and malevolent acts of each other. (28) Balarama thought they 
Were being driven to their fate by destiny; therefore (without making further attempt at a 
compromise) He returned to Dwaraka. There He was welcomed by Ugrasena and other 
relations who were all delighted at His arrival. (29) (Thence) Sri Balarama went to the 
Naimisa forest for the second time. There the sages, (acting as priests) gladly assisted Sri 
Balarama, who had kept Himself aloof from hostility and war, in performing all the sacrifices. 
Pariksit, (really speaking) all sacrifices are but part and parcel of Sri Balarama (and yet He 
Performed them in order to teacha lesson to the world). (30) The almighty Balarama imparted 
Pure wisdom to the sages, by virtue of which they realized the whole universe in themselves, 
and the Self as permeating the whole universe. (31) Then, performing the concluding 
ablutions with His consort, Revati, and adorned with fine clothes and beautiful ornaments, 
He tooked amidst friends and relations just like the moon accompanied by moonlight (in the 
midst of stars). (2) Pariksit, almighty Bhagavan Sri Balarama is the infinite Lord Himself; 
His nature is incomprehensible. He had assumed a human semblance simply out of sport.

Rre,

His exploits are indeed innumerable. (33) He who contemplates on the wonderful deeds of 
the infinite, all-pervading Balarama, both morning and evening, becomes the most beloveg

of God. (34)

Thus ends the seventy-ninth discourse entitled "An account of the pilgrimage of Baladeva" 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SIRS TIOS

Discourse LXXX

Sri Krsna's Reception of Sudama 
THAT 
Wa GA AMM Apa Age: | daar saa wir eg 1 
al 4 aden aeasclhacna: ifawa fastest fasoo: arraritt: 1 2 | 
a atl aa qa Wm Wit wat a ded aaa 
Ste aad feeeag xt aquane: a cot: 1 2 | 
Reg detvafeqaradde ad wait dhe cal: | 
ay fama dst ude ah wht Femi x t 
King Pariksit submitted : O revered sage, Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the same as the 
Supreme Spirit. His powers are infinite. Therefore, His sports (which manifest His love and 
glory), are also infinite. We wish to hear now of the other glorious sports of the Lord. (1) O 
sage, all beings on earth running after the mirage of worldly enjoyments are sorely afflicted 
at heart. The manifold desires pierce them every now and then like the shaft. Under the 
circumstance, what man of taste is there on earth, who having heard of the excellent sports 
of the most glorious Lord even repeatedly would cease listening to them further ? (2) That 
speech alone is worth the name through which one sings His praises; those hands alone 
which do service to Him deserve to be called, hands: that mind aloneis rightly so-called which 
constantly remembers the Lord dwelling in all mobile andimmobile creatures; and those ears 
alone deserve the title which hear the sacred stories of His sports. (3) That head alone 
deserves to be Styled as such which bows to all mobile and immobile creatures, regarding 
them as the very images of God; that eye alone is the real eye, which sees Godin everything:

and those limbs alone are properly so-called, which are daily sprinkled wi ich 
aters whic 
wash the feet of the Lord and of His devotees.(4) Be EN eC NIN aA

Ud sad 
famed wy wa wera: area wana Fraaecaissteatct | & |

Sri Sita resumed : O sages, when king Pariksit made this submission to.Sri Suka, the

latter's heart got completely mergedin the thoughtof Bh an Sri ssing 
the king, he said: (5) g agavan SriKrsna. (Then) addre

- 
- 
'

] BOOK TEN 453

et 
SAYS Sara 
POAT MA HEE ATO REETTA: | Fare BPAY wee FARR: 1 et 
Seeger setae Tet | ea Vat Spetorer aaaray a aAeMaat 1 9 
uftam uit We we ae alias elena a aaa aI | 
aq Hel Wiad: TAT Aankaga: att: | meas AVA wa Badass: | e | 
agife Fert Aet a ua craft aft aft died A gelled 1201 
STRASE SRA MISTGWETSR: |e: | UeMEMTTAAfY «ae | 
fee Ata Tate ATAASISR TENTS: 122 1

a wa ade fast age: ofiat geist fe ual orm samgetmesia ie 
ga aera wat we aft aati sero fafa me ae ata 123 1 
Tara Ad YM ase, WyHdoger | AeaUsA AA, Aaa Va WETSUTAAA 1 Ys 
@ ame farsa: saat arent fees poreestt wei cet enfeta ferrari ieu

Sri Suka replied : (Pariksit),there was a certain Brahmana, who was a (great) friend 
of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. He possessed true knowledge of Brahma and was free from 
attachmentto the objects of the senses. His mind was composed and he had full control over 
his senses. (6) Although a householder, he used to remain contented with whatever he got 
without effort. He was always ill-clad and his wife too had no sufficient clothing to cover her 
body with. (Due to extreme poverty they seldom had a full meal and) the wife (specially) 
became very feeble on account of starvation. (7) (One day) the poor and afflicted wife of the 
Brahmana, who was (extremely) devoted to her husband, approached her husband witha 
withering face and a trembling body, and said to him:—(8) “Adorable husband! Bhagavan 
Sri Krsna, the spouse of the Goddess of Wealth, Himself is your friend. He is like a wish- 
yielding tree to His devotees, the refuge of all and a great devotee of the Brahmanas. (9) 
O blessed one, be pleased to approach Him, who is the resort of the righteous. When He 
comes to know that you are a householder and that you are suffering from want, He will 
bestow abundant wealth on you. (10) He now resides at Dwaraka as the protector of the 
Bhojas, Vrsnis and Andhakas. He (is so generous that He) gives away His own Self to those 
who contemplate on His lotus-feet. It is no wonder, then, that He, the Supreme Teacher of 
the World, should bestow on His devotees wealth and objects of worldly enjoyment, which 
are after all not very desirable things." (11) Thus frequently and gently entreated by the wife, 
the Brahmana at last agreed to the proposal; for he thought that it would give him an 
Opportunity of seeing Bhagavan Sri Krsna, which was a supreme gain in itself. Developing 
this idea in his mind he decided to go, and addressing his wife said, "Odear, is there anything 
in the house fit to be taken as a present ? If so, let me have it. " (12-13) The wife of the 
Brahmana begged of her neighbours and secured four handfuls of parched and beaten rice, 
which she tied up in a piece of rag and gave it to her lord for presentation to Sri Krsna. (14) 
With those handfuls of beaten rice, itis said, the foremostof Brahmanas set outon his Journey 
to Dwaraka. His only thought on the way was how itwould be possible for him to obtain a sight

of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (15) 
Sift yparaniiars fra: wens a fas: | fastsmarercnguiat Feqatationy 12 | 
Te qasaearnt Afedton aifest: | feasted site Ags Tet Fe 191 
4 fitaare a francigaifes: | meters area ateat welstetaet 181

ee: fra fanttgagiatde: i iat arquefsrga Area genta: 1¢¢) 
gaaasa uss Kae AS: SHUM saga «at Tater: 120) 
seta UR Walewlantas: | eaierag err GeeHEA: 12e1 
ge: giiafatit selorafefirder | otfelatsscar anges Ti a ANTAL 122 | 
eae died amt fast aadamicat wed eee «= 9 1231 
SUG «= gel HPSNATA@antitar | faferetsyelesiten state MATHS 1 kx 
fea ad waragia fear fra dea orensier wT aR 
aisat feteren siifrarta aye: | wage fret fear uftgmisast ger 1261 
nue: yal depe ad: | ster ofeat ISM St Ta WERT 1201 
(O Pariksit, reaching Dwaraka), the Brahmana together with other Brahmanas passed 
through three camps of guards and three protective walls (one after another), and then 
reached the mansions occupied by the Andhaka and Vrsni chiefs, who followed the righteous 
ways of the devotees of God, very difficult of access to ordinary people. (16) There was 
situated (in the centre of that innermost ring of the city) the palace of Bhagavan Sri Krsna 
containing the dwellings of His sixteen thousand and odd consorts. In one of them, which was 
specially decorated, the Brahmana entered with the feelings of one who found himself 
merged in the Bliss of God-realization. (17) Bhagavan Sri Krsna was at that time seated on 
a couch with His consort Rukmini. Seeing the Brahmana from a distance, He suddenly rose 
from His seat and advancing towards him, joyously folded him in both of his arms. (18) 
(Pariksit!) the lotus-eyed Lord (who is the very embodiment of Bliss) felt extremely delighted 
when He touched the body of His beloved friend, the Brahmana sage. Tears of joy began 
to drop from His eyes. (19) (Taking the Brahmana by the hand) Sri Krsna, the purifier of the 
world made His friend sit on His (own) couch, and bringing (Himself) all the articles necessary 
for worship, washed the Brahmana's feet and sprinkled His head with the drops of that water. 
(Then) He smeared the Brahmana's body with excellent perfumes as well as with the pastes 
of sandal, aloe-wood and saffron. (20-21) Having joyfully worshipped His friend with scented 
fumes and rows of lights, and offering him betel-leaf seasoned with catechu, lime, areca-nut 
parings and cloves etc., and a cow, the Lord greeted the Brahmana with sweet words. (22) 
The Brahmana was ill-clad, with an unclean and emaciated body, the veins of which were 
visible to the eyes. Queen Rukmini herself actually waited on him having the chowry before 
him. (23) The women of the palace were astonished to see a naked Brahmana being SO 
lovingly honoured by Bhagavan Sn Krsna of spotless fame. (24) (They said to one another:—) 
What meritorious act was performed by this naked, destitute, condemned and lowly begga! 
that the Lord of the three worlds, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, should receive him with such honour 
and respect. Leaving Sri Rukmini, a manifestation of Goddess Laksmi Herself, who was 
seated (with Him) in His bed, He embraced the Brahmana as if he were Lord Balarama 
Himself.” (25-26) Pariksit, taking each other by the hand, Bhagavan Sri Krsna and the

Brahmana recounted the sweet incidents of their boyhood, when they lived together in the 
house of the same teacher. (27)

MATAGAAT 
ot Se epee VAM ween aa mit water aaaft A ar zc! 
meat yey oat | femenmmfered aati Aterksitaa fag ata fated fe 2129! 
fad gaia anifor TREAT ATA: | AISA: Wardiectaere Mindqaaed, 120 |

: : O pious Brahmana, on your return from the preceptor's 
house, after making the voluntary present to him, did you or did you not marry a wife, who 
is in every respect worthy of you ? (28) | know that, even though you are leading (I presume) 
the life of a householder, your heart is free from worldly desires. | am also aware that having 
realized the truth, you do not entertain any love for wealth. (29) (In this world) people who 
have shaken off worldly desires brought forth by Divine Maya, and who yet perform their 
prescribed duties with a heart unswayed by desire, just as | do, for the sake of setting an 
example before the world, are very rare. (30) Do you remember, O dear Brahmana, our stay 
in the house of the preceptor? It is there that the twice-born acquire the knowledge of that 
which is worth knowing, and thus cross the darkness of ignorance in the form of mundane 
existence. (31) O friend, the father from whom one gets the body is the first Guruin this world. 
Next, comes the teacher, who invests one with the sacred thread and teaches him his 
obligatory duties, He is worthy of adoration like Myself. Lastly, comes the teacher who 
imparts the knowledge of Self to men ofall classes and orders and helps one in the realization 
of God. He is identical with Me. (32) O dear friend, the teacher is the same as Myself. Among 
the followers of the Varnasrama order in this world, they alone who carry out the preceptor's 
teachings and thereby cross the ocean of mundane existence without much ado know their 
true worldly and other-worldly interests. (33) O friend, |am the Universal Self (Il reside in every 
heart as the Witness.) | am not so pleased with the performance of daily obligatory sacrifices 
by the householder, nor with investiture with the sacred thread and study of the scriptures, 
which is the duty of a celibate, nor with the penance of the ascetic, nor again with the quietism 
of the recluse, as | am with services rendered by a disciple to the preceptor.(34)

sift a: ada see ad aad Wt | qeatetleqitrerra wha 1341 
sfasri oweRvanad! aed feiamatinaia fg: «eelaea: 126! 
Gist naatad ara aga fet: i Fa He Tord A oad fst 1201 
a ot | Ow CRergiurem «= qr | 
fsisedisu wet at Yeldeem: afer: 13! 
ude fafeat sfea wat arctarie: | staan a: Rrenararetsazaaldrt, 133 | 
aa 8 yet qaneredishig:fam: | amet A sifu AwEtga AER: Iso! 
wita fe fost: adel yerepqt! aa 4 fayemer datatcardor Tt 1g 
Usise at feria: Gan: Wy WARM: | Sarat Waate WA Alsr 
sutrersanht oo aaat TRA Tata aE: eet 1831 
- incident how, one day, when living in the house 
Of “4 peer Be reir wife to bring fuel (35) We entered a thick 
forest, O sage, and were overtaken by a mighty and violent storm of wind and rain, which 
broke unexpectedly out of season, and thunders roared relentlessly over our head. (36) The 
SUN set in the meanwhile and all sides were enveloped in darkness. The land being covered

i ly and 
with wat d not ascertain the high and low level of ground. (37) Severe 
repeatedly Mer violent blasts of wind and showers in that flood, and not knowing the

directions, we wandered in the forest in great confusion holding each other by the hand. (38) 
Our preceptor, sage Sandipani, when he learnt this, proceeded in search of us at sunrise ang 
discovered us, his disciples, in that bewildered state. (39) He said, "My dear boys, you have 
been put to great hardship on my account. One's own self is dear to all more than anything 
else. How wonderful that you have shown your devotion to me by disregarding even the self. 
(40) A good disciple should offer with a sincere heart his all, including his very self, to the 
Guru. Thatis precisely what he should actually do in order to repay the debt to the Guru. (41) 
O jewels of the twice-born, |am (supremely) pleased (with you); letall your desires be fulfilled, 
and may all the knowledge of the Vedas, that you have acquired from me, remain ever fresh 
in your memory. May it never fail you whether here or hereafter." (42) O friend, numerous 
incidents of this type occurred during our life at the preceptor's house. It is by the grace of 
the preceptor alone that man attains perfection and supreme peace. (43)

SEIT SATA 
fenenietdd faca Wai Mad Gee Ast aal Wag ixxi 
arsed «el «Re OSTaud «fasti aaa qe Wey aleisemdiasmey ivy

The Brahmana replied : O God of gods, Preceptor of the World, what else remains to 
be achieved by me? ( | have accomplished everything, realized everything) inasmuch as | 
enjoyed the privilege of staying in the preceptor's house with You, whose resolution is 
unfailing? (44) O Lord, the Vedas which are the repository of the four objects of life, viz., 
Dharma (virtue), Artha (prosperity), Kama (worldly enjoyments) and Moksa (salvation), 
constitute Your body. You went to the preceptor's house to study those very Vedas only to 
imitate the ways of men, as a matter of sport. (45)

Thus ends the eightieth discourse forming part of the Story of Sudama, in the 
latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

eee 
CDSS OD

aNenraifaaHseara: 
Discourse LXXXI

The story of parched rice brought as a Present (for Sri Krsna) by Sudama 
= Ae Sara 
, a sai faqen we aga et: i adyaisfia: wana samt aq 2 | 
i SEA SATE PON Tar Teer, Hea | To Ertawita Aer Wes Bat WH: | 2 | 
Sri Suka began again : ( Pariksit!) Bhagavan Sri Krsna knows the mind of all beings: 
He is devoted to Brahmanas (always takes care to relieve their suffering) and is the sole

J

} 7

i refuge of saints. Thus heartily talking alongwith thathonourable Brahmana, He nowsmilingly 
| spoke to His dear comrade in a jesting mood looking at him with eyes full of affection. (1 -2)

feegararmrit wer, A wen yer! sweet wh: on ata A wa 
: qdaantagd AA dea ead | 2 |

DIS: S| L senstnnenwanneenenenenrarene OOF TEN 457

ESSE LAR MMR RSH BBB Re BR Bh 
wet et woes ate at A seen Sera | ae WTA =8=|-_ eee: 1 X | 
seqoisit fester sifea: uaa fire: i qaemght wer A SERERSIENE: | 4 | 
AATMTAR STAT, TERTATERUT | arent sitet area 1 & 
= dOWet Beafeertter | sat are erenfir araaisneigaen: 1 9 t 
a ie TUTTE: |e wee feaftrelrht yaemaugenyt < |

a Tenitor Wa i Merwe at faa yaenauged: 1 < | 
va” OE Perea feta we aay eet aa | UBT: 1201 
. FRAT ReeTeyga | arferecteasrarg her Cae RUT 122 |

The glorious Lord said : "O friend, what present have you brought for Me from your 
house? | consider as great even a small present offered by the devotee with real love; but 
alot of things offered without devotion do not bring Me pleasure. (3) Whosoever offers to Me 
with love a leaf, a flower, a fruit or even water, | accept and heartily enjoy that offering of love 
by that man of purified intellect." (4) Pariksit, though encouraged by the Lord in this way, the 
Brahmana, feeling shy, did not present the handful of beaten rice to the Lord of Laksmi (the 
goddess of wealth) Himself. He (simply) hung his head. (5) But the Lord, who sees the mind 
of all beings, knew the cause of his visit. He said to Himself, "This Brahmanais a great friend 
of Mine; he never sought wealth from Me before. He approached Me now, at the entreaty of 
his devoted wife, whom he is naturally anxious to please. | shall bestow on him a fortune 
_ which is difficult of attainment even by the immortals." (6-7) Reflecting thus, the Lord 
snatched from under the covering of the Brahmana the beaten rice tied in a rag and said 
"Dear comrade, whatis this? Here you have brought Me something which I like most. These 
grains of beaten rice will satisfy not only Me, but the whole world." (8-9) Saying this, 
Bhagavan Sri Krsna ate one handful of that beaten rice and took another to eat, when 
Rukmini, who was a manifestation of the Goddess of Wealth Herself, caught hold of the 
Lord's hand, for devoted as She was to the Lord Himself, She was unable to leave Him. (10) 
She said "O Lord of the universe, this is enough. One handful of rice is sufficient to please 
You and to bring one an abundance of wealth of all kind in this as well as the next world. 
(Taking more of it, please do not part with me as well.)" (11)

weorat « a To ATTAR AT | TAT Cea FS AA SAT Set TAT 11 
stay fear weaeaiiatad: | st Mead Ma wwaAqaet Afad: 1231 
A TROT eT FOIA TATA | TEM AfStsrrerRRI Ae: 18% 
Si weael EB AVA nat aa aka caitakest ferucdife 194! 
wert afta: Unita, w He: offends: | Heer we aera | afsra: 1261 
fafa: frame wis ara AAT fee ats: Seat ATTRA 1219 1 
we | wa uredarenefh: | aftdt «© aaeta | fade crake 
wnivertht: dat warat gfe amen i aataria fieglat yer aaa 1291 
serdar merged at WHA ret et mk Aout Tee ze 
The Brahmana spent the nightin Bhagavan SriKrsna's palace, partook of a hearty repast

and f ; s if he were in the Lord's own paradise. (12) (Pariksit,) the next 
moming, Gane te PY Bhagavan Sri Krsna) he left for his home. The source of life of the

Di 
ARRRAALPM KAMA AKA AV Ke Ve HF Me KVM Me Wr We Br We Vr Ke Re Ke Br Br Ke Br Ke Kr Ke Be He Be Be Br He He Ke He He Be Be Ke He Bi He Br Ke Ke We Ke Be We We Ke He Ke sneennaaiS. 8 1 
. Brey

entire universe, the very embodiment of Self-enjoyment, Bhagavan Sri Krsna followeg him 
to some distance, delighted him by sweet and polite words and bowed to him.(13) Even 
though the Brahmana did not receive any fortune from the Lord directly, he did not ask fo, 
anything himself. He felt ashamed of the meanness of his heart. He, however, felt supremely 
happy for having obtained the blessed sight of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (14) He said to himself 
"Oh (wonder of wonders) | have seen today with my own eyes, Bhagavan Sri Krsna's love 
for a Brahmana. He is really a devotee of the Brahmanas. He clasped to His bosom, Which 
is the abode of the Goddess of Wealth, a destitute like myself! (15) What affinity is there 
between me, avile sinner and destitue (on the one hand), and Sri Krsna, the abode of Laksm 
(on the other). Only because | am born of Brahmana parents, He folded me in his arms. (1 6) 
Not only that, like His own brother, He made me sit on the bed of His beloved consort Rukmini, 
and finding me fatigued, Queen Rukmini fanned me with a chowry in Her hand. (17) The God 
of gods, whotreats the Brahmana as His deity, shampooed my feet and rendered every other 
form of personal service to me and treated me with the respect due to a god! (18) Heavenly 
bliss, salvation, riches of this world or of the nether world, and all supernatural powers follow 
from the worship of His feet. (19) And yet He did not give me even a little wealth. Because 
He thought, poor as | was, wealth would completely turn my head and make me forget Him. 
Oh, how merciful is the Lord to me. (He has really done me an act of grace by withholding 
wealth from me)." (20)

Ttdad: wt feretran gaaercseifdar: adel aang 
fafastaastan: Hrclesihethe: | WeherohyerAsihSnNlaraiesay: 122 
WE Weg: Gra: ait shuntat: | fate Ha al WIM He afar 1231 
Ua Aaa a AM ASA: Ie AeUrT aaa yaa 12x11 
Ofaaridarcnua Uden | Asem Ferui wfauit sitharsar 1241 
Uda «Ui SBT SAienvoetrert | Mifedieaade aa AAA afte 1261

Musing inwardly thus, the Brahmana arrived near his house. There he found the area 
surrounded on all sides by seven-storeyed buildings resplendent as the sun, fire and the 
moon. (21) It was interpersed with beautiful gardens and parks which resounded with the 
warbling of birds of all descriptions, with ponds and pools in which various types of lilies and 
lotuses were in full blossom. (22) Well-adorned men and pretty women were moving here 
and there. The Brahmana stood puzzled at the sight. He said to himself, " What is this (I am 
Seeing in front of me)? Whose place is this? (Is it the same place where | lived ? If so,) what 
magic has transformed it into so many palaces?" (23) As he was engrossed in these 
thoughts, men and women, possessing the splendour of gods advanced to receive the 
blessed Brahmana singing and playing upon various musical instruments. (24) Hearing of 
the return of her lord, the wife of the Brahmana was extremely delighted (at heart), and In 
joyous impatience, hurriedly came out of the palace. She looked like the veritable Goddess 
Laksmi coming out of her abode. (25) At the sight of her husband her eyes became wet with 
tears of love and excitement. Closing her eyes (out of shyness) she respectfully bowed t0 
him and mentally embraced him. (26)

Uc clea faepedt ccf annie | arta frennosta aed ard a faked: 1291 
Sit: Ga wat aw: sfast froma afr «= ea |= ae 122 
wate a: Wan art veaitesc: ads enevea arrest ize! 
aR A wih ACEO ai mmamaesm faa gata a 130!

Dis. 81 J BOO 
A SeATeTATLORETT RADNER ER i RENEnE Poet MOE mepgenenaeeacues aeabsneees 
Lif 2 8:0 8:2 281

wait «= quer 6 edi, iftradt «= ere 1341 
qa R decent are Gea watt eI! 
Fagus Tone fTASIAT STIS: 136 1 
wee fat wae fe wae used fad? easiest: | 
sidtdstera frase: wat way fom afat aekea i301

ga Safad Gen wnisdta wart fawn we Ty atferee: 1321

The Brahmana was astonished to see his wife brilliant like a celestial lady and shining 
in the midst of maid-servants adorned with necklaces of gold. (27) Followed by her he now 
joyfully entered his own house, which contained hundreds of columns of gems and looked 
like the abode of the celestial king, Indra. (28) It was furnished with bedsteads made of ivory 
and plated with gold, the beds on which were spread sheets as white and soft as the foam 
of milk. Chowries with gold handles were hanging here and there. (29) There were seats of 
gold provided with soft cushions and strings of pearls hung from brilliant canopies. (30) The 
walls made of clear crystal were inlaid with emeralds, and excellent images of women made 
of precious stones held dazzling jewels in their hands to light up the rooms. (31) Seeing there 
such abundance of riches of all kinds come to him without any ostensible cause, the 
Brahmana reflected on this windfall with a calm mind: (32) “I am poor and unluckly from birth; 
Oh, wherefrom could this wonderful fortune come to me? Nothing but the (gracious look) of 
Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the crown-jewel of Yadus and the possessor of untold riches, could be 
the cause of this. (33) Sri Krsna (the Lord of the goddess of wealth and perfect in everyway), 
has infinite objects of enjoyment always at His disposal. Therefore, knowing the mind of His 
Suppliant devotee, He gives in abundance to the latter, though He regards the gift as very 
insignificant and does not mention it to the devotee. My friend, the crest-jewel of Yadus, is 
generous like the cloud, (which though capable of filling up the ocean, sometimes does not 
choose to rain in the presence of the peasant, but inundates his fields at night when he is a 
Sleep, and yet considers the gift as inadequate). (34) Though underrating His own abundant 
gifts, He makes much even of a small present by His devotee. The noble-minded Lord 
accepted with great delight the handfuls of beaten rice | took for Him. (35) May | secure from 
birth to birth His good-will, love, friendship and service. (I have no need for wealth.) May | 
Cherish ever-growing devotion to the lotus-feet of the glorious Lord, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the 
one abode of excellent qualities, and obtain association with His devotees! (36) Bhagavan 
Sri Krsna, who is ever free from the shackles of birth and death, is acquainted with the evil 
un deriving worldly prosperity. He knows how the intoxication of wealth and power brings 
about the fall of many a wealthy man. That is why (out of compassion) He very often refuses 
to grant the prayer for wealth, kingdom and power of short-sighted devotees." (37) (Pariksit!)

aving reached this conclusion by force of his reason, the Brahmana in conjunction with his

wife enjoyed the worldly pleasures sparingly and without attachment, and his devotion

to Sri Krsna grew from more to more. (38) 
aq a -tacad Baad: Wl: | Aelu: wat da FT aver fered aq se) 
wd «a fat waged gr wayckitd coin 
MyStar: Gal THAI So |

ASAI NT MAAS TRTTA 
Wie Seva Bat AVA wT: | aermtar wait Hdeeng faqerd we | 
sft strerad Fege uae Miecnat ates See Ge AAR eara: | ce

(Pariksit !) the almighty God of gods, the Lord of sacrifices, Bhagavan Sti Krsna, 
looks upon the Brahmana as His own Lord and deity. Therefore, there is no being ( on 
earth) greater than the Brahmana. (39) Now, this Brahmana, the friend of the Lord, 
realized that, though unconquerable by others, the Lord easily submits to the will of His 
devotee. Realizing this, he became absorbed in contemplation on the Lord. His ties of 
ignorance were cut asunder by force of this contemplation and before long he attained 
ihe abode of the Lord, the sole resort of saints. (40) (Pariksit!) the man who hears this 
account which illustrates Bhagavan Sri Krsna’s love for the Brahmanas attains devotion 
to the Lord and obtains release from the bondage of Karma. (41)

Thus ends the eighty-first discourse entitled “The story of beaten rice (taken by Sudama as 
a present for Sri Krsna),” in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

FIFISRPRERS S

aT Fasifadaseara: 
Discourse LXXXIlI

Meeting of the Vrsnis with the Gopas and Gopis (of Vrndavana)

WY Faq

sainel ERace aad Wapwet: | gata: qed Head serie

aq Weal AP Ws Weed ada: i wash at aq: satfafercaariet

Faia We gay Wa: weaydi at | zat SRT at Wah Aslecri! 2!

sat a War Wal aaregersft antun icine mead aeratsaaqdal |

sri Suka began again: Pariksit, once upon a time when Bhagavan Sri Krsna and 
Sri Balarama were (thus) residing in Dwaraka, there occurred a total eclipse of the sun, 
which (ordinarily) occurs at the time of universal destruction. (1) Having come to know 
of it (from astrologers) beforehand, people thronged from all sides to the sacred spot 
called Samanta-pafcaka (Kuruksetra) with the object of earning merit or blessed- 
ness. (2) That is the place where, while exterminating the Ksatriyas on earth, Parasurama, 
the foremost warrior (of his time), caused five big tanks to be filled with their blood. (3) 
The almighty Lord Parasurama also performed a sacrifice there for the expiation of sin-

Though ever untouched by good or evil Karma, He did it like an ordinary mortal in order 
to set an example before the world. (4)

Hee daar dare wedi: Us: | qVTaya aAMipradcaigeniad: | & |

Dis. 62 ) eannennnentantwveeneanrenres SOOK TEN 461

agua we at wr gafirene: | wesereranen: Aaa: 1 & | 
areisree! Wat Fran 7 Waid 86 Wafawartdds: 9 area: 1 © 1 
Trea fara fhe eferrereyhar: lord werent: uf arsyaniies: | ct 
Karas: meat: War SA aa Seal ear sater qannfear: 1 e | 
areroteat egiqate:egermniet: | we8y faterad, GRA WU: 12o! 
ag: Wa fase: Get a ua aa a Aeagta gana: qwariiaar: 1221 
qearatatarl: cart Rarersrarefioretig | aan Cal: Aerated FA 1221 
Taienaeteaatiqegaar | HPalsehaM ASM HUA Or 123 | 
sraisareaaar mist aaa aa wae yeat or inisienftoa Br ey

STR Me At: Basel Waal waht aqdeieu

fara Wier = FereiisferatecirarmerngsaaishRAR |

et: FM agragetiad fea att: sornyerat: 1261 
acdsee A gem afasetentem: | ard Hae Yel ap: Herren faa: 1201

Pariksit, on this great occasion for pilgrimage people from all parts of India, intent to wash 
away their sin, assembled at Kuruksetra. There came Yadus like Akrura, Vasudeva and 
Ugrasena (among the-elders), and Gada, Pradyumna, Samba and others (among the 
younger generation). (Pradyumna's son) Aniruddha and Krtavarma, the Yadava general, 
alongwith Sucandra, Suka and Sarana were left (at Dwaraka) for the protection of the city. 
The Yadus came all the way with great pomp and splendour. Adorned with necklaces of gold, 
garlands of celestial flowers and excellent clothes, and protected by armour, they looked like 
gods as they proceeded with their wives in chariots shining like aerial cars, on horses 
Springing like waves, and on trumpeting elephants appearing like thundering clouds, and in 
Palanquins, etc., carried by foot-men shining like Vidyadharas. (5—8) (Reaching Kuruksetra,) 
the (blessed )Yadus took their bath in the sacred waters, observed a fast according to the 
rule (during the eclipse) and made gifts of cows in right earnest to the Brahmanas adorning 
them with clothes, garlands and chains of gold. (On the conclusion of the eclipse) they again 
took their bath in the tanks associated with the name of Parasurama, and thereafter fed 
deserving Brahmanas with dainty dishes. Their objectin doing all this was to strengthen their 
devotion to Bhagavan Sri Krsna’s feet. (Then) the Yadus, who regarded Bhagavan SriKrsna 
alone as their deity, broke their fast with the permission of the Brahmanas and lay down to 
rest at pleasure under the cool shade of umbrageous trees. (After taking repose for a while) 
they began to visit their friends and relations among the princes that had congregated there 
On this occasion. (9—12) Kings of Matsya, Usinara, Kosala, Vidarbha, Kuru, Srhjaya, 
Kamboja, Kekaya, Madra, Kunti, Anarta, Kerala, and many other principalities, who were 
either their allies or enemies, had assembled there in their hundreds, O Pariksit! Besides,

anda and the other Gopas, who were (great) friends of the Yadavas, and the Gopis, who 
Krsna, had also arrived there. (The Yadus saw

ad been | ing to see Bhagavan Sri ; 
them all snaenene ‘Gere (13-14) The joy they derived from one another's sight opened the 
buds of their heart. With faces glowing like lotuses in full blossom and with tears trickling

Their hair stood on end, their 
OWn thei sped one another in close embrace. 1! end, thei 
VOices sat ieee anki and all were transported with joy. (15) (Like the men) the

women also greeted and looked at one another with smiles and side long glances full of love 
and folded one another in their arms. While doing so they pressed to their bosoms the 
bosoms of another smeared with saffron-paste, and tears of love stood in their eyes. (16) The 
younger ones bowed to the elders, and were themselves bowed to by those still younger, ang 
welcoming one another and enquiring after their mutual welfare, they related to one another 
(enchanting) stories of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (17)

Gat We wydter AGAM, frawaft wqueltgre A wet denen Sa: 1201 
(Pariksit!) Kunti, when she saw her brothers and sisters with their children, as also her 
parents, sisters-in-law and Bhagavan Sri Krsna, had her grief soothed in conversation with 
them. (18) 
HIYA 
ara Wa AA STAM HaaAL| Ae AT BNA Ala ATS AAA: 12a 1 
Get wee: wt we: fiauatiager eer ge canaiar iyo!

Kunti (addressing Vasudeva) said : My brother, | find myself extremely unfortunate. 
Not a single desire of mine has been fulfilled. What a pity that even noble brothers like you 
should forget me during my calamities! (19) |am now convinced that friends, relations, sons, 
brothers and even parents forget one on whom fortune does not smile. (Why should | blame

you for this?) (20) 
aged Sara 
ara UMMgaM camletnr aA! dara fe aat lw: Hed Hreasazar 12e 
Sarda: wa ad at feat fei udda wa: WMH ease: Ga: 1221 
Vasudeva replied: Dear sister, do not find fault with us. We, mortals, are nothing but toys 
in the hands of Providence. The world is subject to the control of the Supreme Ruler, and 
everyone acts and is made to act according to His will. (21) Sister, you are aware how

harassed by Kamsa, we had to flee from one quarter to another. It is only now that we have 
been restored to a secure position by Providence. (22) 
Sa

aqeaitaaredetaeistaat qa: | Aaa: 1231 
HEN SUISHARIIA WIM GYM AM | Aa: USAT: Grit Barat fat: qa: 12v! 
eravist fertes stern aafrrer.! geiie gue: Beat qywehg: Tepes 124! 
creat fagneiat Afaet usb gemg: gaat a aaa atfeataa: 126! 
Trt 2 A Wes aeiserqaa: | sifrend ag: at: welts clea fafera: 1291 
AA A WAPOA WAH MAAC: | Maral BT Gi Has 12! 
Sel Mista ya STS Unite | aq agama, get edatafe atfirans 128 |

aeait: aftidere git wees aa TEL

q: aroutiarmts acahtareaatierthkniaadia ashaeats 1301

amt Je Praacif adat a: wnioatm: qaara faq: 1221

Sri Suka resumed : (Pariksit!) (all) the kings present there were duly honoured by 
Vasudeva, Ugrasena and the other Yadus, and they felt supremely delighted and gratifie

Dis. 82 ] BOOK TEN ae

Re Be Be Br Be Br Ke Be Ke Kee Ke He He He Hrs 
Py tke SSR SSER ERT RRS ee ehh Ea aekna neem

at the sight of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (23) Pariksit! Bhisma, Drona, Dhrtarastra, Gandhari with 
her sons (Duryodhana and others), the Pandavas with their consorts, Kunti, Srijaya, Vidura, 
Krpacarya, Kuntibhoja, Virata, Bhismaka, the great king Nagnajit, Purujit, Drupada, Salya, 
Dhrstaketu alongwith the king of Kasi, Damaghosa, Visalaksa, the king of Mithila, the kings 
of Madra and Kekaya, Yudhamanyu and SuSsarma, Bahlika and others with their sons— 
these and other kings, who had accepted the suzerainty of Yudhisthira, were astonished to 
see the person of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the abode of all excellence and beauty, together with 
His consorts. (24—27) Sri Balarama and Bhagavan Sri Krsna duly honoured them all, and 
they in their turn joyfully extolled ( the good fortune of ) the Yadus, who were the kinsfolk of 
Bhagavan sri Krsna and lived under His care. (28) (Addressing Ugrasena,) they said: “ O 
king of Bhojas! of all men in this world you Yadus alone have realized the fruit of your 
existence inasmuch as you constantly have before your eyes Bhagavan Sri Krsna, who can 
rarely be seen even by the greatest of Yogis. (29) The glory of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, which 
is sung by the Vedas (with such zest), the Ganga water that washes His feet and His 
utterances in the form of the scripture go a long way in purifying the world. The earth had of 
late been robbed of its splendour by Time; its potentialities have now been revived by the 
mere touch of His lotus-like feet, and it has once more begun to yield all the objects of our 
desire. (30) You Yadus have both marital and lineal relationship with Sri Krsna. You 
constantly see Him, touch His sacred person, walk with Him, chat with Him, sit close to Him, 
eat with Him and even sleep with Him. Even though you lead the life of a householder, which 
ordinarily paves the way to hell, you have constalntly in your midst all-pervading Lord Visnu 
Himself, whose very sight puts an end to the craving not only for heaven but for salvation

itself." (31). 
MP SAA 
TERA UE WA Weal HOM! dare «qatar wefiegare 1321 
a apt qual gerera: somethin: ake 860m §=—- fartegiteniettt: 1331 
agea: ouftgr cafe: Safege: | Ae ea SAIL a Hes 131 
SO ufgsr faacafwar aia fersrteag: Son ayes Hees 1341 
Tae aga URE TN alte a MTA Yat fasted: Wa: 136 
Aun Raat ara ule AAA Hee Agha Bat arerHvSat AAR: 1301 
at feta at asinfrent aah searerersted gen ae sfcfmar 13! 
Udaesit qa: a fiat: aafuangerareuaier | 
sratageaft ven @ aecniehaga A wat A Aet Ue: GA: 138

SiS i : iksit,) when (the celebrated Gopa) Nanda learnt that Bhagavan

Sri eaeeuie lehee A ee to Kuru ksetra, he too came there together with other 
Gopas to see them with abundant supplies of provisions in their carts. (32) The Yadus were 
delighted to see Nanda (and his companions). They stood up to receive him, even as dead 
Odies are spurred into activity when infused with new life. Having been anxious for long to 
Meet him, they embraced him tightly. (33) Vasudeva embraced Nanda with great delight and 
was Overwhelmed with emotion as he recollected (one by one) the persecutions to which 
© had been subjected by Kamsa, and how he had been compelled to place his sons in 
Nanda's keeping at Gokula. (34) Bhagavan Sri Krsna and Sri Balarama embraced their

foster-parents Nanda and Yasgoda and bowed to them. Pariksit, overwhelmed with emotion,

they could not utter a word as their throats were choked with tears. (35) The blessed Yasoda

and Nanda, too, made their foster-sons SI

t on their lap and folded them in their arms. This

a

2

? 
if

RE eS

removed the agony of their heart (caused by the long separation from their children, the 
apples of their eyes.) (36) Rohini and Devaki too embraced Yasoda, and remembering her 
friendly behaviour towards them spoke to her in faltering words with their throats choked with 
tears:—(37) "Yasoda, we can never forget the continued friendship you have showed to us. 
It is not possible for us to repay that debt, even if we obtain the fortune of Indra, the ruter of 
paradise. (Can anyone be so ungrateful as to forget that service of yours?) (38) When Sri 
Balarama and Sri Krsna had not even seen their parents and their father left them under your 
care, you protected them even as the eye-lashes protect the eyes. You gave them 
nourishment, protection and loving caresses and performed propitiatory rites for their 
welfare. In fact, you did all the duty of parents to them. Under your care, they had no cause 
of fear from anyone. (It was but meet and proper for you to treat them as your own children, 
for) noble souls like you make no distinction between one who Is their own and one who is 
not so. (O consort of Nanda! you and your husband both are really great souls.") (39) 
Sq

Tas meus fares adamt eer uated sata t 
eiutdadis uke aalersrang Maat gay ixol 
Wada fala Wed: ioankeenmma yet seafacusdia ise 
ad Ra A: Ae: WMMeafacntdar | watfsuiassqueareaqureada: S21 
aaa, Raendalaagsai qa ade war ate faq a 13! 
aga wih Wi ge wile ai darafaad yaaa walt sad ixx! 
fa oufefé yarmgaaa aead! fea aediacael vada aera: xu 
sé fe adyerfeedisnt § afe: 1 sift an @ anfatqcafiacee: ive 
Wd ga waa wAg@ssea qd: sud waa wa uZaamanar ive!

Sri Suka went on : (Pariksit ! | have already told you that the highest object of the Gopis: 
love was Bhagavan Sri Krsna.) When seeing Him, they used to curse the Creator for having 
provided their eyes with eye-lashes (which interrupted their vision by falling every moment). 
Seeing the Lord, for whom they had cherished such intense longing, after such a long time, 
they all ushered Him into their heart through ( the gateway of) the eyes and holding Him in 
close embrace mentally became one with Him. The state of oneness with the Lord attained 
by them through Love was not within the easy reach of even those who are ever united with 
Him through meditation. (40) When the Almighty Lord (Bhagavan Sri Krsna) found the Gopis 
in that state (of absorption), He saw them in private, embraced them, enquired after their 
health and smilingly said as follows:—(41) " (Dear) friends, for the service of our people, We 
had to go (out of Vraja and leaving friends like you) had to engage ourselves in destroying 
enemies. Do you still remember Us who have been out of sight for a long time? (42) | hope 
you do not entertain a low opinion of us, considering us as ungrateful? (You will be unfair 
to Me, if you do so.) It is God's will that unites or disunites beings. (43) Just as the wind 
brings together or scatters clouds, blades of grass, flakes of cotton, particles of dust, even 
so the Creator brings together or scatters beings of His creation. (44) Friends, it is a matter 
for congratulation that you have developed that ( transcendental) Love for Me, which 
(automatically) leads to My realization; and | need not tell you that loving devotion to Me 
brings immortality to all who practise it. (45) | am the beginning and end of all beings and 
pervade them both inside and outside, even as the elements, viz., the earth, water, air, fire 
and ether constitute the beginning and end of all material objects and pervade them both 
inside and outside, O fair ones! (46) These five elements have entered into the constitution

of all physical bodies as their material 
the enjoyer or the individual self. |am 
appear in Me. * (47)

eh) whereas the spirit or self resides in them as 
€ Ego Absolute beyond them both. In fact, both these

Nh SAA

AEM TT US ett Atha: 1 reyeTeUrea ratte ARTETA 1K 
ee ¢ Afra vented ahtatée fafeeesta: | 
HaR_aaiNerst Aare Teafeat. «Mel: INR

eft A EMTAd ASG UA teas GS sae gfetarsat ar Gaeirasts ear: 122 |

Sri Suka continued : ( Pariksit!) Bhagavan SriKrsna thus instructed the Gopis in spiritual 
lore. Revolving that in their mind, again and again, the Gopis got rid of their ego-body and 
became one with the Supreme Self. (48) They said, "O Lord, from whose navel sprung the 
lotus where Brahma, the creator, took His birth, the greatest of Yogis, possessed of infinite 
wisdom, contemplate on Your lotus-like feet in their hearts. Your feet alone serve as the 
support to enable people fallen in the abyss of mundane existence to get out of it. (O Lord,) 
occupied as we are with our household duties, kindly bless us that Your lotus-feet may ever 
remain present before our mental eyes, ( so that we may never forget them even for a 
moment)." (49)

Thus ends the eighty-second discourse entitled "The Meeting of the Vrsnis with the Gopas and 
Gopts of Vraja", in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SSE Sie es

3IY Walaa a seara:

Discourse LXXXIll 
Conversation between Bhagavan Sri Krsna's consorts and Draupadi 
My SAA 
AI wa Ata a Yetta: aefermenpesd Tals eels! ¢ | 
a wa Meet oye: AaepA: | WeREATMETMICaTeMee: 121 
Sasha wenger Tete «8waesgd = wlad| 
fafa a aaigis sat fest tepafifeats 2 | 
Frc S STEEL TTA AAT TAT AA ASAT ET, I 
WA A Aly 
(Pariksit!) the almighty Lord (Bhagavan Sri Krsna) was the 
as the goal (which they sought to attain through the practice 
Of His teachings). Having thus shown His favour to them, the Lord saw Yudhisthira and all. 
(other) friends and enquired about thelr welfare. (1) (Pariksit!) their sins disappeared at the 
Very sight of the lotus-feet of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. Kindly enquired after and duly honoured

by the Lord of the (three) worlds, they felt delighted at heart, and replied:—(2) ° (Blessed) 
Lord, exalted souls enjoy with their mind the nectar of your lotus-feet, which occasionally

Sri Suka began again : 
Preceptor of the Gopis, as well

flows out through their lips (in the form of the stories of Your enchanting sports). Those who 
quaff this nectar to their heart's fill with the cup of their ears are rid of all ignorance in respect 
of You—ignorance, which is the root of corporeal existence of all embodied beings. How can 
any evil befall them? (3) Lord, You are an embodiment of unfailing wisdom and a perfect 
ocean of Bliss. The three states of the soul occasioned by its contact with the mind (viz., 
wakefulness, dream and dreamless sleep) cannot touch even the fringe of Your effulgent 
Being and melt away even in Its proximity. You are the sole resort of recluses, who have lost 
all consciousness of the world. You have assumed a human semblance through Your own 
inconceivable Yogamaya (enchanting power) in order to protect the Vedas whose influence 
had waned through the force of time. We offer our obeisances to You.” (4)

HEAT A 
seqraaecnferaratat sMygfigacctsenaaltaraa: | 
aaa Mien faetisquifaeterit: soy avian a1 & | 
Sri Suka continued : (Pariksit!) when Yudhisthira and others were thus extolling the 
most glorious Lord (Bhagavan Sri Krsna), ladies of the Yadava and Kaurava families met

together and began to relate to one another the stories of Bhagavan Sri Krsna sung 
throughout the three worlds. | shall now tell you (in detail) what they said. Please listen. (5)

MP CIE| 
2 acwed wet 2 wad wae 12 AAA allot] ser Ueto Haast | & I

@ PV Udall sa al Wa Ba swan at leaded ANAT! © |

Draupadi said : Rukmini, Bhadra, Jambavati, Satya, Satyabhama, Kalindi, Saibya, 
Laksmana, Rohini and other consorts of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, (please) tell me how the 
glorious Lord Bhagavan Sri Krsna espoused you. Though God Himself, He behaves like 
mortal through His own Maya (enchanting power).” (6-7) =

weqar 
wma wWMdfqueddey wsreastanesratcetrg: | 
fa ars ga aTasiiagend, cashiers, AaTesaa | ¢ |

Rukmini said : (Draupadi,) Jarasandha and the other kings wanted that! should be given 
in marriage to Sisupala. They came armed for a fight to carry out this intention of theirs. But 
the Lord took me away from their midst even as a lion carries away its prey from a herd of 
goats and sheep. (It is no wonder that He should do so; for) even invincible warriors bear the 
dust of His feet on their crowns. (Dear Draupadi, | sincerely wish that) the lotus-feet of my 
Lord, the repository of all prosperity and beauty, may be available to me for worship from

(birth to birth). (8) 
ATA 
a 4 wifvamded afemienasae | 
Baas Tare. a aa ta: fatfegra At seas sar et 
Satyabhama said : (Draupadi,) my father was sorely grieved at the death of his brothe!

(Prasena); he, therefore, charged the Lord with Prasena's murder. In order to wipe off this 
stigma cast on Him, the Lord vanquished the lord of bears, Jambavan, (in battle) and winning

PE orm —- oe -e eee ee @

‘ce 83 
Dis ssuannennsensrenstnssrenteseneses oOo EN, wissen 
Sr ar kr fr fr or 
the jewel from him restorediitto my father. Seized 
made by him, my father bestowed the jewel ont 
had affianced me to another. (9)

with fear on account of the false imputation 
he Lord alongwith myself, even though he

aT eee Prra’d diet fragerarerrer 
wreat witat sareegot at ut ser afierenqer ent 1201

Jambavati said : (Draupadi,) my father (Jambavan, the lord of bears,) was unaware that 
my Lord was the same as Sri Rama, (his own lord and deity). (Therefore,) he fought the Lord. 
for twenty-seven days. After this test when he recognized the Lord (to be Sri Rama Himself), 
he took hold of His feet and offered’‘me asa present, together with the jewel. May | continue 
to be His slave (from birth to birth, is my only prayer to the Lord). (10)

Kalindi said : (Draupadi !) when the Lord came to know that | was practising austerities 
in the hope of obtaining the privilege to touch His feet, He came with his friend (Arjuna), and 
espoused me. | have now the privilege of sweeping His house. (11)

at at waar 30a fara yor Ae agenirareate fear: | 
Wis Asuped: By Pata Asya | 82 I

Mitravinda said : (Draupadi !) my father called an assembly of kings at his capital to 
enable me to elect my own partner in life. The Lord too attended the assembly and, 
vanquishing all the kings (in battle), took me away to His capital (Dwaraka), which is the 
abode of all excellence and beauty,-even as the lion carries away his prey from a pack of 
dogs. My brothers, who offered Him resistance, with a view to delivering me from His hands 
and thereby injuring me, were equally worsted in the fight. | now seek that in every life | may

get the privilege of washing His feet. (12) 
Gena

aplenishistedtdgdanrign, fat seart ferfarcttetatterorer | 
am areteeteter Frye west aaeT F eT Rrerattsstettenry 183 | 
a se didaent at aritiseguie| ate Pia Usa, Peat cere” A ex!

4A said: +1) in order to test the strength of the kings (who had assembled

to aye eoetae secured seven oxen endowed with inordinate strength and 
energy and very sharp horns. These oxen had shattered the pride of many a valiant warrior; 
but the Lord playfully and quickly took hold of them, (put strings through their noses) and 
br Ought them under His power in no time, even as children deal with kids. (13) Thus winning 
‘Me as a reward for His strength, my Lord carried me to Dwaraka with all my attendant maids 
Under the protection of a strong army. He conquered on the way all the princes who tried to 
Intercept. (O queen, my only desire now is that) | may (always) get the opportunity of serving

Him. (14)

isc censesivasnsceanannenneannnevenseserensnrensanenmwens: Oo

TATA

fat A Ae Bae ana! Hel Hora afaamatieve weiss: 1241 
aa A meade wasrah Sra | Harahan SA AT SAA: 18 1

Bhadra said : Draupadi, Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the son of my maternal uncle. Knowing 
that | had given my heart to Him, my father sent for Sri Krsna of his own accord and bestowed 
me on Him, with an army consisting of one Aksauhini and many maids-of-honour. (15) | now 
consider that my highest good lies in obtaining in every birth the touch of His feet, wherever 
| may be thrown by the force of my Karma. (16)

Or

we 86a = get gata

fi dee feo wes ga: qaaed faa ola 'e! 
Wet AA wd aka fir cleqaae: | qeat git CAAA ATA AA 12S 
JM Waar Uist Aca: UIE Ha: 1 3 q Slerresal ead A Hey UTILS 
add Aad WM snaqdhad: YM! Malena: ATA: ACA: 120 
far aun: ad andi amaa:ioneg: Gat am ag udig afga: 1221 
Sea SAGs Safad, Gel date: | strentfe Sat MAHeI Ugtensaa Fal: 1221 
aa amt dit wrreragafea: | dint gale: soit afadeeatertary 123 | 
TTA Ms Aer Areal A aeatheerfereL | Ural aatsaste AO ArhesA, TATA TTL RY

Laksmana said : O queen, Devarsi Narada frequently sings the story of the descent and 
sports of the Lord on earth. Having heard those songs and duly considering the fact that 
Laksmi, the goddess of wealth, rejecting (Indra and) the (other) guardians of the world, had 
chosen Him as her consort, | set my heart on the Lord. (17) O virtuous lady ! my father, who 
is known by the name of Brhatsena, loved me intensely. When he came to know of my mind, 
he contrived a plan for carrying it into effect. (18) O queen, just as on the occasion of your self- 
choice of a husband your father invented the device of a fish in order to get Arjuna for you, my 
father too invented a similar device, with this difference that thé fish was totally screened 
externally and only its reflection could be seen in the water. (19) Hearing of this, kings versed 
in the secrets of archery, and the use of all other arms comes alongwith their teachers, in their 
thousands from all sides to the capital of my father. (20) All were honoured by my father with 
due regard to their prowess and age. With their heart set on (winning) me, they took up the bow 
and arrow keptin that assembly and attempted, (turn by turn,) to hit the mark. (21) Some of them 
lifted the bow but finding themselves unable to String it left it where it was. Others succeeded 
in drawing the string as far as the other end of the bow, but (unable to fasten it to that end) fell 
down Struck by it. (22) Greatest warriors like Jarasandha, Sigupala, the king of Ambastha, 
Bhima, Duryodhana and Karna succeeded in stringing the bow, but could not locate the 
fish.(23) Seeing the reflection of the fish in the water, Arjuna was able to locate it, discharg? 
the arrow aiming at it with great care, but failed to hit it, the arrow only touching the fish. (24

Treg Hay wag TIM TEM aaUE aed Hart Sle 124! 
der ware fate wet der caste | aqua wa arfiafrfa fer 126! 
fefa geet «Agiamecgm 86 yer tars PAN AAaetiaget: 1291.

pis. 83 ]

i : aa PORTA Tat SE aa OAATET | 
Reta ufterg = 
saree Valse Hele 1261 
ual’ Sear aes TST Rifaeramererae: | 
. | Wehdiasqungee Reet GaIerL 1221 
sf te aan aaa ei iliac aS 2! 
mo uae ried Pride of the proudest of princes having thus been crushed, most of the 
kings returne : O : elr Seats (giving up all hopes of winning me). It was then that the almighty 
Lord took up the bow, strung it sportfully, joined the arrow to it, and looking but once at the 
reflection of the fish plerced it by His shaft and brought it down to the ground. The sun was 
atthe meridian at that time. (25-26) (O good Draupadi !) shouts of victory were raised all over 
the earth while celestial drums began to sound in the heavens and gods transported with joy 
showered flowers. (27) (O queen !) | entered the arena at that moment, with the anklets at 
my feet sweetly Jingling. | wore round my loins a new piece of finest silk and had wrapped 
myself with another. With flowers adorning my braid and bashful smiles on my lips, | carried 
inmy hands a brilliant necklace of jewels wroughtin gold. (28) Thick tresses of hair overhung 
my face and brilliant ear-rings added lustre to my cheeks. Lifting up my face | glanced at the 
kings on all sides with enlivening smiles and sidelong looks and with a heart over-flowing with 
love gently placed the necklace round the neck of my Lord. (29) The moment I placed the 
necklace round His neck, clay tomtoms, tabors, conchs, drums and kettledrums were 
sounded; male and female dancers began to dance, and songsters began to sing (in various 
tunes). (30) . 
Wd ad wate wae qaqeaia afet aaah weld gear: 132! 
at diag wae RAMAN Aa wateetearmt ages: 1321 
crengieama 486 alse | fast BST Ui Aon ATUfsaq 1331 
tsar wusen freq af deri dam segdgrea arafeier ger eft gx 
4 udeqenid: qaargaiterent: 1 fag: set eaftee werd seq: 134 
Draupadi ! when | thus chose my beloved Lord as my life's partner, the other love-lorn 
monarchs grew (extremely) jealous and were very much upset at their discomfiture. (31) In 
the meanwhile my Lord, possessed of four arms, (at once) placed me on His chariot drawn 
by four excellent horses and, lifting up His bow and putting on His armour stood prepared 
for battle. (82) Daruka drove the chariot decorated with gold as all the kings looked on, O 
queen, and the Lord proceeded to Dwaraka even as the lion passes through a herd of 
deer. (33) Lifting up their bows and prepared for a battle, some of those kings pursued my 
Ord with a view to obstructing Him on the way; but their attempt was no more successful than 
that of dogs to check the lion. (34) Some of them fellin battle, their arms, legs and necks being 
torn asunder by the arrows discharged from the Sarnga bow of the Lord; while others

abandoning the fight took to their heels. (35) 
ad: qu AGUAS gM : 
rot fate yfa aftrceaat enfreeittta wear 196! 
fren 2 l\nearaisegsn: «- Were feese: 13191

aria: adumabaezereentata: | argent weretfer eat qufer sifted: 131 
srearaer ae ad a yecieen: | acagiqere ae A AYA 1391

Then the Lord of the Yadus, like the very sun, entered His home, the city of Dwaraka. 
whose glories are sung in heaven as well as on earth. The city was specially decorated on 
this day with various ornamental arches and streamers which screened off the rays of the 
sun. (86) My father honoured all his friends, relations and kinsmen with valuable textiles 
and ornaments, beds, seats and other articles. (87) Though my dearest Lord lacks nothing 
being complete by Himself (in everyway) and delights only in the Self, yet my father out of 
love presented Him with a number of maid-servants, all kinds of wealth, foot-soldiers, 
elephants, chariots, horses and many valuable weapons. (O queen !) we must have (in our 
previous lives) practised great austerities giving up attachment to all. That is why in this 
birth we earned the privilege of actually working as His maid-servants in the household of 
our Lord. (38-39)

MEA HF: 
ata free Gut afer aa Saal Aare a: fafasra fest: | 
fia dgftfateanqaed: cera ufo a san: xo 
4A ad Ua Be Sed Aisa | Aue UNA A Se aT Bt: Wa Ise 
arate we sates: Bai gaperrne yet alg Aalya: 182! 
Sita ae awefa gfeequedley: | Magad Mot: weet ARI: 1¥3 | 
Sia SaarTad ASA URSA Bled Say Saal Safar seara: 123 |

Rohini (on behalf of the sixteen thousand consorts) said : Having conquered many 
a king during his expeditions for world conquest, Bhaumasura had made us, their 
daughters, captive and kept us confined in his palace. When, having put an end to Bhauma 
and all his forces in battle, He came to know of our existence in his palace. He liberated 
us and, though Perfect in Himself married us (all), knowing as He did that we ever 
contemplated on His lotus- feet, which bring emancipation from the bondage of birth and 
death. (40) O virtuous lady, we crave not for universal sovereignty on earth, or for rulership 
of the heaven, for the enjoyments attaching to both these positions or for supernatural 
powers, for the position of Brahma, or for Liberation or for (the various forms of personal 
existence in) the (eternal) abode of God.(41) We (only) desire that we may (continue to) 
bear on our head the glorious dust of the lotus-feet of our Lord, which is scented with the 
Saffron on the bosom of Laksmi (the goddess of wealth). (42) We long for the touch of the 
(sacred) feet of the glorious Lord, which the Gopas and the Gopis, the Bhila women, nay 
the very creepers and blades of grass craved for where He tended cows in Vraja (May this 
yearning of our heart be fulfilled by the Lord). (43)

Thus ends the eighty-third discourse, in the latter half of Book Ten of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

GISESASA IS

ke lS ee

pis. 84 ] BOOK TEN 4714

An account of the pilgrimage (undertaken by Lord Sri Krsna) 
NYP FAA 
Ta GA qIsqaya aPMaat areera fafaqacr sa waqnrey: | 
PUSS Rt Way at faraquensetHetes: |g | 
ofa aerennng afs: ee afte saad HPORIM aaa | 2 | 
saat AReH 0a Ss amtsfaa: | fafa: stare! siegisiisa Tilaa: 1 3 | 
TA: ARIEN Tar aasl Meal WT: | Goat: Heaaishisy urchusal qeenta: | x | 
fgahaasanasy TAGARAMST: | STAN «= AMaeaa «aaearaatsat 1 & | 
aM. GBI sala MMM Wales: | Weal: Haat a wegfdaatadr & | 
ammddien = oae |= weeseqeisetad| SPT oeeeaeU er: 119 1 
Jara SA, war ead: | eee «edt «| Actareitsyeyaa: 1c |

Sri Suka began again : (Pariksit !) hearing of this deep attachment of the consorts of Sri 
Krsna, the Soul of the universe, to His person, Kunti, Gandhari, Draupadi, Subhadra, the 
consorts of the other kings and even the Gopis, whom He held so dear, were all greatly 
astonished and their eyes were bedimmed with tears of joy. (1) When ladies were thus talking 
with ladies and men with men, a number of sages appeared on the spot for the sight of 
Bhagavan SriKrsnaand Sri Balarama. (2) The more prominent of them were Krsnadwaipayana 
(Vyasa), Devarsi Narada, Cyavana, Devala, Asita, Viswamitra, Satananda, Bharadwaja, 
Gautama, the glorious ParaSurama with his disciples, Vasistha, Galava, Bhrgu, Pulastya, 
Kagyapa, Atri, Markandeya, Brhaspati, Dwita, Trita, Ekata, Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana 
and Sanatkumara, Angira, Agastya, Yajnavalkya, Vamadeva, and (a few) others. (8—5) 
Seeing these Rsis, revered and worshipped by.the world, all the kings who had been sitting 
there from before, including (Yudhisthira and) the (other) Pandavas, SriKrsna and Balarama 
at once stood up and bowed to them. (6) (There) Sri Krsna, Balarama andall (those who were 
present there) welcomed them with sweet words and duly honoured them by offering seats, 
water to wash their hands and feet with, garlands, incense, sandal-paste etc. (7) When the 
Sages were comfortably seated, the Lord, who had appeared on earth for the protection of 
virtue, spoke (as follows) with the great assembly silently listening to Him. (8)

amt ad aera wal aeett denen! Baraat gerd aq abteraRitH | < | 
fe weaarat yoreatai PEC Rk Ih (HEISE ED ET ICCRUCE I. § 1Qol 
= wernt dat a tar gisorren: 1a Greener aaittet BT: 1821 
aft gif aa asda A yi GT aesa AEH: | 
sofear feat weed facia ofa | yeitaar ez 
aerate: got feng wet: weaicg at souelt: 1 
ase a afangiag 2 wa Wat 1x21 
The glorious Lord said : Today our life has been highly blessed, and the object of our

taking birth has been fully realized; (for) we have been honoured with a visit from the reat 
Masters of Yoga, whose sight cannot be easily obtained even by the gods. (9) How cap, 
people whose austerities are poor, and who see God cabined in a particular image (only)

gain (the rare privilege of) your sight and touch, of inquiring about your health etc., ang of 
offering you salutations and worship ? (10) Sacred waters alone do not possess purificatory 
virtues, nor do images of clay and stone alone represent the deities. Whereas these Purify 
a man after one has recourse to them and worshipped them for a long time, holy men purify 
by their very sight. (11) The gods presiding over fire, the sun, the moon, the stars, the earth, 
water, ether, air, speech and mind, when worshipped, cannot completely wash off our sing

inasmuch as they promote our sense of diversity; whereas the wise wipe off our sins even 
if we serve them for a few minutes, (less than an hour). (12) (O sages and assembled friends) 
he who looks upon His contemptuous body (which is virtually dead), constituted of the three 
elements of wind, bile and phlegm as the self, those related to the body (wife etc.) as one's 
own and images of clay, stone or wood as his objects of worship, and who regards the sacred 
waters alone as purifying, and never so the men of wisdom, is indeed, a donkey among cows 
(in human form). (13)

Rh Jaa 
fae wad: HWevedaa: iam qead fasrequitara wats: |e! 
fax fagea waa saree wae sae: Aad Wage 1241 
Sri Suka resumed : (Pariksit,) Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the possessor of unfailing wisdom. 
Hearing the above words from His lips, the sages kept silent. Unable to make out the meaning 
of those mysterious words, they got confounded. (14) After long consideration they came to 
the conclusion that though the (Supreme) Lord of the universe, He was behaving like an

ordinary man subjectto the law of Karma justin order to teacha lesson to the world. Realizing 
this, they smiled and addressed Sri Krsna (the supreme Teacher of the world) as follows. (15)

WI4 aq: 
aaa ddiaga aa fantfeat faagemeltac: | 
adie Ye ge set fafat wanafedfeaies 
oie Wie agi sie gaat aA aed ae | 
ate yfademafot aa fayashd fasaamieyl 
aa ae aria fan ad wos a 
weleam deat Wied anise yea: at varied 
Ha od ea We Ware: | alae aq ormdenh a ad: W129! 
Wee TAGS Te Wesreaaen: | Musas As ae AeTarsoisiary 120 | 
Fe At aaaHed eae FA: | a Gera UE Bart: Haat UT: 122! 
Tee 8 8WMad 8 HMlAHvstea | aanmeasantea UMA 122 | 
4 4 faa Yor Wes go: | aastatersaaet reita 23! 
aM WAM: GT Se Widen i amaatsaad a aq wad AL ies! 
tw am weary fawdtyfsdeni men fawn a ae wegen i2u! 
ae a agferrefiretenifiatad ze aa afecedt: |

_—— ee 2 Oe. oe ewe ee oe

sTquaghaean sypyerar SALI 2G |

The sages said: (Lord, even) great Progenitors of the world (like Marici) and the 
highest sages like us stand deluded by Your Maya (enchanting power). The almighty 
Lord of the universe, You behave like an ordinary creature, concealin Your true Self

behind Your seemingly human activities. Oh (all) Your sport : : 
he earth (though s( sports are (really) most wonderful. (16) 
Just as t ee ugn one) assumes different names and forms through its various 
products (viz., the tree, stone, jar etc., which are essentially the same as the earth), 
even so, though one, You assume various names and forms and, though static, You 
create and protect the universe and (finally) swallow up the same by Your own Self and 
(yet) these activities do not bind You. Oh, what is all this but a mere sport on Your part, 
O perfect one! (17) (Lord,) though You are the (supreme) Spirit beyond the realm of 
Prakrti (Nature), You assume from time to time a Form made of pure Sattva for the 
protection of Your devotees and suppression of the wicked and by Your example 
maintain (and perpetuate) the eternal Vedic path. (Really speaking) it is You who 
manifest Yourself in the form of the different castes and orders. (18) (Lord,) the Vedas 
constitute Your immaculate heart; through askesis, study, meditation and Samadhi 
(absorption) You are realized there in both Your Manifest and Unmanifest aspects, as 
well as in Your transcendental aspect which is beyond these two (and is the substratum 
of both). (19) Since You are known through the medium of the Vedas (which are stored 
in the heart of the Brahmanas), it is the Brahmanas who are the real medium of your 
realization. O Perfect One ! that is why You are the foremost patron of the Brahmanas, 
and that is why You honour them so much. (20) In You lies the culmination of all 
blessings; You are the sole refuge of saints. Having met You today we have attained 
the fruition of our birth, learning, austerities and wisdom. (21) (Lord!) Your wisdom is 
unbounded: You are the Supreme Spirit, the Embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss. 
You have concealed Your glory by Your own Yogamaya (enchanting power). We offer 
salutation to You as such. (22) The kings assembled here, and even the Yadus, who 
enjoy life together (with You), do not (truly) know You as the Universal Soul, the Time- 
spirit and Ruler of the universe, veiled as You are by Your own Maya. (23) As a 
dreaming person looks upon all objects of his dream as real, and regards his dream- 
formed body which is perceived (only) with the mind and exists in name alone—as his 
self, and not the body of his waking life, which is out of his mind for the time being, 
(even) so (in waking life) when the mind gets deluded by Maya in the form of the 
wandering of the senses among their objects which exist only in name, its discrimination 
gets clouded, and the Jiva fails to realize You who stand beyond the waking life.(24-25) 
(O Lord !) sages who have attained ripeness of Yoga succeed in enthroning in their 
heart Your lotus-feet, which are the origin of the holy waters of the Ganga, which wipe 
Off heaps of sins. We are glad we have seen those feet today. Lord, we are Your 
devotees. (Pray) shower Your grace on us. Now the (highest) state of Your realization 
is attained only by those who through their overflowing devotion succeed in shedding

their ego, which obscures the souls. (26) 
Ayah Far 
sera sare «gas afftory | rd Tara TY Tat eA AA: 1 VOI 
aq ater aqua aaeal AMAT: | wos wre wee alata: 1 21 
Sri Suka continued: O royal sage ! having thus (praised and) taken leave of the Lord,

King Dhrtarastra and (the virtuous) Yudhisthira, the sages thought of returning to their 
hermitages. (27) Perceiving this, the illustrious Vasudeva approached them. Bowing to them,

[565] B.M. Part II—44

and clasping their feet, he addressed them with great humility. (28)

qqed Sara 
am a: Wades wea: Mandal ado adel aM Maer ire!

Vasudeva submitted : Sages, in you reside all the gods,” | offer my salutations to yoy. 
Kindly listen to me. (Pray) tell us by what sort of activity one may be able to rid oneself of a} 
Karma and (the desire for Karma). (29)

ARG sd

aaa fas aaeal aya) pot aac aa: goof sa ae: 1301 
ahreest f€ aaa me feet aerate aia Bat 1321 
Tau: wed wales Al wdiswerad Yt a Has fers 1321 
a SHEE MIRC MME IS COIRG IRE RIC ES IIE a 
sroTtets: Wfavaenyerat Wad gataa afar: 133 |

Devarsi Narada replied : O sages, it is no great wonder that regarding Sri Krsna as his 
child, Vasudeva should inquire of us with a view to his enlightenment, the road to his spiritual 
welfare. (30) For human beings are generally prone to underrate those who are near them. 
We find persons living on the banks of the Ganga leaving the Ganga water and resorting to 
other sacred waters for their purification. (31) Sri Krsna's self-awareness is never obscured 
by the processes of creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe, which are carried 
out by Time. It does not suffer diminution on any account (either) by itself or through any 
external cause, or through the action of the Gunas.(32) His wisdom is never obscured by the 
(five) afflictions (in the shape of ignorance, egotism, attraction, repulsion and fear of death), 
nor by (virtuous and sinful) Karmas, nor by their fruits (in the form of joy and sorrow), nor again 
by the ebb and flow of Sattvika (and) the (other) Gunas. He is the one Lord, without a second. 
When He veils Himself under His own potencies, the vital airs etc., ignorant people consider 
Him as veiled, even as when the vision gets obstructed by clouds, mist and eclipse, etc., 
people regard the sun as screened by them. (33)

sangre WIAs MaAse | AA YA Wat Aare: 13%! 
edo ade we ay Prefud: | aang asia fam] adagat wea: 1241 
fareimisa a apfaf: areremticieta: grit ant eens: 136! 
aa eta: wen fenced: | aegessafada «= aA Ss TS: 13091 
fertaati AMer ea IAOMy | Seles ea sO fagqae a: | 
TA SPAN: Aa agelhewedtaay 132 
RUiatatest scl cattgo IM aM «RT Wa 38! 
a aa um great a mfafaariema i agdavigggs «= conse «= wal IX! 
ded Aa FA wae waa gael wariat of: @ aa at gaat Wa: Ive! 
Addressing Vasudeva, (as follows) within the hearing of Sri Krsna, Balarama and the 
kings (present there), O king, the sages then said: (34) The best way of neutralizing past acts

and wiping out the desire for future action through action itself is to propitiate, with (due) 
reverence, Visnu, the Lord of all sacrifices, through sacrifices. (35) Perceiving through the 
a ee ey

* The Sruti says: ada eadren: Gai Actate are aaa |

Dis. 84 ] BOOK TEN 475

: Br We Be Re We Be Be We We We Ke Ke He He ay 
gr or te Be BC BT SSESSEROON KHER eRRTNRKheRNK REA hrhknh Akon eh eh hEEER

eye of the Sastras,the all-knowing Sages have declared it to be the easiest means of attaining 
tranquillity of mind, and a sacred duty the performance of which brings delight to the 
heart.(36) For the twice-born householder the most propitious course is to perform with 
reverence the worship of the Supreme Person expending (liberal sums of) money:earned by 
fair means. (37) O Vasudeva, a wise man should get rid of his thirst for wealth by performing 
sacrifices and making Gifts, his craving for wife and children by enjoying the pleasures of a 
married life, and his desire for the enjoyment of the higher worlds etc., by thoughts of their 
being subject to the ravages of Time, Having (thus) renounced all (the three types of) desires 
even al home, the wise proceeded to the forest for askesis. (38) O Vasudeva, the Brahmana, 
the Ksatriya and the Vaisya are born with debts to gods, the Rsis and the manes. He who 
renounces the home without discharging these debts through the performance of sacrifices, 
study of the scriptures and by begetting a son respectively (surely) falls. (89) (O wise 
Vasudeva,) you are as a matter of fact free from your debts to the Rsis and the manes now. 
Pay off your debt to the gods (too) through the performance of sacrifices, and thus freed from 
all obligations you may quit the home. (40) Vasudeva, you have surely worshipped Sri Hari, 
the Lord of the universe, with supreme devotion. That is why He has accepted the role of a

son to you. (41) 
Hye Jaq

sft dad seal aMeal eM: i aaeighast ad quis Set a 1x2! 
aq Wasa wre aa ado enfin diane Bt AcEdtcde: 131

AeA SAMA GMT: Yeast: | Ge: MATA TSAI: TRAM: 18% 
wafesas dfeat frennved: Garda: | dlamenermueramiea = AAT: 131

AgHagucesg talrnea: | AWdterdaaedya: QaaRTAMT: | 
TY; YUN WIA: Agtt Aetde: 1k 
BEPC Esc § fafacnasamatast: | Teitfasteats: Aensiargh: 1s9 1

aa was Fors SG: Vaepfeadt | wg: Wadelwsttaan waferagfate: 1401

Sri Suka went on: (Pariksit,) hearing the aforesaid words of the Rsis the high-minded 
Vasudeva sought their favour by saluting them with his head bent low and appinted them to 
Officiate as priests at his sacrificial performance.(42) Duly appointed as priests, O king, the 
Rsis helped the pious Vasudeva in performing a number of sacrifices on the largest scale 
in that holy place. (43) On Vasudeva being initiated for the sacrifice, the Yadus and (other) 
kings took their bath, put on their best attire and ornaments and adorned themselves with 
Qarlands of lotuses. (44) The consorts of Vasudeva too adorned themselves with gold 
necklaces and besmeared their bodies with sandal-paste and, clad in their best attire, 
JOyously entered the sacrificial hall with offerings in their hands. (45) Clay tomtoms, tabors, 
conchs, drums, kettledrums and other musical instruments were sounded (at the time); 
dancers, both male and female danced; bards and panegyrists uttered praises; Gandharva 
women with their husbands sang beautiful songs. (46) Vasudeva applied collyrium to his 
-eyes and anointed his body with butter. The priests (then) consecrated him alongwith his 
eighteen wives by sprinkling water on them, justas (inthe ancient times) the moon and the stars 
Were consecrated. (47) Initiated for the sacrifice and clad in deer skin Vasudeva looked most 
charming with his wives who were all dressed in (beautiful) saris and adorned with bracelets,

necklaces, anklets and ear-rings. (48) Clad in silk and adorned with jewels, the priests and 
supervisors of the sacrifice shone like the priests at the sacrifice performed by Indra (the Slayer 
of Vrtra). (49) Sri Krsna and Balarama, the Rulers of (all) Jivas shone brightly on that Occasion 
with their relations, consorts and sons, who were Their part manifestations.(50) 
Sst fair «= _atfretnfemarth: 1 sipadenceltdoraraferetarcy, 14g | 
AAAS SIS AMAT F AON: | AoEMASH_aA MAHAN ACTH: 1421 
uddasrayeasiat a eda: lee wage fam asgTau: 1431 
aisograia areaiseren faa: idd: Bogd aUAaasat Geta 14x | 
Se FER Fad Ueto yet faadataeped cHifrehnageary 144 | 
Mea ae ATOTT, FUAMAGCARUT | SATA Wad: WAY: HAL IGE! 
TUBISTA: Wet atei Aor: YT AAt | ANS WTA ATS: YEAR: 14 | 
Sq UR set alec fardaa: agent 9 wemigmt = sa: 4c 
Te ME Medea «otal: | PONMaAae | TRACTS: 149 1 
aqeaisearita TARGA | Yeas: MAA AWene Ht Werle 
At the end of each sacrifice, Vasudeva performed, in accordance with the scripturals 
ordinance, the Agnihotra and other sacrifices as well as those falling under the category 
of Prakrta and Vaikrta sacrifices, and thereby worshipped and propitiated Visnu (the Lord 
of all substances, rituals and the Mantras with which they are performed). (51) Then in due 
time he adorned the priests well (with clothes and ornaments) and gave them sacrificial 
fees and also gifted them duly adorned cow and girls as well as lands and abundant 
wealthy as laid down in the scriptures. (52) After going through the ritual of Patnisamyaja 
(which is a part of the sacrifice).and the rites connected with the concluding bath, those 
great sages who had officiated as priests of the Sacrifice followed Vasudeva to the tank 
named after ParaSurama and performed their ablutions there. (53) After taking their bath, 
Vasudeva and his wives gave away all their ornaments and clothes to the bards and, 
adorning themselves well (with new ornaments and dress) entertained all classes of men 
and animals down to the dog. (54) He honoured with extensive presents (all) his relations 
alongwith their wives and son as well as the princes of Vidarbha, Kosala, Kuru, Kas, 
Kekaya and Srhjaya, the supervisors of the sacrifice, the priests, hosts of gods, men, 
Spirits, manes and the celestial bards. They (all) took leave of Sri Krsna (the abode of Sri) 
and left for their homes praising the sacrifice. (55-56) (Pariksit,) king Dhrtarastra, Vidura, 
Yudhisthira, Bhima, and Arjuna, Bhisma, Drona, Kunti, Nakula, Sahadeva, Devars! 
Narada, Bhagavan Vyasa, and other friends and relations and kinsmen felt the agony ©! 
Separation (when leaving their friends, the Yadus). With their hearts moistened through 
affection, they embraced the Yadus and departed for their homes with (great difficulty). The 
other people also left with them. (57-58) (Pariksit,) honoured with extensive presents by 
Sri Krsna, Balarama, Ugrasena and others, Nanda, alongwith the other Gopas, out of love 
for them, stayed (there for some time more). (59) (O dear king,) having (thus) easily 
realized his great ambition like one who crosses an ocean without much effort, Vasudev4

felt (greatly) delighted at heart. In the midst of his friends and relations he took Nanda Dy 
the hand, and addressed him (thus). (60)

ATA Sara 
Wid: Wet FO a: wedi: ia gems wa auonafa afr?!

DiS. Sec ergincaik tied a ae Br Pr tr 
— SESS Be Be Re Ber rR ke te tr eke te tee te tr te frie te tte te te teeter tert te eee tettrte

SOU PANY AWA: | Aoatimme aft a Frater teh 1621 
i AL Uidat Area fe | step sftaerenan a asara: Ut: Aa: 131 
mT Tease Ge: teearE AM | SMI SAE at a sala aaretew eX

Vasudeva said : Brother (Nanda), God has forged for men a bond which is known by 
the name of affection. | think the greatest of warriors and Yogis find it difficult to undo it. (61) 
Highly virtuous as you are, the friendship you have shown to us, ungrateful souls, is 
unparalleled and cannot be repaid; and yet (we know) it will never cease (it will continue for 
ever). (62) O brother, formerly we could not do any good turn to you precisely because we 
were helpless, and now we are blinded by intoxication of wealth and power and do not look 
at you even though you stand before us. (63) O virtuous brother, let not royal fortune fall to 
the lot of one who seeks blessedness. Blinded by it, man fails to recognize even his own 
kinsmen and relations. (64)

Sh Sa 
wi 86 Mteetifaeaiad «engi: iedle aeeat Sat ereasfaetes: 164 
Teal TS: Hand som aMfararan: | ste ao sft Arava aehatdisaad, 165 | 
dd: la: Gaal: Uae: Aeareda: | Wem: 1g9 1 
Raa PW gaserfefa: vara «uted arid agftrat 1ec1 
weal Tos Trasy Mfume i aa: fad wedetien Aa aq: 16e!

Sri Suka continued : (Pariksit,) Vasudeva's heart melted with love as he said all this. 
Tears rushed to his eyes, as he remembered the love and friendship which Nanda bore to 
him and he began to weep. (65) Anxious to please his friend and out of affection for SriKrsna 
and Balarama, Nanda put off his departure from day to day and stayed (there) for three 
months receiving the best attentions of the Yadus.(66) They gratified him and his brother 
Gopas and other residents of Vraja (who had accompanied him) with enjoyments of various 
kinds as well as with valuable ornaments, silk garments and other invaluable presents. (67) 
Vasudeva, Ugrasena, Sri Krsna, Balarama, Uddhava and others (severally) presented him 
with gifts. Taking all these and permitted by the Yadus, Nanda left (for his home). (68) 
(Pariksit,) Nanda as well as the other Gopas and Gopis had transferred their heart to the 
lotus-feet of Sri Krsna; and they were unable to withdraw it from them. (So) they departed

for Mathura (leaving their heart behind). (69)

TYG sfeareag qua: FMead: | ates STIGaaraar aaqgiadt YA: 190! 
START: mosqaearereran| aerate §—- qeaerastatfachy, 198 | 
ft strrsrad merged onde Seat cae seat clara aa agrelifaraHIseAra: 1261

returned (to their respective places), the Yadus, 
ho now saw the monsoon approaching, returned 
e people an account of the grand festival 
d by Vasudeva, the adored of the gods,

(Pariksit,) when all the friends had (thus) 
Who looked on SriKrsnaas their deity, and w 
to Dwaraka. (70) (Reaching there) they gave to th 
(in the form of a sacrificial performance) celebrate

their meeting with friends and relations, and all that had happened in course of the 
pilgrimage.(71) 
Thus ends the eighty-fourth discourse entitled "An account of Sri Krsna's pilgrimage," 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31 Usantladay sear:

The Lord brings back (from the abode of Death) His (six) elder 
brothers(throttled by Kamsa)

SMTA SATAT 
saenisstist «= Gt | hdUlalitarett tagedisitaere seat astute | 
iat @ aa: set walettgeenn addsiaasry: = afte | 2 
SN HON Heat ado GAT A aA Sel Maa, TATA RAT TT |B 
aa a Gdl AM AA se Ue AM Acti Mee WTA Aaa Wages: i x t 
Udarntaet PAPA SAM AT | SAMARAS TUT sitet farsreist: 1G | 
Tone fasrget Bpal A: UA a: | Uda AMlexala SMNAGA VMSA! « | 
Sides: WA GA Aslachelfagar| ad Wa wat yadhatetselal wari © | 
qo saa ead a asa: 13: Aa as apt afaalareaai cl 
feat anacnranista feat: G Bhle Sista: | Atel auieaaS stendiat yaenafa: 1 e | 
erst faksaromt a east 4 deque: | Haale Va Geslaeaea: Pat 1Qol 
Waa Wdiekrsaoit a deta: | dential faeneat Wemiaaqenears 1k! 
wage May ad waaAaiam seafery scot frefra ie? 
Ge WA git Weds BM: 1 ae wall at afeaa arma 123! 
THe Get Wet aie ata fanieam: 1a arity faenty aerate: 12x! 
i WUsare Wiaagqeahaenrdt: ith gente wardiie alfa: 124! 
t aqsa Fal WI Yneuts suri ast wane ad wa waaay 12k 
i as sete | Aa Teraaey | Beralaata War Bdfae BT 1eV! 
} Gat Aa: Oat Man TerayEtat | querer srenituif aunsser z IRC! 
f at Wiser uvenfacnoadehuamendael | 
WreaMenmmrsieieed udicge wai ut aaumate: 12°! 
aie AY we vars at tat seman fete | 
faqs at aq ya seme faye io!

SriSuka began again: (Pariksit, on their return from Ku ruksetra) one morning, Srikrsm4 
and Balarama went to Their parents to offer Their salutations to them. Vasudeva receivé 
his Sons (most) affectionately and, after They had bowed to his feet spoke to them (as 
follows). (1) (Pariksit,) Vasudeva had heard about the glory of his sons from the lips of the

ee J > ~

Dis. 85 | | BOOK TEN 479

sages and had himself witnessed Their wonderful exploits. He was thus convinced that They 
were no ordinary beings but divine personages. Addressing them with great affection, he 
said—(2) "O Krsna, the embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss, O Sankarsana, the Lord 
of the greatest Yogis, You both are eternal. | know You are the rulers even of Prakrti and 
Purusa (Matter and Spirit), the two direct causes of this universe. (3) You are directly the 
substratum and both the instrumental and material cause of the universe. (Nay,) You are its 
sole Lords, and ithas been broughtinto being for Your sport. Whenever andin whatever form 
it exists and whatever You react upon is nothing but You. You are the enjoyable in the form 
of Prakrti, and the enjoyer in the form of Purusa, and also the ruler beyond them both. (4) 
lord, You are beyond the senses and beyond birth, existence and other modifications; 
having created this diversified universe in Yourself, You have Yourself entered it as its Inner 
Controller. Appearing as Prana (active force) and as Jiva (cognitive force), it is You who 
sustain and nourish it. (5) The potency possessed by the Prana and other forces responsible 
for the creation of the universe is (in fact) Your potency; for (unlike You) they are material and 
not spiritual in essence, and are also dependent on You. The activity which they exhibit is 
only apparent (the motive power behind them is Yours). (6) (O Lord,) the lustre of the moon, 
the glow of fire, the effulgence of the sun, the twinkling of stars and the flash of lightning, the 
firmness of mountains, the odour and sustaining power of the earth—all these are, in fact, 
You. (7) O Lord, the slaking, life-giving and purifying property of water, are You. You are 
water itself as well as its taste. The vigour of the senses, mental energy and bodily strength, 
the activity of the body and its locomotion (—all these), though attributed to the wind, (really) 
proceed from You. (8) The cardinal points and the space denoted by them are You. Ether 
and its principle sound, I. e., speech in its subtlest form known by the name of Para, and its 
other forms, viz., Pasyanti, Madhyama as well as Vaikhari (articulate speech), consisting of 
letter-sounds and words denoting several objects are nothing but You. (9) The power to 
reveal objects inhering in the senses, the deities presiding over them and the power by which 
they do so are indeed You. The determining faculty of the intellect and the power of duly 
connecting various experiences, inhering in the Jiva, are You. (10) In the elements You 
inhere as their cause, the Tamasa aspect of Ahankara (Ego); in the senses You existas their 
Cause, the Taijasa (Rajasa) aspect of Ahankara; in the deities presiding over senses as well 
as inthe mind You exist as their cause, the Vaikarika (Sattvika) aspect of Anankara; and You 
are Maya, the cause of the repeated birth of Jivas, bound to Karma. (11) (Just) as in the 
(various) modifications of a substance the original substance is observed to be the abiding 
factor, so You are the imperishable truth behind all these perishable objects. (12) (O Lord !) 
the three modes of Prakrti—viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—and what are known as their 
modifications (the Mahat-Tattva etc.) are, in fact, assumed in You, the transcendent Brahma, 
through Your wonderful Yogic power. (13) Therefore, these modifications (viz., birth, 
existence, growth, etc.), do not existin You. When they are projected on You, (then only) they 
appear in You, who appear as permeating them. Atother times, however, (when they cease 
to be So projected, e.g., during deep sleep), You remain in Your absolute-state (unconnected 
with these modifications).(14) This universe is but a (continuous) flow of the three Gunas. 
They who fail to perceive the subtle presence in it of Your absolute state as the All-Soul get 
Entangled in (the meshes of) Karma (due to their identification with the body) and (have to) 
undergo repeated births and deaths in this world. (15) O Lord, providentially | have attained 
In this land (of Bharatavarsa) the rare gift of a human body, endowed with vigorous senses 
and organs, and yet under the influence of Your Maya (enchanting power) my life-time has 
been fritterec away in (utter) neglect of the (main) purpose of my existence. (1 6)(O Lord }) 
You have bound the whole of this universe with ties of affection having their roots in selt-

identification with the body and the feeling of meum with regard to those connected with the 
body. (17) (I know) You are no other than the Lords of Prakrti as well as of all individual] SOuls 
and not my sons. You have come down for the destruction of the Ksatriyas, who haye 
become a burden to the earth; You Yourself spoke like that in unambiguous terms to me (at 
the time of Your descent). (18) Therefore, O Befriender of the afflicted, | have sought for 
protection this day Your lotus-feet, which (alone) dispel the fear of transmigration haunting 
those who have taken shelter with them. | am fed up with this much of craving for sense. 
enjoyments. It was under the influence of this that | have (so long) identified myself with this 
mortal body and looked on You, the Supreme, as my child. (19) O Lord, in the lying-in- 
chamber You said that, though unborn, You had, as a matter of fact, been manifesting 
Yourself through us in different pairs each time for defending Your own laws. Like the Sky, 
You assume diverse forms and cast them off, even though You are one andinfinite.Whocan 
know the secret of Your wonderful potency—Yogamaya ? All people extensively sing Your __

glories. (20) ch 
snes fiqatet wa GaAs: | WMS IAA: WEA Bava ATT 121

Sri Suka resumed : Hearing these words of His father (Vasudeva), Lord Sri Krsna (the 
crown-jewel of the Yadus) began to smile. Bowing in all humility ( to His father), He replied 
in sweet words as follows. (21) |

al a: aaa aMddeaaae | Aa: Ua, aylerd Aaa Sdled: 1221 | 
3g gaqaad sa a gkalne: | aasad vests fageat: Param 23!

Tan Beh: SAA AaSA PAN Wer: | saeTGPeIeHAy =A RATA 12 | 
: qa | stfaferniseaydent Ara aretatata 1241

The glorious Lord said : Father! we are your sons; you have in these words expounded) 
the highest philosophical truths to us. We accept as true whatever you have said. (22) |

Yourself, my venerable brother, Sri Balarama, myself, these citizens of Dwaraka and all 
others including the mobile and immobile creation should be regarded as Brahma, O jewel

among the Yadus! (23) (O father!) the Selfis really one, self-effulgent, eternal, identical with

the body etc., and unqualified; yet it projects the Gunas out of Itself, and in the bodies of the 
tt various creatures evolved out of these Gunas itappears as diversified, perceptible, transient, | 
} distinct from the body etc., and qualified. (24) Just as (each of the five elements—) ether, air, | 
fire, water and earth—though one in essence, appears differently in its different products and | 
can be distinguished as manifest or unmanifest, meagre or abundant, and so on, so the Self | 
{00 appears as many through Its (various) adjuncts. (25) |

Sor 
Wa Wad We Adee sale! sear faaparneieait staat sty 126! | 
BA TA GRAB cat Adda | Aenssatd WN: Waar wafer 12! 
FORM CAAT VAM Hafeteaar| eet aot we Ageqeyeraat 12¢!

Sri Suka continued : Pariksit, hearing these words of the almighty Lord Vasudeva was 
rid of his sense of diversity, and delighted at heart, became silent and drove away 4 
thoughts from his mind. (26) Devaki, who represented all the deities in her person (and was 
also present there when this conversation was going on) was greatly astonished to heal 
that her Sons had brought back the (deceased) son of Their preceptor (from the abode, 
Yama). (27) Recollecting her sons who had been done to death by Karnsa, she feltagitale” 
in mind and, addressing Sri Krsna and Balarama with tears in her eyes, piteously SP° ° 
(thus). (28)

| a

=~ ase ee? ieee + 
aT verre, , ewreer 7 rm oP

pis. 85 ] | BOOK TEN

aat a Heel Hla qat TRAN | SNIAeArL Ua aaa SSA 133 |

Devaki said : O Balarama, the delighter of hearts, Your nature is beyond the ken of 
mind and speech, O Krsna, You are the supreme Lord even of great masters of Yoga. | 
know You to be the rulers of even Prajapatis (the progenitors of all creation) and 
manifestations of the most ancient Being (Sri Narayana Himself).(29) They say You have 
descended on earth through me this time for the destruction of kings who having lost 
through flux of time their virtues and excellences are transgressing the injunctions of the 
scriptures and have, therefore, become a burden to the earth. (30) O Soul of the universe, 
itis well-known that from Your part manifestation in the form of the Spirit proceeds Maya 
and from Maya, the three Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas; and from a particle of these 
Gunas, proceed the creation, growth and dissolution of the universe. Today, | resort to You 
for protection. (31) | have heard that being urged by Your preceptor, Sandipani, and guided 
by Providence, You brought back his son, who had died long before, from the abode of 
Death, and thereby discharged Your debt to the preceptor. (32) The Lords (even) of 
masters of Yoga as You are, | desire that You should similarly grant my desire also, and 
bring my sons, who had been done to death by Kamsa so that | may see them (and bring 
satisfaction to my eyes). (33)

eA 
wa astfedt met wa: POI AN | Utes Afataarqarrarargarsrd 13x | 
dha sfastauena dene faered Yat aaissem: | 
deqigreakgaa: Ca: wyea ATA aaa: 1341 
aa: waria aged ag fafapdte nereriier: 
wnt Ueda asi Ada Aste We aay zizal 
anearaa a a faxfafiniedaesnongqed: |

a seat wmanega fade safafiaa frat 
sqrt (iO: «= EBT TT RTA 1 CI

Sri Suka went on: Thus directed by Their mother, O scion of Bharata, both Sri Krsna 
and Balarama, with the help of Their Yogamaya, (divine power), entered (the subterranean 
region of) Sutala. (84) When Bali (the king of demons) saw the Soul and adorable object of 
the universe as well as of his own (manifested in the dual form of Sri Krsna and Balarama) 
enter Sutala, he sprang at once from his seat and with a heart overflowing with joy at Their 
Sight, greeted Them alongwith his family. (35) Full of delight he offered them excellent seats 
and, when both these divine personages were seated on them, sothe tradition goes, washed 
Their feet and sprinkled on his head as well as on all the members of his family that water 
Which purifies the whole universe from Brahma downwards. (36) (Then) Bali duly worshipped 
Them by offering Them valuable clothes, ornaments, sandal-paste, betel-leaves, lights, 
dishes sweet as nectar and other sumptuous articles, and surrendering (his all, including) 
his family, wealth and (even) his self (to Them). (37) With a heart saturated with love he bore 
the Lord's lotus-feet again and again (on his bosom and on his head), so the tradition goes,

o4 
: 
> 
“a 
7 
> 
83 
= => 
7 
= 
| 
—

his eyes bedimmed with tears of joy, and his hair standing on their ends; and in a voicg 
choked with emotion he prayed to the Lord (as follows), O protector of men! (38)

aoe ara

ASW Ged AA: HTT awiareatada Tt aA 131 
aaa at fe Yat Get BAI STAM Ga: Wat Aes ixo 
eaeatrelal: facgiaensranum: | aaa: faararsy VATA: 12 | 
fqeraeds a weenififir fel Aeagera ad art a alee: 1x21 
Sees HIN: 1A AMT Graden: afew: quea: 1x3! 
suet wae aati a facet amen arena gat aay ives |

dt: wale frafaqaqeroentactaureerspar | sa

fem farsninenesiqh: at ata st adeaar xu 
Meade Mae He A: TIGA aaageasshssiarar fae ixet

Bali said : O Rama, You are infinite. You are (so) great (that manifestations like Sesa 
are allincluded in You). O Krsna (embodiment of Truth, Knowledge and Bliss)! You are the 
Creator of the universe. The path of Knowledge and the path of Devotion have both been 
originated by You. You are the Absolute, the Supreme Spirit. (9) Surely Your sight cannot 
be easily obtained by ordinary beings; (through their own effort) and yet (through Your 
grace) it is so easy to gain. For You have (today) of Your own accord vouchsafed that to 
us, whose temperament is predominantly Rajasika and Tamasika. (40) O Lord, we and 
other beings similar to us, viz., Daityas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Siddhas, Vidyadharas, 
Caranas, Yaksas, Raksasas, Pi$Sacas, Bhitas and the leaders of Pramathas (instead of 
adoring You through devotion) constantly bear deep-seated grudge to You, whose Form 
is the very embodiment of the Vedas, a manifestation of the purest form of Sattva. (41-42) 
That is why some of us through inveterate hatred, and others through devotion with some 
interested motive, have been so closely united with You as has not been possible even for 
gods possessed of a Sattvika nature. (43) O Lord of masters of Yoga, even great Yogis 
often fail to comprehend the true nature and mode of operation of Your Yogamaya. How, 
then, can we be expected to know it ? (44) Therefore ( O Lord,) be pleased to grant that 
my mind may obtain a firm hold on Your (lotus) feet, which are sought after even by those 
who are free from all desires, so that by resorting to them | may be able to get out of this 
dark well of a householder's life, and under the shelter of those feet, which are the sole 
refuge of the world, may attain peace and tranquillity and move in the world without any 
company. And if! have to associate at all with anybody, let it be with those saints, who are 
friends of all. (45) Lord! You are the Ruler of all beings in creation. Pray, make us sinless 
and advise us that course by following which with faith man acquires immunity from 
injunctions and interdictions. (46)

MMT ATATA

Se, Aka: Fe UAT Sulat west itar: w seadier gai afsaqqer ive! 
CART, Ateaecelendon | fexvaenferarstiat Alara = arraraar 1s! 
Cae Sat SI Us hefafefaan | ar aestaencas Bret Baseaeshas xe | 
St UA, Ue Agate gaa | aa: arora fared ots areata fase: 140 | 
wig: ugg: Udg: asaya guitiwfed uaa wateata wer ue!

= 
& 
| 
E 
*

»

ro 
-

ewe tab eee

eS i TT SRT yfStet | Urahara Td: Yara 1421 
Se Leal eet Greteegrert | uftgerguritar qeihre nave: 143 |

Taare FIT we: | dafveddker ua wed iucl

The glorious Lord said : (O chief of demons!) in the first Manvantara (presided over 
by Swayambhuva Manu) Marici had six sons through his wife Urna. They were all gods. 
They laughed when they saw Brahma intent upon sexual intercourse with his own 
daughter. (47) On account of this misdemeanour on their part they (were cursed by Brahma 
and) had to take birth in the Asura race as the sons of Hiranyakasipu. Thence they were 
transferred to Devaki's womb by Yogamaya, and were murdered by Karnsa as they were 
born. (O chief of the Daityas,) mother Devaki grieves for those children of her own, who are 
now with you. (48-49) For removing the sorrow of our mother We propose to take them from 
here. They will thereby get completely freed from their curse, once for all and will happily 
return to their (celestial) abode..(50) Their names are Smara, Udgitha, Parisvanga, 
Patanga, Ksudrabhrt and Ghrni. By My grace, all the six of them will regain their (original) 
happy state. (51) (Pariksit,) having thus explained Their mission to Bali, the two Brothers 
took the children with Them and, duly worshipped by Bali, returned to Dwaraka and handed 
over the children to mother Devaki.(52) At the sight of those children, milk began to flow 
from the breasts of Devaki through (excess of) maternal love. Placing them on her lap, she 
embraced them and repeatedly smell their crowns. (53) Overwhelmed with emotion at the 
touch of her children, she suckled them with great delight, deluded as she was by the Lord's 
Yogamaya, which takes the form of affection in order to keep the cycle of creation going 
on. (54) The milk in Devaki's breasts was veritable nectar; for it was the remnant of what 
had been tasted by Sri Krsna. Having suckled such milk and, blessed with the touch of the 
Supreme Lord, they attained knowledge of the Self. (55) They (now) bowed to Sri Krsna 
(the Protector of cows), (mother Devaki), their father (Vasudeva) and Balarama, and 
ascended the abode of the celestials in the presence of all.(56) Mother Devaki was 
astounded to see her deceased children return to earth and then depart again, and 
concluded that it was nothing but a sport of Sri Krsna, O protector of men!(57) Sri Krsna, 
O scion of Bharata, is the same as the Supreme Spirit; His powers are unlimited. Endless

are His exploits which are so wonderful as this. (58)

Yd Sara 
aq senqyuitd aaa al TI shaagqdentdaterd Sag: | 
smenfres daaneenigt watt safer ait ae GR I

me and glory of Sri Krsna are immortal. The stories of

Sut - O sages, the fa 
a tesuiied 2 bring delight to the ears of devotees and saints. They

His Sports rid the world of all sins and

Spa evens ein einnrennenbennenneeetebbannnnanwaeeawnrewendtes oO 
ks

have been narrated by the revered Sri Suka, son of Vyasa (himself). He who constantly hears 
them or repeats them to others gets his mind fixed in the (almighty) Lord, and attains His | 
abode of eternal Bliss. (59)

Thus ends the eighty-fifth discourse entitled "Sri Krsna brings back His deceased elder brothers 
(from the abode of Bali)", in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. |

31g Weanfaadarseara:

(Subhadra carried away by Arjuna;) the Lord's Grace on Srutadeva

UAT 
Se adatom: Wak wane: | aaa fast ar Aare frase i 2

The king (Pariksit) submitted : O sage, we desire to know how (my grandfather) Arjuna 
married Subhadra, the sister of Balarama and Sri Krsna, who was my grandmother ? (1)

Sh Sa

serena «= Wena SY 1 Ta: NMTAAAUIAea AW se: | 2 |

quieras Uae sedi A Ari afew: a afar feud gramme | 3 |

wa oS afin Aerated aleareten: | Ut: MeaTssetent TACs A A: | 
sri Suka replied : (Pariksit,) wandering over the earth in the course of his pilgrimage, 
the powerful Arjuna went to Prabhasa and heard (there) of his maternal uncle's daughter 
(Subhadra). (2) He further learnt that Balarama would give her away to Duryodhana, but not 
others. Eager to win her he went to Dwaraka disguised as a recluse bearing a triple staff 
(symbolic of renunciation). (3) There Arjuna spent the four months of the monsoon intent

' upon accomplishing his object. He was every now and then honoured by the citizens as well | 
| as by Balarama, who could not identify him. (4) 
; Gad Tearia snfiem frat qi seed fet ada ay fol 4 | 
: Ase edt sat shee tqepecawrera waar wat aati & | 
ait at ae diet ano equi gaa sifSaTsl 4 aereteeaaroT | 9 | 
wT WN RA SE: 1a OA at afm: sMarhtaciaar | ¢ | 
One day, so it is said, he was invited as a guest by Balarama and brought to the palace: 
where he partook of the dishes offered with reverence. (5) There Arjuna saw the youthful 
maiden (Subhadra), who captivated the heart of (great) heroes. With his eyes blooming with 
Joy (at her sight) he set on her his heart agitated with passion. (6) Subhadra too fell in lov? 
with him as soon as she saw him, ravishing as he did the heartof women. She casther bashtu 
glances at him and fixed her heart and eyes on him. (7) Focussing his thought on her alone

Arjuna looked for an opportunity (to run away with her). His mind being distracted by an 
overwhelming passion for her, he had no peace of mind. (8)

Meat caarrat went atitriay wenrgaa: fet: Here a aa: 1 2 |

\ SOezewy « aq geegett ls mer. 8

zs

wet Te Wise wer fear Raat emt aur

WMisaq 1Qol 
reget aftrat wa: uduita ugrfa: 1 aga: PUT ehaarawad 12 
meat uReetfot axasatfer aes: | Melee: 12zl

With the consent of her parents (Devaki and Vasudeva) as well as of Sri Krsna he took 
her away (one day) even as she drove out of the fort in a chariot to visit an important 
temple.(9) Taking his Seat in her chariot Arjuna took up his bow and put to flight all the gallant 
warriors who tried to intercept him. In the midst of Subhadra's own people screaming (in

distress) Arjuna stole her away just as the king of beasts would carry away its prey. (10) .

Hearing of this, Balarama was agitated like the ocean ona full moon and got pacified (only) 
when Sri Krsna and other friends and relations clasped His feet (and tried to appease His 
anger).(11) (Then) Balarama joyously dispatched for the bride and the bridegroom presents 
in the form of abundant wealth and articles of household use and a number of elephants, 
chariots, horses and male and female servants. (12)

My Saraq 
PU fe: acca sit sya: | HMlHvaeM YUriel: Ad: Hara: 1231 
a sara facey fafaerat erent 1 atearssnaerdtatdarstisna: 12¥1 
ararara aRecaUAAaA | Alfeteh Alaa WS: fematsich setter: 1241 
aa anes sere sft aa afer Prema = streergafrat 12a 
Sri Suka began again: (Pariksit,) at Mithila, the capital of the Videha territory there lived 
a jewel among Brahmanas, known by the name of Srutadeva, who had all his objects 
accomplished by virtue of his single-minded devotion to Sri Krsna and was tranquil (of mind), 
full of wisdom and destitute of attraction for sense-objects. Though (he lived the life of) a 
householder, he performed (all) his duties and lived on whatever subsistence came to him 
without (any) effort. (13-14) Everyday he got by the will of Providence as much as was barely 
necessary for his sustenance, and not (a bit) more. (fully) contented with this, he discharged 
(all) his duties in the proper manner. (15) Dear Pariksit, the (then) ruler of Mithila was similarly 
devoted to the Lord. He was known by the name of Bahulaswa. He was (absolutely) free from 
egotism. Both (the king and the Brahmana) were beloved of Sri Krsna (the immortal 
Lord).(16) 
aa: weal war aehoned TH! sem ale aPifaflee seat wy: 101

ARG areRalsh: Het waishadisett: | ate Geet: sual AtageEd: 1221 
aq aa amd we Weel FIisade: aeieen ae: gefratiar 129!

STA eaH ESS OS A OS AAAI: 
aa oa aeeteeneehaeant qa Wager fard: 1201

Seq: walauEtees: at folayewgd aA a4! 
5 maaan wa atiitvemestatecert 122! 
Pleased with them (both), the almighty Lord (once) mounted the chariot brought by 
Daruka and drove to the kingdom of Videha, accompanied by (a number of) seers. (17) The 
(celestial sage) Narada, Vamadeva, Atri, (my father) Krsnadwaipayana (Vedavyasa), 
Parasgurama, Asita, Aruni, myself (Suka), Brhaspati, Kanwa, Maitreya, Cyavana and others 
formed the party. (1 8) At every stage (in the course of the journey), O protector of men, the 
citizens and villagers waited upon Him with offerings in their hands, appearing as He did (with 
His followers) like the sun surrounded by planets. (19) O king ! (during that journey of the 
Lord) the men and women of Anarta, Dhanva, Kurujangala, Kanka, Matsya, Pafncala, Kunt

Madhu, Kekaya, Kosala, Arna and those belonging to other territories drank with their eyes 
the nectarine beauty of His lotus-like countenance enlivened by His winsome smiles anq 
loving glances. (20) On those people, from whose eyes the scales of ignorance haq 
completely fallen through His sight, Sri Krsna (the Teacher of the three worlds), conferred 
(by His very look) insight into the Truth as well as final beatitude (the fruit of such insight) 
and hearing (even as He advanced) His own glory, sung by gods and men, which llumined 
the quarters and drove away all evil. (In this way) the Lord slowly journeyed to Videha. (21)

asa wrasse cht wet qui areigdfenrenree = etereoraora: 122) 
eB a samacid sigepeoraea: | meaty: = aageteret Ai 1231 
SEM aN wart Gd aTaqeqi Afro: areas oes: Gag: wat: ext 
aad aanenfaeaa we fan: iafae: seca qo edited 124 
mati wa: frafeateri sedate Aequeat cewfea: 1261 
silqTearaa Qt Sich: VENTA | AMMA, War, AMAT: 1291 
WIEAIAT SHUCATAMAS AT: | AAT ACSIA NACA AaaY Glenaret: 1221 
aeeet ae qat geese gai wemiearanencagudarehig’: = 1281 
Sarat AT Suraarreraditary | Weare fam: Pees 1301

Pariksit ! delighted to hear of the arrival of Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord), the people of 
the city of Mithila and of the adjoining villages (all) came forth to receive Him with offerings 
in their hands. (22) At the sight of the glorious Lord, their faces brightened and the buds of 
their hearts opened through ecstasy. With their heads bent low and with their palms joined 
on them they greeted the Lord and His companions) the sages, of whom they had (only) 
heard before. (23) Realizing that Sri Krsna, the Teacher of the world, had come to shower 
His grace on them, the king of Mithila as well as Srutadeva, fell at the feet of the Lord. (24) 
With joined palms they both simultaneously invited Sri Krsna (a scion of Dasgarha) alongwith 
the sages to partake of their hospitality. (25) Accepting their invitation, and with intent to 
please them both, the Lord (simultaneously) entered the residence of both in two separate 
forms, unperceived by the other one. (26) The king of Videha, Bahulasgwa, was a high- 
minded prince. Finding that Sri Krsna and others, whose very name could not reach the ears 
of the unrighteous, had called at his house (uninvited), brought (excellent) seats for them and 
seated them (all) comfortably on them. (27) His heart leapt for joy through intense devotion, 
and his eyes were bedimmed with tears. Bowing to them, he washed their feet and sprinkled 
that all purifying water on his head and on his relatives and worshipped the Lord as well as 
the divine sages by offering them Sandal-paste, flowers, textiles, ornaments, scented fumes; 
lights, oblations of water, cows and oxen. (28-29) After they had been heartily fed, Bahulaswa 
placed the feet of Sri Krsna (who was no other than Lord Visnu) on his lap and gently pressing 
them, and delighting Him with sweet words, joyously prayed (as follows) . (30)

Har fe Aaya Malt ae fast | ster ARacemist wat welt Wa: 132!

1 aareregtirat Ha Tera A Ad: Sitest: fra: 122! 
otf SUTnisadiag fry Tar. fits araat wit aerate: 133! 
asad adel Tot deat iat feat wert Aceaghraaes 13%! 
Tt Wad 8 PUN GVSATA ARTA mM Wai aq qa 134! 
fen efctag yar Wer at Fee fest: | aaa: crear uate Fra: Her 1a6!-

is. 86 
Dis. 86 ] BOOK TEN 487

The king (Bahulaswa) said : "© Lord, Youare the soul ofall created beings, the witness 
of all hearts and Sell-effulgent. You have presently revealed Yourself to us, who have been 
(constantly) contemplating on Your lotus-feet. (31) (O Lord !) You have appeared before us 
just In order to vindicate that Statement of Yours which You have (often) declared, viz., that 
neither Sri Balarama (who Is Your second Self) nor (Your better half) Laksmi (the goddess 
of beauty and prosperity) nor (even Your child) Brahma are dearer to You than one who is 
exclusively devoted to You. (32) Is there any man on earth who would abandon Your lotus- 
feet even after he has come to know that You offer Your very self to those sages of serene 
mind who regard nothing as their own (not even their body). (33) Appearing in the race of 
Yadu, You have extended Your glory—whichis capable of wiping out the sins of (all) the three 
worlds—in order to put an end to the transmigration of men revolving on the whirligig of births 
and deaths. (34) Hail to You, the almighty Sri Krsna of unrestricted wisdom, who have taken 
to austerities in their mildest form in the person of the (divine) sage Narayana. (35) (Be 
pleased to) stay in our house, O infinite Lord, for some days alongwith the sages, and purify 
this line of Nimi with the dust of Your feet." (36) (O Parikst !) entreated thus by the king, Sri 
Krsna (the almighty Lord), the Protector of the worlds, stayed on (at Mithila) in order to confer 
blessings on the men and women of the place. (37)

seaseaad MG eel aati acl qi Gaesl Ga ala aad g 13c! 
PMlogeyaaridtgwasat G: | AMAA AAaisahst FET 139 | 
qeslal AUNT SI ATeraaqi aaah Beal Gea: 1xol 
THonlewhaiearargaraader qe qos: | 
STNTaaTATa amaqaal aaa Maaasareasay 12 | 
@ ahaa dl Anraye Yerwed wade aga: | 
q: Pddiataeneuis: pea arenafchayae: iv2 
wares, diqeaedca 9 sahed: | eae SATA: 13 | 
(Dear Pariksit !) like the king of Videha; (the Brahmana) Srutadeva (too) was overjoyed 
to find Sri Krsna (the immortal Lord) and the sages arrived at his door and bowing to them 
(all), he began to dance waving his cloth: so the tradition goes. (38) Bringing raised seats 
made of straw and mattresses of Kuga grass (from inside his cottage or from his neighbours) 
he requested the guests to sit on them and, greeting them with words of welcome, he gladly 
washed their feet alongwith his wife. (39) With that water the highly blessed Brahmana 
sprinkled himself as well as his house and his people, and felt that all his objects had been 
achieved. He was (literally) transported with joy. (40) (Then) he propitiated (all) with whatever 
articles of worship could be (easily) procured, namely, fruits (offered by way of an auspicious 
Present) and other offerings (Such as sandal-paste, flowers, incense and lights), cool, 
scented and sweet water, scented earth (for being used at the time of bath or for washing 
one's hands and feet with), Tulasi leaves, KuSa grass and lotuses as well as with food which 
Promotes the quality of Sattva. (41) He reflected: " (| wonder) how this meeting has been 
Possible for me. condemned as | am to this hellish life of a householder, with Sri Krsna and 
(these) sages who have enthroned Him in their hearts, nay, the very dust of whose feet 
brings sanctity to all holy places." (42) When the guests had partaken of his hospitality and 
were comfortably seated, Srutadeva alongwith his wife, children and other relations, waited 
on them, and, touching the feet of Sri Krsna (his principal guest), addressed them (as

follows). (43)

—

8 eee 
- Ore Cad * 
—— "~-.F 8

aS

“se af

Wr eRe Ke Be We Wr Be Bee He Me Hr Be Me Br Ar Br Ke Sr Be Ke Mr Re Re Re ER Re Re RE Ree We ee We Re Ke EE eM Bee We We Be Hee Be Hee We We We We We We We We Be We We Be He We We We We We we Hy BOM Ke Ke He

YAIRI Sava 
aI oat aad sma: Wt umages: | adie akefe: ger sfast mierda ixx 
qq Sa: Get Ada UE Sieh UW wINAqfagararad ive 
sua Nedi Wadd Aaa! FO Adediadele «= ARTA IATL IE | 
qawisafiere: SHAAaTACaAL | SHARAN S AYU TUNTAAT —«1¥i9 | 
THisg asarafact wie sie wife |

PROTO ATS veel 
a a a aya a: fe ta arama | Ge Fo set «= awarafartre: ive

Srutadeva submitted : (Lord!) You are the Supreme Person (beyond Prakrti and the 
Jivas). It is not for the first time that You have come to our view today. For You have been 
with us (since the very beginning of creation), when, having created the universe with the help 
of your potencies, You entereditas its Soul (even) asa sleeping person creates with his mind 
itself a peculiar dream-world of his own through his ignorance and, entering that world 
himself, appears in various forms. (44-45) You shine in the heart of those men who 
constantly hear and repeat Your stories, worship and bow to Your images and talk with one 
another about You and have their heart purified (thereby).(46) Though present in their 
heart, You are remote from those whose mind is distracted by activities (of various kinds) 
and temporal duties. Though beyond the grasp of the various faculties of the mind, You are 
(on the other hand) proximate to those who have developed the excellent qualities of their 
heart (by singing and hearing of Your glories).(47) (My) salutation be to You, who are the 
Supreme spirit in the eyes of those who know the Self; whereas before those who regard 
the body etc., (which are other than the Self) as their self, You come, as death allotted by 
Yourself. You are the ruler of all effects as well as of their cause. Your Maya cannot screen 
Your vision, though it screens the vision of all others. (48) O self-effulgent Lord !(pray,) 
instruct us, Your servants, what service we should render to You. The sufferings of men 
disappear as soon as You come to their view. (49)

My Java 
qgneguevd 8 waa side Jekar uforar urfot sederqara zg 140! 
Sri Suka continued : Hearing these words of Srutadeva, the Lord, who dispels the

agony of those who betake themselves to Him in all humility, took the Brahmana by hand, 
and smilingly said (as follows): so the tradition goes. (50)

MATT ATTATA 
ACeMASIaa CHAM, eT, FA | Paha WaT Slee GH: UTexoyay: 14k! 
qa: aarfot ciettt agiteriard: iat: ura mea aaerdadtera 1421 
AN SAT sar AAs sitoritag | aren fererat qsan ferq ener Ga: 143! 
I smeUrn dad waddedysi adden fas: wudeanat GEA 14%! 
gual Saeed: 176 at | fesmnemmatefasrepa: 144 
arene fag weal a ware eda: 1 agora ademed fast adler ius 
qed Fea Fe eRe | ua Defeidtseagt Aen yfezfahr: ye!

The glorious Lord said : Srutadeva! know that these (great) sages have come here

is. 87 | BOOK T 
a

(only) to shower their grace on you. They move about with Me purifying the world with the 
dust of their feet. (51) The (images of) gods, holy places and sacred waters purify one slowly 
by sight, touch and worship after a long time; the saints (however) do so at once. (Nay,) the 
gods etc., too derive their purificatory virtue through the very sight of exalted souls. (52) (O 
Srutadeva !) the Brahmana by his very birth is superior to all beings in this creation, the more 
so ifhe is endowed with austerity, learning, contentment and devotion to Me.(53) (Even) this 
Personality of Mine, endowed as it is with four arms, is not dearer to Me than the Brahmana. 
Indeed the Brahamana is an embodiment of all the Vedas, while | am the embodiment of all 
gods. (54) Men of crooked understanding, who do not know this truth, regard (only ) idols as 
worthy of adoration and, full of jealousy, disregard the Brahmana, the preceptor of the world, 
who is the same as | and their (very) soul. (55) By perceiving Me in all a Brahmana bears in 
his mind that this universe consisting of mobile and immobile creation and the (various) 
categories (such as the Mahat-tattva) that contribute to its existence are (but) My manifestations. 
(56) Therefore, O Srutadeva, worship these Brahmana sages with faith, regarding them as 
My own selves. If you do so, | shall have been directly worshipped, but not by any other 
means, (even) through enormous (expenditure of) wealth and show of splendour. (57)

| Nh Sara 
@ SA TYUNISSHeS: VeRO festa! seearastad Afsessm Park 14ci 
Ud aa US War AAHAM! swassega GAT WAshadheeTa 148 | 
sft AMerTad ASM GRAS Afeda CaM SaAUe AdcasAeEl AA Wrxilladtssear: 124 | 
Sri Sukadeva said : Instructed as aforesaid by the Lord, Srutadeva worshipped Him as 
well as the sages as one with their own self, and (through their grace) attained oneness with 
God (the goal of the pious). Bahulaswa (the king of Mithila) too attained the same (exalted) 
state. (58) Pariksit ! (just as the devotee loves God), God (too) loves the devotee. He 
(therefore) stayed on with His two devotees and, having taught them the ways of the 
righteous, returned to Dwaraka. (59)

Thus ends the eighty-sixth discourse entitled "Sri Krsna's Grace on Srutadeva", 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cB Peck Pood F5 
PII IS

Praise uttered by the Vedas (in their living form)

Wileigara 
Te, sgwafadea frat qUgHa: | wet oid Aca: Ma eae: TEI k |

uti texts, dealing as they do with the (three) Gunas 
Brahma (the Absolute), which is indefinable and 
s (both) the Cause (the Unmanifest) as well as the

A Song of

Pariksit submitted : How can the Sr 
(material phenomena), refer directly to 
beyond the (three) Gunas and transcend

Fe

ee a

en 
LTT EET

a | 1) eesSaeeicomn ie co 
7 ote

SET men

effect (the visible universe) ? (1)

Ayp FAA 
FeO, ATTA WY: | Ataref A varel aT BAIAASHTAST ATI 2 | 
jar wouheq sat gaat ydstefar | ster eae Get AA wesahesr: 1 3 
aq a quiente meat ARauifadq i aneet A Maraqeniwaureas «=a x | 
Sri Suka replied: The almighty Lord evolved the intellect, senses, mind and the vita) 
airs of the (innumerable) Jivas (embodied souls) for their enjoyment (of sense-delights), 
acts of being born and so on, for enjoying the delights of the various worlds and for fina| 
beatitude (in the shape of cessation of all speculation). (It is with the help of these that 
one can determine the real import of the Sruti texts, which as a matter of fact deal with 
Brahma alone).(2) This indeed is the well-known secret of the Vedas relating to Brahma, 
treasured up by Sanaka and others (more ancient even than the ancient).Whosoever 
cherishes it (even now) will be shorn of identification with body etc., and attain 
blessedness. (3) On this subject | shall narrate to you a story connected with the (divine 
sage) Narayana, and shall also reproduce (as follows) the dialogue between (the 
celestial sage) Narada and the sage Narayana. (4) 
UWnal ANel clam we wrafwa: | aaa xe sat ANTAUITSAAI & | 
Gt a Undasstar AAS eta FONT | MA AATAaA Acura eae: Le 
aarofasa rats: Hagar: iat «=: Wurdsgwfaaqha = PME © 
aa Gade waster yvadhteq i at ager: qdet saetntrataari ¢ | 
Going about the worlds, on one occasion, (the sage) Narada, beloved of the Lord, 
went to the hermitage of (the sage) Narayana in order to see the immortal seer, who has 
from the (very) beginning of the Kalpa (cycle) betaken Himself in this (land of) 
Bharatavarsa, for the prosperity and spiritual well-being of men, to (a life of) asceticism, 
coupled with piety, Self-Knowledge and dispassion. (5-6) Bending low (with reverence), 
O jewel among the Kurus, Narada put this very question to the divine sage, who was 
seated there (in His hermitage) surrounded by sages inhabiting the village of Kalapa.*(7) 
In the midst of (other) Rsis, who were (all) listening, the divine Sage (Narayana) actually 
gave to him the following reply, which embodied (the gist of) a discussion bearing on

(the topic of) Brahma, held among the ancient Rsis (Sanaka and others) of Janaloka (the 
fifth heaven). (8)

MATA TAA 
Ys aaa Sciesdad GWT aaet AME adiaTaedtaarl & | 
vedetd daft wale aS adwamiagae: qdqu: saat aa VAI 
aa MAAN Wea Al AATGSaa | Qo | 
qian: = kate ame: Wee ysyadtsak1 ¢2! 
The divine Sage said : O Narada (son of Brahma, the self-born), of yore there took 
place a meeting, for exchange of views regarding (the true nature of) Brahma, in Janaloka;, 
of sages born of Brahma’s mind and dwelling in that sphere, who were all lifelong celibates 
(lit., who had directed the flow of their generative fluid upwards). (9) On one occasion when 
you (O Narada!) had departed to Swetadwipa to see Lord Aniruddha (the Ruler of that island, 
a form of Lord Visnu), there ensued (among the Rsis of that sphere) a masterly and thorough

discussion concerning Brahma (the Absolute), about which the Vedas (too) remain silent. 
— eee er”

* Another name of Badarikasrama, where the famous shrine of Badrinatha is now situated.

There (in that assembly) arose the same question which you have (just) put to me. (10) 
Though equal In point of learning, askesis (self-abnegation) and practice of virtue, and 
although friends, foes and neutrals were alike to them, they treated one (of themselves. viz., 
Sanandana) as an expounder (of truths),while the rest remained inclined to listen. (11)

UtCT Sarq uF

wgsenmta wat we afkeie: | ae MIspeMtiers: Wa: ULL?!

aa AS are: ISA Yaechalfeercrasitfera: 123 | 
| Sanandana said : At the end of Pralaya (the period of Dissolution of the universe) the 
deities presiding over the Sruti texts ( and sprung up from His very first breath) awakened 
the Supreme, who had been lying asleep (as it were all the time) alongwith His (innumerable) 
potencies (Prakrti, Purusa, Time and so on), having swallowed this universe evolved by 
Himself—through (the following) hymns indicating His true character in the same way as 
bards depending for their subsistence on an emperor call on him, while he is (still) asleep,

at daybreak and awaken him with songs of praise celebrating his exploits that contribute to 
his excellent fame. (12-13) 
AIT Hz:

GeUSAidcdraasada ad saadnal faqadie arfeacac i 
at BAAN eeeala Weer Haase vata yfa eager For 1241

The Srutis prayed : Manifest Your glory, reveal Your exalted nature, O unconquered 
Lord ! Root out the nescience, which has no beginning, of (all) the Jivas invested with an 
immobile or mobile body—nescience which has assumed the (three) Gunas (Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas) for an evil purpose (viz., obscuring the blissful nature of the Jivas and there by 
throwing them into bondage), possessed as You are ofall divine attributes by virtue of Your 
own essential nature, O Awakener of all the powers in those souls !| The Veda is able to 
describe You (only) when during the period of creation You sport in conjunction with Your 
Maya (beginningless divine energy) or exist in Your absolute state. (14) The wise 
recognize this known (seen and heard of) universe.to be (no other than) Brahma (Yourself), 
because it is Brahma (alone) that remains (when all else is dissolved) and because it is 
from and into Brahma (the material cause)—which remains unchanged—that the universe 
(Its evolute) emanates and returns (even) as the earthenware are evolved out of and 
disappear into clay. Hence (because of Its being the material Cause of and, therefore, 
comprising the entire universe) the Vedic texts have concluded as referring to You 
Whatever is contemplated with the mind (that is, the import of words,) and uttered with the 
tongue (viz, the names). How could the feet of men placed anywhere (on earth) be

regarded as not placed on the earth (itself) ? (15) . 
St qa GrAheAshaIAGAAUTH AMAT AT Sg: | 
feud Ga: wafer: A Ward A WeAAIAGaAAAT 125 | 
aaa sa BEAT ae asgfen Aecemaaisvsnyl AaTAEM: | 
URefasaasaA UASAAMEy A: Aad: Ut GAA ACGaAMTAAy 12191

Therefore, O Lord of Maya (consisting of the three Gunas), the wise have taken a plunge 
into the ocean of nectar in the shape of Your stories—that wash away the impurities of all

men (who sing them)—and (thereby) shed their (threefold) sufferings. What wonde, 
then, that they should get rid of their afflictions, who, having conquered by dint of their 
Self-Realization the tendencies (evil) of their mind (in the shape of attraction and 
repulsion etc.) as well as the effects of Time (such as old age), O Supreme, contemplate 
on Your essential character consisting of eternal consciousness and bliss. (16) People 
live (justify their existence only) if they are obedient to You (follow Your commandments) 
or else they (simply) breathe like bellows. You are that (creative principle) by whose 
grace (interpenetrated by which) Mahattattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence) 
Ahankara (the cosmic ego) eitc., (though insentient) have brought into being this egg-like 
universe (including this microcosm); (nay,) it is You who animate (all) the (five) sheaths 
(with which the soul is invested), assuming the shape of those sheaths and permeating 
them (as their material Cause), although (as a matter of fact) You are the ultimate 
Substance underlying all (phenomena), beyond the gross as well as the subtle, that 
which remains (after everything else has disappeared) as the Reality. (17)

saa sO ANacig _uay: uftacneht Eqaareual aa 
dd Satetd da aa fe: a WARE aq GA A Udi Halal Ve 1 
Wapdiardaamay fasta sada adda aonlectad Cadi: | 
ay facanantatadet da aa ast farsittatscacatHiaqvad Wha! 23 | 
Out of the (many) paths (leading to God-realization) chalked out by the seers (of 
old), men of gross vision (lit., having their eyes blinded with gravel) contemplate on 
(Brahma as presiding over the spiritual centre called Manipuraka located in) the abdomen; 
while the sons of the sage Aruna (who are possessed of a subtler vision) contemplate 
on (Brahma as manifested in the centre known as the Anahata Cakra located in) the 
cavity of the heart, the organ from which the veins and arteries branch out (in various 
directions). Thence proceeds upwards, O infinite Lord, the artery known as Susumna 
(the supreme effulgent channel leading to You) to (the crown of) the head (the seat of the 
Spiritual centre known as the Sahasrara). Reaching this path men do not fall again into 
the jaws of death here. (18) Entering as it were the diverse types of living organisms 
evolved by Yourself, though (as a matter of fact) You already existed in them as their 
(material) Cause, and assuming those forms, You shine (through them) as high or low 
like fire (which, though undifferentiated in itself, assumes diverse shapes according to 
the shape of the fire-wood). Therefore, men of unclouded judgment, who do not expect 
any (worldly or other-worldly) reward for their actions, recognize Your true nature as the 
one immutable, undifferentiated and uniform Substance in those unreal forms. (19) 
Serenata 4 ad Yet dexahacmeydl serena 
gia yd fata eat Peract wad suradsStaraa uta fagtadi: | 201 
RAMA Aaa MaMa AEM TAA AL STAOTT: 
1 UReaha chhaqueriadtar a ‘aureisapeaefageyel: | 2 | 
aay porahtennrggiaarentt ata wate fet fra area a 
Tad Wee AACHEN Aaa WARTS Pereya: | 2 
Pymesrisagerasn ede Gaya sored daratste aq: CUT! 
faa stiinnstarstaamiea aan t Gar: MaSysShraIseTeM: | 23 | 
The Vedas speak of the Purusa (the individual soul) dwelling in these bodies shaped (45 
a result of its own deeds) by itself—though, as a matter of fact, it is not limited by anything 
which Is of the nature of a cause or an effect—as a part made as it were out of You, the Wwielder

—

eeeeeEeEOeeeeeeeeeee eee. ere nee ie

of BAS inter eae thus determined the nature of the Purusa, the wise on this earth, full 
gue of such ion el, at which (all) acts enjoined by the Vedas are offered and which (as 
ar a : ae put an end to rebirth (for all time). (20) Some, who have got over 
their ta Pee entre by revolving on the whirligig of births and deaths) by diving into the 
ocean O! nectar-like stories relating to You—who have assumed personal forms for the 
purpose of revealing the truth about Your own Self, which is (so) difficult to realize—and who 
have renounced their home asa result of their fellowship with devotees revelling like swans 
in the lotus of Your feet, do not aspire even for emancipation, O Lord ! (21) This human body 
(which Is like a nest* for the soul, that has been compared to a bride flitting from one body 
to another in the course of its mundane existence), when it follows the track leading to You, 
behaves as our own self, benefactor and loved one. People (however) do not find as much 
delight in You—who are (ever) favourably inclined towards them and are their (true) well- 
wisher and loved one, nay, their very Self—and kill their soul by pampering this body and 
those connected with it ( which are all unreal and) by cleaving to which they are thrown into 
wretched wombs (like those of dogs and swine) and revolve in this mundane existence, 
which is full of great fear. Oh, what a pity! (22) By thinking of You Your enemies too have 
realized the same truth which ascetics that have controlled their breath, mind and senses and 
rigidly practised Yoga contemplate in their heart. The women (cowherdesses of Vrindavana) 
who set their mind on Your (delicate, long and) stout arms resembling the body of Sesa 
(taking You to be a finite being), and even we, who look upon You as equally present 
everywhere and hold fast to Your lotus-feet, are equal in Your eyes. (23)

m sé 1 ac adlauraedismet ad samefedagq canon sya |

dfe A aa Aaa A a chlesta: feanta 4 aA Waal Weld aq 12!

share: Gat Aaa a a fet faced wreaafeaha a strafed: |

forma: gaat feet aesterpat ala A ad: Ue A Aaeaslete 1241 
Alas! what individual of posterior birth and death can possibly know You, who are anterior

to all and from whom came forth Brahma (the first sage), after whom appeared the two 
classes of gods (viz., those presiding over the Indriyas, mind etc., and those presiding over 
the heavenly regions). When, withdrawing everything (into Yourself at the end of creation), 
You repose (as now), there exist at that time neither the gross phenomena (ether etc.) nor 
the subtle (such as the Mahat-tattva and Ahankara) nor the product of both (viz., the 
psychophysical organism) nor the flux of time nor anything else nor the scriptural texts (by 
means of which You could be known). (24) They who posit (as the Vaisesikas do) the coming 
into existence of that which did not exist before (viz., of this world as an evolute of Matter), 
Or who affirm (as the Naiyayikas do) the cessation (known by the name of Liberation) of that 
Which exists (viz., suffering of twenty-one kinds), as well as they who admit (as the 
Naiyayikas or Sankhyas do) of diversity In the soul or who declare (as the Mimamsakas do) 
the fruit of actions (in the shape of enjoyment here as well as hereafter) to be real inculcate 
all this on the ground of misconception (alone). Since the conception of diversity with regard 
to the soul based on texts such as “The soul is composed of the three Gunas (modes of 
Prakrti)" is caused by ignorance about You, the latter cannot existin You, who are above such

ignorance, Knowledge being Your (very) essence. (25)

‘

da uh & aeahaeaaaehddar d sd VelssHarafarres” art Fea: | 
uhaaa wala fre fagqerata deals acddied: Ge Gara 7a ferpe|t: 12191 
SHU: WMishdomktaatmenada afeqgeha waster: | 
aiysistaotatiadka faaget facafa at a afta sacar: 1221 
eras: Betartrast feet ster afe ae faqw aa: | 
a fe cert iver A a Nae faad sae Aa BAe Sea: 12k 1

All this(objective) universe, consisting of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti)—which igs 
a projection of the mind (alone)—including the Jiva (which is referred to as the self), though 
unreal, appears as real (because of its) being superimposed on You. The knowers of the Self 
(however) recognize this entire universe (both subjective and objective) to be real because 
of its (being a projection of) their (very) self. Just as those in quest of gold do not reject its 
modification (in the shape of gold ornaments) because of its being gold itself, so is this 
universe (both in its subjective and objective aspects) concluded (by such knowers of the 
Atma) to be their very self inasmuch as it is evolved and interpenetrated (too) by the 
Atma.(26) They alone who worship You as the Indweller of all created beings take no 
account, and set their foot on the head of, Death. You keep bound (on the other hand) with 
the word of God (in the form of the Vedas) as (so many) beasts (with a rope) even the so- 
called wise (to their respective duties). Indeed they who have cultivated love for You (are able 
to) purify themselves as well as others; (but) not so they who have turned their face away 
from You. (27) Though devoid of organs (of sense etc., in Your formless aspect). You wield 
the powers of all the organs, self-dependent as You are (and hence requiring no such 
instruments). As the rulers of subcontinents bear tribute to the suzerain Lord of the entire 
globe and (at the same time) unreservedly enjoy the tribute collected from their own people, 
so do Brahma and others (the creators of the universe) as well as the (other) divinities © 
(guardians of the various spheres, and those presiding over the ten Indriyas and mind etc.) 
united as they are with Maya (which has no beginning), bear tribute to You and gladly partake 
of the oblations offered by human beings (through the sacrificial fire). Afraid of You, they do 
that work to which they have been appointed (by You). (This is the form of tribute they bear 
to You). (28) When, O Lord who are eternally free, the desire to sport with Maya (which has 
no beginning) appears in You, who are beyond that Maya, (the countless) species of mobile | 
and immobile creatures, endowed with a subtle body made up of the latencies of their 
Karmas and brought into existence by Your very look, come into being. To You, who are 
untainted like the sky and bear resemblance to the void (in point of subtleness) and are 
supreme (in every respect), none is kindred or alien (so that the disparity among created 
beings is traceable to the divergence of their Karma and not to any partiality in You) . (29)

santa gardaya ate adatarede a areata Praat ya jax 1 
aa a ae ddlaqer Hay add waged wend AdgwdaT 130! 
4 ued sea: seherisaetag vagy weaCqead | 
ata a go dat fata: amt aha sania wats feeqsracal: 132 
If the Jivas (embodied beings) are (held to be) infinite (in number), everlasting and all- 
pervading, their subordination (to another's will) cannot be maintained (because of the! 
equality with one another as well as with Yourself) any more than Your control over them;

which could be possible (only) in the opposite case (i.e., if they were held to be limited in 
number, short-lived and finite), O eternal Lord ! (For) that (Brahma alone) could be the ruler

. Washing whose feet is (accordingly) capa

(of the Jiva), as whose evolute it has co 
material cause and is equally present in 
claim to know it, since whatever comes t 
(coming into being at a particular point 
(Spirit) does not stand to reason inasm 
as) birthless or without beginning. Livi 
(only) when the two (viz., Prakrti and P

me into being and which is inseparable from it as its 
all, nay, whichis (practically) unknown to those who 
O be known is known imperfectly only. (30) The birth 
of time) of Prakrti (primordial Matter) or of Purusa 
uch as both of them are (declared in the scriptures 
ae ts (on the other hand) come into existence 
; rusa, matter and spirit) come to be unit istaken 
for one another), (Just) as bubbles appear on (the saree through he ean 
of air and water. (Since the birth of the Jivas in this way is only apparent and not real,) that 
is why they get merged In You ( the final Cause ) with (all) their several names and attributes 
(in the state of Liberation) even as rivers disappear into the sea or (during dreamless sleep)

just as all (kinds of) nectars of flowers get dissolved into (what is ultimately known by the 
name of) honey. (31)

TW da Wa waadigana yet wala yfeaisna eats maaqaay |

Hanqadd Wawa aa aa yale: gaa Yehaaraaes Ty A132 |

fahrtetinaginerntadet a sé adea oaqufaereqaratea: |

SMAIMrAaAM: CAAA WVU alist Sat UAAHViAT eset 1331

Perceiving the misapprehension (in the shape of self-identification with the body etc.),

implanted by Maya (Your deluding potency), in these human beings, men of sound judgment 
develop intense devotion—that grows every moment to You, who are capable of putting a 
stop to their transmigration. How can the fear of birth (even) haunt those that worship You, 
since Your frown in the shape of (the wheel of) Time (as represented by a twelvemonth) with 
its threefold rim (as consisting of the three parts of the year, viz., winter, summer and the rainy 
season) inspires terror (again and again) into (the mind of) those (alone) who do not resort 
to You as their asylum. (32) They who endeavour to break the most restless steed of their 
mind—unsubdued (even) by those who have controlled their senses and breath (too)— 
neglecting the feet of their preceptor, and taking (great) pains over other devices (for mind- 
control), remain beset with a hundred and one calamities in this world like merchants tha 
have not secured a pilot (for their vessel) in the sea, O birthless Lord ! (33) :

afa fe zo saa sie ade | 
sf wana frasat wa at qaala at Fag wfeed aires 13¥1 
afe yequadiiaeryeat fangiet sq VamMEngstedisatcahastcn: | 
aaft upaeata a amet Haga A Tread TeTANE TAAL | Bh

. . What is to be gained by men though kinsfolk, progeny, (their own) body, wife, wealth, 
houses, land, (nay,) their (very) life and chariots etc., while You, the (real) Self of the man 
Seeking shelter in You, the embodiment of all blessings, are there (by his side)? Indeed what 
Object in this inherently perishable world, intrinsically shorn of all substance, can (really) 
Qratify those who are unaware of this (aforementioned) truth (viz., Your being the sole 
Embodiment of real happiness) and are striving for the (false) pleasure of married life?(34) 
Sages who are destitute of (all) pride and treasure Your-lotus feet in theirheart and the water 
ble of destroying the (entire) sin (of those who sip 
it Or spri d and eyes etc.) yet resort to the numerous holy lakes and rivers 
and ngeee OP Atel st ar ( the murtace of) the earth (since it is there that they secure the 
Company of exalted souls). For, they who set their mind (but) once on You, their (very) Self, 
the embodiment of everlasting bliss, no longer remain attached to their household, which

drains the very best in men (in the shape of their judgment,

fortitude, forbearance,peace of = ie

mind and so on). (35) 
Ga sauferd Miata aq dad Aes HA oH AAA A aasyagsy | 
Adena fanct sideman waafa aNd a seqhi easter! 3 | 
4 afeeay sia a Nasedt Femreqasanr cafe fasaiat Wawa 
Ad sudtaad sxlavrsifafancawdidawatiacnaqdyaaa-aageM: | 319 |

If it is argued that this (objective) universe is real in that it has evolved from the Rea| 
(God), this proposition is surely disproved by critical examination. The fact of an effect 
following the nature of its cause varies in certain cases (as for example a son is found 
to be different from his father); while in some (other) cases the evolute of a real 
substance is known to be false (just as the perception of a serpent following from a real 
substance, viz., a rope is false). (It may be objected here that it is not the rope alone 
but the rope coupled with ignorance which is responsible for its being mistaken for a 
snake. Our reply to this objection is that) the world (too) is a product of both (viz., 
Brahma and Avidya); hence it is not real. (If the world is held to be real because it serves 
our purpose and discharges some function too, our reply is that) for explaining worldly 
transactions the illusory nature of the universe is (on the other hand) more welcome (to 
us); for worldly transactions will be carried on by blindly following past traditions. Your 
word (in the shape of Vedic texts declaring the reward of ritual acts as real) deludes by 
its manifold powers of expressing, indicating or suggesting a meaning (only) those dull- 
witted persons who have been blinded by their excessive faith in (Vedic) rituals. (36) 
Since this (phenomenal world) neither existed in the beginning (i.e., before creation) nor 
will it survive after dissolution, hence it is concluded that during the intervening period 
(too) it falsely appears in You, the absolute Existence. Therefore it is likened (by us, the 
Vedas) to the ways of the diverse manifestations (e.g., an earthen jar, ear-ring etc.) of 
material substances (like earth, gold and steel). Therefore, ignorant are they who 
recognize this unreal world, a (mere) play of fancy, to be real. (37)

GAs AMAA WS Se wast Maral aay Bea: |

add wala aaeka canner vata adaassaforasahas: | 32 1

aig tanta ada fe HAST QUEPASA Ele Wel SMTA VSALTT: |

AGP Ayadsaga 8 wWaAdHleteacdale 4 Wad: 138

(Ever) since under the influence of Maya (Your deluding potency) the Jiva (soul)

embraces ignorance (which has no beginning) it identifies itself with a body, senses and 
SO on (Products of the three Gunas) and then, acquiring the characteristics of these 
(viz., the body etc.) undergoes transmigration, its (conscious and blissful) divine nature 
being obscured. You, on the other hand, (ever) keep that ignorance away (even) as 4 
serpent casts off the slough, retaining Your divinity and possessed of infinite power, ant 
shine in Your eightfold* glory. (38) If strivers (outwardly engaged in subduing thell 
senses, mind etc.) do not tear the roots of passion planted in their heart, You remain 
difficult of access to such vile persons, though (ever) present in their heart (even) like 
a gem about the neck of a man, though forgotten by him. And for Yogis (passing by this 
name but) given to the gratification of their senses, O Lord, there is misery from bot 
Sides, viz., from Death (on the one hand) that has not turned his back (on him, here)

and (after death, on the other) from You, whose truth remains unrealized (by him). (39) 
mn

* The eightfold lory denotes here the eight Siddhis or supernatural powers enumerated in the works on YO9* 
viz., Anima, Laghima, Mahima, Prapti, Prakamya, Isitva, Vasitva and Kamavasayitva.

da

Dis. 87 ] 
BOOK TEN 497

gqada es a 9 Baer anit aeaShee Aq Aa: | 
Ses a At aa We crepeTRaee fe creas aera: 1S21

who ha tn ees

ee hen . acod ei con You (in reality) no longer feels the impact of joys and sorrows

> Evil acts (committed in past lives and) coming in relief by Your will 
(prone as You are to requite them according to their merit or demerit); nor does he recognize 
in that state the commandments (of the Vedas, which are no longer binding on him inasmuch 
as he has risen above them by virtue of his being no longer identified with his psycho-physical 
organism), intended as they are (only) for those identified with their body. (This is but 
natural;) for, ushered (into the heart) through the ears (even) by men (who have not realized 
Your truth) day after day with the help of teachings handed down from age to age to all, O 
Lord with (sixfold) divine properties, You are (eventually) attained by them in the form of final 
beatitude. (40) Even Brahma and others (the rulers of the heavenly regions) could not reach 
Your limit (farthest end), nor even You, because of Your being limitless—You, in whom, 
indeed, driven by time, float together, like particles of dust in the air, multitudes of cosmic 
eggs alongwith their (seven) sheaths ( viz., earth and so on, each of which is ten times as 
large as the one enclosed by it)! Thatis why we, Srutis, finding our end (goal) in You, become 
fruitful in You, (describing You indirectly as we do) by negating everything other than You

The Lord (the divine Sage Narayana) continued : Having heard in this way the 
aforesaid exposition regarding the Self (in the shape of the eulogy uttered by the Vedas in 
their living form) and realized the (true) nature of the Self, and (thereby) achieved their end 
(as itwere), Sanaka andothers (the celebrated mind-born sons of Brahma, who were already 
accomplished of their purpose) now paid their homage to Sanandana (their preceptor for the 
time being). (42) In this way was churned out by the exalted souls (Sanaka and others)—who 
are the earliest born (among the entire creation) and course through the air (unconcerned 
as they are with everything)—the essence of all the Vedas (their earlier portion, consisting 
of the Samhitas and their exegesis, the Brahmanas), the Puranas and the Upanisads (the 
later portion and the crown of the Vedas). (43) Cherishing with faith, O Narada (son of 
Brahma), this exposition relating to the Self—(which is) capable of burning out (all) the 
desires of men—perambulate you at will the globe (as well as the other spheres typified by

It). (44) 
yh SATA 
wa B FafAUTISShES RAT ASMTSSHA| YT: Tee Weiate aad YA: sl 
$17 S ivi he divine 
Sri Suka went on : Receiving thus with reverence what was imparted by t 
Seer (Narayana), the sage (Narada)—who had (full) control over his self, who was (fully)

i ind the teachings of the 
accomplished of his purpose, (nay,) who (ever) bears In mind | 
spretiines and ee fe heroic vow Of perpetual celibacy, submitted (to Him), O king!

(as follows):—(45)

We Wr ewe Se Fr Wee eR RRR We RR Re RR eR Re Ree Be Re Re ee MEE Be He Sr Be Be Be Ae Be i Be BL BE BE Ne Be BF See Wi Wee We Ve We We We Ke He Kew, Beer wy SOK ey 
SASS ll

ARG sald

Ta «860 Ma i HOTT Maida a ad WAYAMMMaTalet: | HET: Ise 1

Narada prayed : Hail to the celebrated Lord Sri Krsna of stainless glory (in You), who 
assumes charming forms for putting an end to the (repeated) birth of all created beings. (46)

sary «= heey Nel: LadisTaIsTd « olatd frase A ive)

awit Wad paradise: tae de avian ATUAey xc)

sade aftid Use Aa: NA: Hoes set seared Frfvistt wat ixet

asa wileneet alsernsiteaant 
q: Openers wmfsun ads gt: wit ar: 
q We wena da: Head aM 
a HATA MLA AT eAaestel Sh 1401 
=a oi : > aetna — jms

AGRA TAM AAHISeATA: 1219 | : 
Bowing low in this way to the Sage Narayana (the most ancient seer) as well as to His 
high-souled disciples, Narada proceeded from that place to the hermitage of my father, the 
sage Dwaipayana, (who was) directly present there (at that time). (47) Welcomed by the 
divine sage (Vyasa) and having taken his seat, Narada reproduced to him the aforesaid 
hymn (chanted by the Vedas in living form) as heard from the lips of the sage Narayana. (48) 
In this way has this hymn (sung by the Vedas) been reproduced by me, O Pariksit, describing 
how the mind (as well as the Veda) could penetrate Brahma even though the latter was 
indefinable and untouched by the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), which (precisely) was the 
question that had been put to us by you. (49) One should constantly meditate on Sri Hari, 
the Dispeller of (all) fears, who in His absolute state keeps Maya (the prime cause) at a 
distance; who plans this universe and continues at the beginning, middle and end of it; who 
is the Ruler of both the Unmanifest (Prakrti) and the Jiva (embodied soul); who, having 
created this universe and entered it forthwith alongwith the Jiva, evolves bodigs (for the

Jivas) and controls (maintains) them; and having attained to whom the Jiva sheds ignorance

et 7 : ‘ 0 beginning) in the same way as a man fast asleep loses consciousness of his 
ody. (50

Thus ends the eighty-seventh discourse intitled "A Song of Praise uttered by the Vedas 
(in their living form)," forming the theme of a dialogue between Narada and 
the divine Sage Narayana, in the latter half of Book Ten of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS yy

d

Oe ok okt 1 aan ee eet oo oe ee oe ee et | i i eiees | eee. fd

Lord Rudra rescued (from trouble)

UAT 
eI, 4 wratd frei saat aca : 
f MAM: Ait SA eI 
Ug cieghrear: wees wer, fe a: | freagitedt: wedilesr asai wR: 1 2 1

The king (Pariksit) submitted : Those among the gods, demons and men that worship 
Lord Siva, who has spurned all enjoyments, are generally found to be wealthy and enjoying 
the pleasures of sense; but not so those who are devoted to Lord Visnu (the Spouse of the 
goddess of wealth and consequently endowed with all enjoyments). (1 ) We are (according) 
eager to know how it is that the lot of those worshipping the two (Lord Siva and Lord Visnu) 
of contrary disposition is (quite) the opposite (of.what might be expected). Great indeed is 
our doubt on this point. (2)

site Sar

fra: akega: wad, fest quad: darters amateae frei 3 | 
adt fart stveq weamdig wai sue faudai wafamaa air x 1 
ite Frio: GIA Fea: Sad: O18 WaaTUsST aq ware Fron Wadi & | 
Raagaaag us ae: | Ua Mad) AAGesiaateyA | & | 
A ste wads wa: aya wy: 1 qui P:stearata atsadiuit at: Her 1 © t 
Sri Suka replied : (Pariksit!) Lord Siva ever remains united with His Sakti (Energy). He 
is invested with the three Gunas and is the deity presiding over Ahankara (the Cosmic Ego), 
which is threefold (in character), viz., Sattvika, Rajasika and Tamasika. (3) Out of these three 
Varieties of Ahankara are evolved the sixteen final evolutes (viz., the mind from the Sattvika 
type, the ten Indriyas from Rajasika and the five gross elements from the amasika). He 
who worships the deity presiding over anyone of these obtains access to all forms of (earthly) 
Prosperity. (4) Lord Visnu, on the other hand, is the Supreme Person Himself, (far) beyond 
Prakrti and devoid of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti); He is omniscient and the witness 
(of all hearts). Anyone worshipping Him is rid of the (three) Gunas. (5) (Pariksit !) at the 
conclusion of the ASwamedha sacrifices your grandfather, King Yudhisthira, while listening 
from (the lips of) the Lord to an exposition of (the various types of) sacred duties put this (very) 
question to Sri Krsna. (6) (Pariksit!) Sri Krsna, the almighty Lord, who appeared in the race 
of Yadu for ensuring the highest good of men, felt (much) pleased (to hear the question) and 
Spoke to the king, who was eager to listen (in the following strain).(7)

SMT TAA 
cerenpyert afte wa TM iced oT TT Gag ha! < | 
Baa raeitethh fafaoor: wre ere et: GaleT aaEREY AGIA! | 
aepel wet yet fra WaT! ara Ht YgUTed feararl Wai SH: 1Ro! 
one Seat SRRUBSLEM: TART: SAT ate feTetaaat 1821

The glorious Lord said : Him on whom | shower My grace | gradually deprive of wealth. 
His own people thereupon forsake him when he is (thus) reduced to penury and stricken with 
sorrow. (8) When, striving (once more) with intent to acquire wealth, he finds all his attempts 
abortive (through my grace) and, getting disappointed, makes friends with My devotees, that 
is the time | show My (special) grace to him, whereby he attains (oneness with) that supreme 
infinite Brahma which is (very) subtle (and therefore difficult to comprehend) and consists of 
pure consciousness and Truth. Thatis why people turn their back on Me as one very difficult 
to please and (proceed to) worship other deities. (9-1 O)Elated through the royal fortune 
obtained (through such worship) from gods who are quickly propitiated, they get intoxicateg 
(with pride) and go astray. Forgetting the very gods that conferred boons on them, they

neglect them. (11) 
MP SAA 
STATS HalawMpearea: | Me WaTAeiss rat He A AAA: 1221 
3a 0 Ueland «= Que i geerqua fren at araissmag| 123 1 
qe ATER: UA: Bar: af AREA! epissads ure aay fy git: ie 
a ste ea fifterqorenaa feeafa | ascot qurelenamnl daa peas 1g41 
SRIRAM S: Wadlareaihta | Wades al ad Bam Wagseieei

Sri Suka continued : Dear Pariksit! Brahma, Visnu, Siva and the other gods have the 
power to curse as well as to bless. (Of these again,) Lord Siva as well as Brahma (get 
propitiated and angry soon and) are (therefore) very prompt in blessing as well as in cursing, 
(but) not so Visnu. (12) In order to illustrate this truth, the wise relate an ancient anecdote 
showing how by conferring a boon on the demon Vrka Lord Siva (who has His abode on 
Mount Kailasa) got into trouble. (13) (Pariksit!) meeting (the celestial sage) Narada on the 
way, this evil-minded demon, Vrka by name, son of Sakuni, inquired (of him) which of the 
three gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) was quick to propitiate. (14) The sage replied, " Betake 
yourself to Lord Siva. You will (thereby) gain your object very soon; He it is who is soon 
Pleased with a small measure of merit and gets angry equally quickly through a slight 
offence. (15) pleased with Ravana (the ten-headed monster) and Bana (the demon), who 
(simply) glorified Him like bards, He conferred (on them) immense wealth and power, and 
courted serious trouble thereby (in that Ravana uprooted His very home, Mount Kailasa, 
while Bana secured from Him a boon that He should ever guard his city)." (16)

PONCE «= SUN ATA: | he StH WSMiseaa A120! 
caetersra fide aaasefi Srisgsa witiaar aditelfaerqeisr 1 2c! 
qaql Helter: a geifedet ad uorfuftatfendisaen | | 
Pya@ deat ysaiianaa aceite sya saeparnfa: 12 
wae meas qig H amin faa a ami 
Mita det FO some watssa yada qa 1201 
eat OW aA Uda at YAMA Ge ae at aiifeot areat a faerarfafa 122 
cea Wa esl Hal ga UNATIsifia sederet atskuyd aa iz! 
Instructed thus (by Narada), the demon worshipped Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the 
universe), propitiating Him by means of (oblations of) his own flesh out of his body through

the mouth of fire at the sacred spot of)Kedara (a summit of the Himalayas). (17) Unable 0 
gain the sight of the Lord (even after worshipping Him in this way for six days) he proceedé

_

ii: 2m §&

a

‘fatigued. Have you covered a long distance

Disn0S) wasnt B

out of despair, on the seventh day, to lop off with his swor

were wetted through a dip in the hol d his (very) head, the hair on which

y waters of that place, (and offer i 
: ; offer it as an oblation to Lord 
Siva). (18) (O King!) the highly merciful Lord Siva (who ae matted locks on His nea rose

out of the flames, (brilliant) like the god of fire, and, holding Vrka by the arms with His own 
deterred the latter (from that terrible act) even as we would deter a friend from committing 
suicide. Through His blessed touch the demon was whole again. (19) The Lord said to him 
"O dear one, enough of this, no more of this. Ask of Me any boon of your choice, (and) | shall 
grant it to you. | should be pleased with (a little) water offered by men who resort to Me. Oh 
in vain is this body tormented by you (so) cruelly." (20) The highly wicked demon (thereupon) 
sought from the Lord a boon which was terrifying to all beings. (He said,) "On whosesoever 
head | should place my hand, let him die." (21) Hearing that request, O scion of Bharata, Lord 
Rudra looked grave as It were (for a moment), and (then) laughingly said, " Amen!" He thus 
conferred on him a boon, which was as good as giving milk to a serpent. (22)

gam: asa I Atemrensa: 1a daxatianst aint ferac: | 
MS AGCANA MSHA Mapdifasa: 123 |

wags: GAR: WIM Way: 1 aaed feat wa: aMmamecH 12x!

stared: Siafefet qi ata: | adl aqvenae Vat AMG: WELIR4I!

aA ARTA: Aaefsat wal Aft: | ra AKeUSAT Adal Aladd We: 12E1

ja AM Sed SBT WAM gheres: | el Wea ea Agel ANTATAMAT 1201

aesretana Saor| siftarearara A a qHaranfurfdatdad, 1221

Thus assured (by the Lord), the said demon was as a matter of fact possessed with the 
desire of laying his hands on (Goddess) Parvati; and in order to test (the efficacy of) the 
boon, the demon, it is said, proceeded to place his hand on the head of Lord Sankara 
(Himself). The all-blissful Lord (now) got dismayed at His own act (of granting that boon). (23) 
Trembling in great fear, He fled before the Asura, who now pursued Him. He covefed the 
whole length of the earth and heavens and reached the very end of the cardinal points; but 
(finding the Asura still pursuing Him) ran (further) in a northerly direction. (24) Finding no 
remedy for the trouble, all the great gods kept quiet. Finally Bhagavan Sankara went to the 
Shining region of Vaikuntha, lying beyond the sphere of Prakriti. (25) It is the realm of 
Bhagavan Narayana, the supreme resort of recluses who, having taken a VOW of complete 
non-violence have attained perfect tranquillity of mind. On reaching this region one does not 
return to mundane life. (26) Seeing Siva in that miserable plight, froma distance, Bhagavan 
Narayana, who removes all affliction, assumed the form of a young Brahmacani (religious 
Student) by dint of His Yogamaya (wonderful creative power) and appeared before 
Vrkasura.(27) Adorned with a girdle made of Munja grass, (black) deer-skin, a staff and a 
rosary of Rudraksa beads, He shone by His lustre like the fire. Holding a (bunch of) Kusa

grass in His hand, He hailed the Asura like a humble student. (28)

ATTA TAT 
Wepre cart cork SI: fee GANT: | art fara Ga Sree WasIATR 12k 
ae a: saunas qaqetatad fart | qoTat Meet: Used: Sat TAled 1301

hmacarl) said : O Vrkasura, evidently you are (much)

: ‘CAL ra 
The Lord (disguised as a P e? Rest Yourself awhile. This body is the source

CLAN Bicdkdedl 
te

a

y

of all blessings. (Why do you putit to unnecessary exertion ?) (29) Mighty as you are, please 
tell me, ifthe matter is fit for our ears, what you have set your mind upon. For people generally 
seek to accomplish their object through persons choosen for their help. (30)

Me SAA 
wa Wad Ys! adamgaatton i maguissdtist Baga yTy 132 t

Sri Suka went on : (Pariksit !) thus questioned by the Lord in words raining nectar (as 
it were) the Asura felt refreshed and related to Him in order of sequence all that he had

done.(31)

STATI ATA 
UW ade aged a aa seeitafes at cereror dared sa: Saftarree_ 1321 
ae aaa farsi aaas wamtiddem aaa edt ae odessa 
GMa ad: Wa: wae aaalwi del Weaaearst A aa awed WA: 13x 
Sa Wadia: AU Wastes: | faeifeaa: sift aad Hafaetens 1341 
siamade_ faafant aeled Sa AUM| Weaglecl AN-Ree: Ulelecisad fafa 1361 
Wa: usasiitt et am agareticaiugreal alfa: Ugerfsa: 1301 
ae Pierase «Ta «| GESIA: | Stel Ca AeIea UMIsed WA OGM 13¢1 
@d: ch J Neca sae cpdienfeas: 1 Act ere feng fads Haren sa 1381

The Lord said: "If itis so, then we do not believe his words. Do you not know that under 
the curse of Daksa He has adopted the ways of Pisacas (evil spirits)? He is now the ruler of 
Pretas (genii) and Pigacas. (32) O lord of demons, if you still repose faith in Sankara as the 
Teacher of the world, the truth may be verified (by you) this very instant, O dear friend, by 
placing your hand on your own head. (33) O chief of Asuras, if the words of Sankara are found 
to deviate from truth in any wise, you had better do away with that liar so that he may not (live 
to) utter a falsehood again." (34) The words spoken by the Lord were so very sweet and cast 
such a magic spell on him that he lost his reasoning power, and the wicked Asura in utter 
forgetfulness placed his hand on his own head. (35) Instantaneously he fell down with his 
head split as if by a stroke of lightning; and shouts of triumph, salutations and applause were 
raised (by the gods) in heaven. (36) On the sinful Vrkasura rained having been killed, gods, 
manes and Gandharvas showers of flowers, and Bhagavan Sankara was redeemed from a 
precarious situation. (37) The almighty Lord Visnu (thereupon) said to Sankara, who was 
(now) free, " O Lord ! O supreme Deity, this wicked Asura has been killed by his own sins. 
OLord, having actually sinned against the great who can possibly be happy? Much less could 
he be happy who did wrong to You the Lord and preceptor of the universe". (38-39)

a Wanenndadadd: Ue Mand wel a: | 
fiftata audi a faqend dofafireonttta: ivol 
Sf Arad AS GRAS Gleaa SAHA SATE SHANA ATATBTaMaaANSeATA: ICCA

Sri Hari is an ocean of powers, which are both incomprehensible and beyond the range 
of speech. He is no other than the Supreme Spirit beyond Prakrti. He who relates or listens

to this story of His rescuing Lord Sankara

(from troub| 
of) births and deaths and is rid of the fe e) gets completely freed from(the cycle

ar of enemies. (40)

Thus rae = eighty-eighth discourse entitled "Lord Rudra rescued (from trouble),” 
in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

3 Tenlaaa aaa sear:

Discourse LXXXIX 
(The three chief gods put to test by the sage Bhrgu;) the

Lord brings back the (dead) sons of a Brahmana 
My FAA

Aaa wags: aaaad fadh: aaa fryeiery al Aer g |

awe faaram a A Wy saad FOI ae searna: Asa AAMT: AAA | 2 1

qT qa Neu Ma wh aaa aH Als War Medeor Ga asa | 2 |

GT Sead AAA «TY: | Saierag ser aie ata arose: 1X 
Sri Suka began again : O king, (on one occasion) great sages assembled on the bank 
of the Saraswati (for exchange of views on the object of life and the means of attaining the 
same). (In the course of their discussion) a question came up before the assemblage as to 
which of the three lords of creation (viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva) was the greatest. (1) O 
king, the Rsis actually deputed Bhrgu, one of Brahma’'s sons, to ascertain the out of curiosity 
fact with intent to know this truth, Maharsi Bhrgu (first) visited the court of Brahma, and with 
a view to testing Brahma’'s forbearance and other qualities, did neither bow to him nor 
offer any praises. Brahma got angry with him and looked as if burning with his majestic

pat i Brahma (the self-born) 
low. (2- idering that the insult was offered by his own son, selt- 
leds koanase of his Hear within his mind by force of reason, just as one extinguished

fire by water, which is an evolute of fire itself. (4) 
aa: hora wa Bat TeME Ufa TAA sera we a4! 
jomneae st aaqem el yeu aq wana feraotes: 1 & 1 
Ufacar creat arama a fit) ote seme agus aa eat SHEA: | | 
Ma fa se Ul FAAASAA,| et SAAT TAL AS HVA Aa Ait: tS 
macmcacena vam feet A oe a art Hert Prtararert ATTA 
STAAL a: GAS A: HHT Ft 
anita aiaet am aeoh 3 wegy gare feos weet SH TTT Igo 
Gifs wach at Haueis Ae! Mela qaqeiatat dtefanftom 1281

? . : " , [ IS

SMe Wass sada awa A wWlatactaadiea: 1221 
From Brahma's court the sage Bhrgu went to Kailasa (the home. of Siva).Seeing that it 
was his own brother (Bhrgu, who had come on a visit to Him), the Lord Sankara (the supreme 
Deity) rose in (great) joy (from His seat) and proceeded to embrace the sage. (5) But Bhrgu 
avoided his touch saying, "I shall not touch you, since you have broken social conventions 
and flouted the injunctions of the Vedas." Siva lost His temper when He heard this. His eyes 
shot fire. Taking up His trident, He proceeded to strike the sage (with it.) (6) But Goddess 
Parvati, falling at Siva's feet, pacified Him by soothing words. Thereafter Bhrgu went to 
Vaikuntha, the realm of Bhagavan Visnu. (7) He found the Lord reposing (with His head) on 
the lap of Laksmi (the goddess of prosperity). (Breaking into His room unceremoniously) the 
sage suddenly kicked Him on the chest. The almighty Lord, the (sole) refuge of the virtuous, 
thereupon (quickly) rose with Laksmi alighted from His bed and, bowing His head 
(in reverence) to the sage said, "O sage, you are welcome. Make yourself comfortable on 
this seat and rest awhile. Unaware of your arrival, we could not offer you welcome in time. 
Pray, forgive us this omission.(8-9) O great one ! great sage, your feet are so soft, O dear 
one !" Saying this, the Lord began to knead the feet of the sage with His own hands, and again 
said:—(10) "O sage, the water touched by your feet lends sanctity even to the sacred waters. 
(Pray) sanctify Me, My realm (Vaikuntha) and the protectors of the world residing in Me, with 
the same. (11) O worshipful sage, all My sins have been washed off by the very touch of your 
feet. From this day | have become the sole abode of Sri Laksmi, the goddess of wealth. She

will hereafter (constantly) dwell on My bosom (bearing the mark of your foot)." (12)

Sara 
Wi gal dagus yqerasa fri Adana vaausisyete: 1231 
WA WAS Wet Adal aay wwe wala iexi 
daar yaa fafa amdeen: | yard steefewy aa: anatase et 
| ad: Male adil AA Ara aA dead Wad ABM Ale AMMA 1h! 
Gist ARS We Wada! ses Beat wae: wat W101 
aa Fe Ha Afdisigonikasead: | asraaire: ara a art frquraga: 1221 
Pianeta Waa stqU: Ae: 1 Wore Aaa BSI: aa aniefareray 128!

Sri Suka continued : Hearing these words of the Lord uttered ina deep low tone, the 
sage Bhrgu felt (highly) satisfied and happy. His voice got choked through (the rising tide 
; of) Devotion and tears rushed to his eyes. He could not utter a word. (13) O king, returning 
to the assembly of sages, who were (all) expository of the Vedas, he narrated all that he 
had experienced (in the valms of Brahma, Sankara and Bhagavan Visnu). (14) Hearing his 
experiences, the sages in the assembly were filled with wonder and freed from all doubts. 
They were now convinced that Visnu was the Supreme Deity, the fountain-head of 
tranquillity and security. (15) From Visnu proceed virtue itself, wisdom, dispassion, united 
with it, the eight forms of supernatural powers and fame, which wipes out the impurities of 
the mind. (16) He is described as the supreme resort of saints and sages who are 
embodiments of peace, equanimity and detachment, and who have taken a vow of 
complete non-violence.(17) The quality of Sattva constitutes His beloved person, and the 
Brahmana is His favourite deity. Men possessed of disinterestedness, serenity (of mind) 
and subtle understanding take to His adoration. (18) Itis his Maya, constituted of the three 
Gunas, which has evolved His three forms, viz., the Raksasas, the Asuras and the gods. 
Of these, only gods embodying the quality of Sattva are the means of His realization (He 
Himself being the end of all pursuit).(19)

‘ 
+

=

Sri Suka went on: (Pariksit !) 
this conclusion (not for theirowns 
feet of the Supreme Person, the

ats Lane assembled on the bank of the Saraswati arrived 
oh )for dispelling the doubts of men. Adoring the lotus- 
y attained to His supreme state. (20)

sera rerTarerEreng waved ue | det 
ers Haye: fleaviest ursitseawaorafient aaft 1291

Sita said : (Saunaka and other sages !) this story, which brings out the glory of the 
Supreme Person, dispel the fear of transmigration (in the form of births and deaths). Like (a 
stream of) sweet-smelling nectar it has emanated from the lotus-like lips of Sri Suka (the son 
of the sage Vyasa.) The traveller who, coursing through the circuitous paths of this world 
constantly drinks of it through the cups of his ears gets rid of the fatigue of wandering through

the world. (21) 
Sy FATA 
Wheel ghaai @ fasaem: Hanes: | Wat Ya WEI AAN faa ANA 122! 
fast delat Yah Weedon aise Stata facut dare: 1231 
wees: welsat ger fava: | eae adele Gara A dist: 1261 
fates Fuld S: Borst sae | Tal Usa: Gera ahst eae: faat: 124 1 
wa fai fasfigdta aata aifaga a yet a mat aamad 124! 
aasia sug) cnféfead, na aia AEA ae) ATT ATT 1219 
finftaa sereatrare se ahd aet: | Waa a SIUM: GA Bae 1221 
ENING GA Baht AST a A Terao Fat SAS: 1281 
a set at amar teet deatfte 1 stretivistegtsh seed edenera: 1R01

Sri Suka resumed : Pariksit, once upon a time at Dwaraka the wife of a Brahmana gave 
birth to a child; but the moment it was born and touched the ground, they say, it died. (22) 
Taking the deceased child to the portal of the royal palace, the Brahmana laid it on the ground 
and with a heart full of grief began to weep (for it) piteously. He spoke thus:— “My child has 
died because of some vicious act of the ruler of this kingdom, (a base ksatriya) who is a 
Brahmana-hater, has a wicked disposition, is full of avarice and has set his mind on the 
pleasures of his sense. (23-24) The people depending on a ruler who takes delight in bloody 
acts, has a vicious character andis aslave of his senses, lead a miserable life and are always 
in distress for want of money.” (25) The second and third child of the Brahmana sage also 
died under similar circumstances and the Brahmana brought their dead bodies in the same 
Manner to the palace gate and repeating the same observation In a loud tone left the 
deceased children there. (26) (Thus as many as eight children of the Brahmana died one 
after another.) When he repeated the complaint at the loss of his ninth child, Arjuna was also 
Sitting by the side of Lord Sri Krsna. Hearing the remarks of the Brahmana, he vauntingly 
Said, "© venerable Brahmana, Is there no Ksatriya who can wield a bow in this city of 
Dwaraka (where you reside)? It seems these Yadavas (who are unable to protect their

[565] B.M. Part lI—45

2 2 2 hh heh hihhh kiki hih PRR ee RRR eR Ree eR Wr Wr Wr We We We Br Ke Hr Be Ke ee Be He We Ve Bee He We We ee We We ee Hie Be We Ber wweieersecn® 
8

subjects) are no better than Brahmanas assembled for a sacrifice. (27-28) The rulers in 
whose kingdom a Brahmana grieves over the loss of his wealth, wife or children are (no 
Ksatriyas, but) mere actors playing the role of a Ksatriya only to fill their belly. (They live in 
vain.) (29) O Brahmana, | undertake to protect the child that may be born to you (hereafter), 
afflicted as you and your wife are (by the loss of your children) here. If | fail to carry out my 
promise, | shall jump into fire (and put an end to my life) and (thereby) atone for my sin." (30)

MAT Sava 
asiut aged: Set ahaat at: | stiegisseat A ad WHara aise 
Wd wa {Na HA cent sdtae: | fantdfa a alioean aa MEMS Fa 1321

The Brahmana said: (Arjuna!) when Sri Balarama, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, Pradyumna, 
the foremost of archers, and the matchless warrior Aniruddha have failed to protect my 
children, how dare you undertake to do so ? Even those lords of the world find it an 
impossible task. It is simply childish on your part to brag like this. We cannot put any faith

in your words. (31-32) 
ST Sara

Ag ASU FEA HM: aifoha al ag al Sef AM Wea TA SF Aq: 1331

Ma AA He ala Braedon ye fara se sae A Te WUT 13x 
Arjuna replied : | am neither Balarama, nor Sri Krsna, nor again Pradyumna. Surely | 
am Arjuna, the wielder of the famous Gandiva bow, O worshipful one! (33) Please do not

make light of my prowess, with which | pleased the three-eyed Sankara (Himself). | shall 
conquer even the god of death in battle and bring back your child, my master. (34)

a,

| Ga fasts fas: wie wis eye sa: urelat Peraisat

i Taide sated water festada: ioe oe set Welfteatemiaarde: 136!

a syed Bert ane anew feearsen daa aed mMedlanred 1391

if eu, Aiden 99 aiaretaifera: | faeyedaer: «areas «= ARS 1301

, Wd: HAR: Asal fags we Ye: | MelsegiqaMae wank fagrrari3et

daisse fast fasta fatreq qerafaat | ated asad A alse sea SlaHAAA IXol

4 sgMl aes! A Wa A a hee: ae ae: ula alsaeafaaae 1¥2!

TR yMee ene ay: i catags at ISR I 
Pariksit, thus (comforted and) assured by Arjuna, the Brahmana returned to his place full 
of delight and eager to witness Arjuna's prowess.(35) As the period of confinement of his wife 
drew near, the exalted Brahmana approached Arjuna in great anxiety and entreated him 
saying, “Pray, protect my child from death." (36) (Hearing this), Arjuna sipped a little pure 
water and bowed to Bhagavan Sankara. Thereafter he invoked all his weapons of supe! 
natural efficacy and took up his Gandiva bow having strung it properly. (87) He fenced on 
all sides, as well as above and below, the house of confinement with arrows charmed with 
the power of Mantras, thus encasing it in a cage of arrows as it were, (38) The wife of the 
Brahmana in due course gave birth to a child, which gave repeated cries; but presently It 
bodily disappeared through the sky. (39) Now the Brahmana began to censure Arjuna in the 
presence of Sri Krsna. He said, " Look at my folly. | put my faith in the futile boast of 4

eunuch.(40) Who else is powerful enough to save one whom neither Pradyumna nO! 
Aniruddha, nor even Balarama and SriKrsna could protect ? (41) Fie upon Arjuna, who made

—

Dis. 89 ] BOOK TEN 507

empty boasts. Five upon the bow of Arjuna, who indulges in self-praise. Look at his dull-

wittedness! The fool intends to bring back what has been snatched away from me by 
Providence. (42)

wa wala faset fermen weys: | aat data wares aA aa: 1¥3 | 
fastened wat we see Set Ghent areeat areciaa | 
We Aenys AwWaATTaTAa: 1% | 
AASHETSTAA atatvisttaa: | sift fafaa: qt sep: wfareter se 
ela fast = Wegeraaert | aaa: afd feat caer: wrath set 
When the Brahmana sage began to reproach him thus, Arjuna, with the help of charms, 
at once went to the capital of Yama, where rules the god of retribution (43) Not finding the 
child of the Brahmana there, he thence proceeded, bow in hand, to the cities of Indra (the 
lord of immortals,), Agni (the god of fire), Nirrti (the god of death), Soma (the moon-god), 
Varuna (the god of water), Vayu (the wind-god), to the nether world known as Rasatala, to 
regions higher than Indra's paradise and other regions, but did not find the Brahmana child 
anywhere. Having thus failed to redeem his promise, he now decided to jump into blazing 
fire. But Bhagavan Sri Krsna deterred him, saying, “Brother Arjuna, do not make light of

yourself in this way. | shall show you (all) the children of the Brahmana. The very men who 
reproach you now will then resuscitate our spotless glory." (44—46)

sa aarti TC: | fee TTT Sie feartfaaia ivy 
ay stam wa faen aaediina! cree ander fader qyedt: 1%21 
TATA: TeaqanaqMaciean: aa = WET AYN ATH 1s 
aM. gel War Ht velista: | deatieaeene Weteh sfeuil ge: 140!

aH: at wet ad wea feared yao fear

Tara «6«fafafast dealt Worl waeRt ae aq: 142

BUT anlar Aaa: Ut ay Rafa |

aayar wader wieda: selfedtantsfqetsteront SH 1421

qd: as: Ges Wed selsiqgetyy |

Di 
eas kk banc acasshaneneeennantknnennewenesnaneneines®: 89 
tr

fanart A gaatféceon waiat yfa = eiqaa 
HOMAGE «««« BAW TAA =—_- ARR 
uuemar = gat RARTOTTat | eriareat fret seaet Sleaze igo! 
Thus consoling Arjuna, the almighty Lord, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, took Arjuna with Himang 
mounting His divine chariot, proceeded towards the west.(47) Crossing the seven Dwipas, 
each containing seven mountain ranges, the seven oceans (dividing those Dwipas from one 
another) and the Lokaloka mountain (situated beyond them all), He entered the region of 
thick darkness. (48) Pariksit! His (celestial) horses—Saibya, Sugriva, Meghapuspa and 
Balahaka—lost their way in that darkness (and could not proceed further). (49) Seeing them 
in that plight, Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the Lord of all great masters of Yoga, sent ahead of Him 
(as a guide) His discus (Sudarsana), which shone like a thousand suns (put together). (50) 
Quick as thought, SudarSana made its way through that extensive thick and most terrible 
darkness created by the Lord Himself, piercing it by its enormous light. It appeared (at that 
time) like a shaft discharged from the bow string of Sri Rama penetrating the armies of 
Raksasas. (51) Following the path made by SudarSana, the chariot reached the end of the 
region of darkness. Beyond it shone the region of supreme, infinite and all-pervading Light. 
Dazed by that light, Arjuna had to shut both his eyes. (52) Crossing the region of light, the

divine chariot entered the region of (supramundane) water, which looked most beautiful .

because of its huge waves created by a strong wind (which was blowing at that time). A 
wonderful and most luminous palace shining with thousands of columns of brilliant jewels 
appeared before them there. (53) Bhagavan Sesa, most terrible and wonderful to look at, 
was present there. Possessed of a thousand hoods, each radiant with many jewels on its top 
and two fearful eyes, He shone brightly like the white Kailasa mountain, and was blue at the 
neck and endowed with blue tongues. (54) (Pariksit! there) Arjuna saw the most exalted 
Supreme Person, the all-pervading Lord of infinite powers, reposing on Sesa, making the 
coils of the latter His comfortable bed. His Form resembled in colour a cloud surcharged with 
humidity. He was clad in bright yellow, and His cheerful countenance and big eyes looked 
(most) charming. (55) The lustre of the ear-rings and of the crown on His head, containing 
many precious jewels, lighted up His profuse curly locks. He possessed eight long and lovely 
arms; the Kaustubha gem shone at His neck; His chest bore the mark of Srivatsa, and the 
garland of sylvan flowers hung up to His knees. (56) (Pariksit!) Arjuna saw that the Lord's 
attendants like Nanda and Sunanda, His discus (Sudargana) and other weapons endowed 
with personal forms, His four Potencies viz., Pusti (Grace), Sri (Splendour), Kirti (Fame) and 
Maya, and all the fortunes waited on Him, who is the Lord of Brahma and the other Rulers 
of the world. (57) (Pariksit!) Bhagavan Sri Krsna bowed to the infinite Lord, who was but 
Himself in another form. Arjuna was (somewhat) filled with awe at His sight: (but following 
Sri Krsna) he too bowed to Him and both of them stood (there) with joined palms. (Now) with 
a smile on His lips, and in a deep and sonorous voice the Perfect Person, who is the Lord 
of Brahma and other protectors of the world, said to them. (58) "(O Sri Krsna, O Arjuna); 
desirous of seeing You both, | had the sons of the Brahmana brought here. You have poth 
appeared on earth with Your part manifestations for the vindication of virtue. Killing the 
Asuras, who have become a burden to the earth, soon return to Me. (59) You are the sages 
Nara and Narayana. Though sated in everyway and foremost of all, follow the path of virtue 
for maintaining the world order by setting an example before men." (60)

saest wad at got waiBAri siftreara yea fee ie?! 
Tei Se MH west amma faa aeq: UA seed geraa: 162!

sail je pe . ataterd: | afeatoag dred yat AA roman 3 |

qaanihacry Werte Syst rear grata areahsadka: 1 ex

set TY WNT werOTiey | aeentet last smrarsdesaareera: 1&4 |

koalt UrateaTS TEA: | SST adarara ett TM AAfaret: 1 SS 1 
is fo T Re Sas fee A WaHAafaASEAT: U1 CS I

The said Sri Krsna and Arjuna accepted the mandate of the Supreme Person, 
bowed to Him and, supremely delighted, returned to Dwaraka with the sons of the 
Brahmana following the same route by which they had gone there. The sons of the 
Brahmana had grown up according to their respective age, but in appearance they were 
the same as at the time of their birth. Bhagavan Sri Krsna and Arjuna returned them to 
the Brahmana. (61-62) Seeing the glorious realms of Bhagavan Visnu, Arjuna felt much 
astonished. He realized that whatever prowess is possessed by men was due to the 
grace of Bhagavan Sri Krsna. (63) (Pariksit!) exhibiting these and many other similar 
feats, Bhagavan Sri Krsna appeared to men as if enjoying worldly pleasures (like 
ordinary men of the world) and performed sacrifices on the highest scale (like the 
greatest of kings). (64) Just as Indra sends down timely showers, so He showered all 
boons on the Brahmanas and other subjects, adopting the conduct of an ideal king. (65) 
He Himself killed many an unrighteous king, and caused many others to be killed by 
Arjuna and others. In this way He easily re-established the rule of Dharma (throughout 
the world) with the help of Yudhisthira and other (righteous) kings. (66)

Thus ends the eighty-ninth discourse entitled “The Lord brings back the (dead) sons 
of a Brahmana”, in the latter half of Book Ten of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31a Aatddar sear:

Discourse XC 
The Story of (the amorous sports of) Sri Krsna narrated 
Myh SAAT

faa great fava: ate: | adage VTA qrearasa: | 
SR MELE | wdetlehtedty clecdttedtsqelt: |

4

r of Dwaraka was matchless.) Its roads

Sti Suka began again: (Pariksit! the splendou

).

Di 
NEE aaS haa catenstkarwahnnhbhnhewebnennhnenmnnakeeie m0 
tr

and streets were day and night thronged with young elephants in rut, richly adorned soldiers 
horses and brilliant chariots plated with gold. On every side of the city there were gardens 
and parks containing rows of trees in blossom which were filled with the music of birds ang 
humming bees. It was a city abounding in wealth of every description. The world's greatest 
heroes, the Yadus, considered it a privilege to live in it and enjoy its amenities. The women 
of that city possessed budding youth. When, while playing with balls etc., in their mansions 
their gorgeous dress got unsettled exposing a part of their body, it flashed as a streak of 
lightning. The Lord of Laksmi (the goddess of prosperity) Himself lived in that city with great 
ease and comfort. It was His own (favourite) city. (1—4) Bhagavan Sri Krsna was the one 
beloved consort of (more than) sixteen thousand wives. Each of them possessed a mansion 
of surpassing wealth and splendour for her residence. Assuming as many charming forms | 
as He had wives, He sported with them (severally) in their mansions. (5) All these mansions | 
possessed beautiful tanks of their own. Their limpid water was ever fragrant with the pollen | 
of lotuses of every description, (Swans, cranes and other beautiful) birds (continually) 
warbled in them. (6) The Lord of prosperity (Bhagavan Sri Krsna) sported (with His consorts) 
entering the water of the rivers, and the saffron on the breasts of these ladies transferred itself

to His bosom as they embraced Him (in the course of these sports.) (7) The Gandharvas (at

that time) sang His praises, while the Stas, Magadhas and bards joyously sounded their 
clay tomtoms, kettledrums, tabors and lutes. (8)

aaMisadadiveddia: tach: ofafier fafaets aeiifiderntisa i ¢ 1 
uw: fGaaatagdepane: fas seydgqechawree: | 
ard WW taahteraaqg wdenkeaedset fata: 1201 
PO aM pS rAgM SMI gras T ase: | 
st dedahis: stare ww arwfaavait: ata: 1221 
Temi Adentat a tidaretusitfear| wlsiesRaraia penises a faa: 1221 
pura faerdt Teeth: | Aeateatge: eto fame gat fer: 1231 
saderecn teats Sasa | fran sferaat aft A aed: yy ie!

The consorts of the Lord would (now and then) smilingly throw jets of water on Him 
through syringes, and He (too) sprinkled water on them and drenched them in return. 
Sporting thus with His wives, He would appear like Kubera (the king of Yaksas) sporting with 
Yaksa women.(9) The breasts and thighs of these ladies would appear through their wet 
clothes, and flowers stuck to their swollen braids would drop. Throwing water on Him 
(through their syringes), they would approach Him with intent to wrest the syringe from His 
hands, and make it an excuse for embracing their beloved Lord. Through His thrilling touch 
theirlove would grow all the more, which would make their face bloomin greatjoy. The beauty 
of the queens naturally increased on such occasions. (10) The garland of sylvan flowers 
hanging on Bhagavan Sri Krsna's bosom would get tinged with the saffron on their breasts. 
Through intense absorption in enjoyment the braid of His curly locks would get loosened an 
begin to wave free in the air. He would throw, again and again, jets of water on His consoris, : 
who in their turn would drench Him in the same fashion. In this way the Lord sported with His 
consorts (even) as the leader of a herd of wild elephants would with their females. (11) (ON 
the conclusion of this sport) Bhagavan Sri Krsna and His consorts would give away thelr 
clothes and ornaments used at the time of sport to male and female dancers and to thos¢ 
who subsisted by vocal and instrumental music. (12) (Pariksit!) that is how the Lord used {0 
carry on His sports. His (charming) gait, (sweet) words, (endearing) glances, (enchanting

Se OS ee ee & eee ee

a

smiles, (enlivening) jests and jokes and (loving) embraces captivated the heart of His

consorts. (1 epee Sti Krsna was the be-all and end-all of their lives. the sole possessor 
of their heart. : sorbedinthe thought of their lotus-eyed Lord, they would remain speechless 
for a while, an would Suddenly break out with incoherent talks in the manner of a lunatic. 
(In the intensity of their love) they would (now and then begin to experience excruciating pain

of separation from the Lord even in His presence and) ci a 
iV 
reproduce these talks; (please) listen to them. (14) ) give way delirious talks. | shall

NEAT HY: 
ark faoute a chats 3 38 wataha sf weamrhtet water: | 
aaa uta afae metiiada AleaqaAelalenetetatad 1241

The queens said : O she-osprey, we are in the depth of the night now, and the whole 
world appears to be one big void. The Lord Himself has buried His ever wakeful conscious- 
ness (for the time being), and has gone to sleep. But your eyes know no sleep. Why do you 
wail and lament thus, keeping awake for the whole night ? O friend, it seems your heart has 
been pierced, equally with that of ours, by the (sweet) smiles and gracious and sportive

glances of the lotus-eyed Lord. Surely that is the-reason why you do not get sleep. (15)

wa Pdieafa wamagseyed india meu ad amare | 
aa ad aafmarqaaent fa al ast Wears Hato ate 12c!

O red goose, why have you closed your eyes during the night ? Is it because your partner 
has gone out of sight that you wail so piteously ? If so, we are really sorry for you. Oris it that 
you are possessed like us with the desire of waiting upon the Lord, and long to adorn your 
braid with the garland offered at the feet of the Lord ? (16)

a @: Val Rea seaamerhslserTaasM: | 
fe at YpRUeaOSA: MAT aM A A Tel HATTA!

O ocean, you constantly roar and thunder. Do you get no sleep at all ? It seems you have 
developed the disease of insomnia.Or is it that our dear Lord has robbed you of the natural 
qualities of tranquillity and gravity etc. ? That is why, like us, you have developed a disease

Which is so difficult to get rid of. (17)

eq ARTO HeLa Tate Seay NetoreTa = Fasteners: fare | 
saRrqerentemrht ser ae a fereqer At: waftreitermare A: 1261

O moon, you have fallen a victim to the fell disease of consumption. Oh good gracious, 
you have got so attenuated that you cannot disperse the darkness by your rays. (No, no;) 
it seems the (sweet confidential) talks of our beloved Lord (Sri Krsna) have escaped out of

your memory, as out of ours. That is why you have become mute. (18)

ifs wrafianenirteartre ashe! tiferqengitit echtatet A: F189! 
we given you that you send impulses of love into our

O ffence have 
southern wings Ogee the sidelong glances of the Lord ? (19)

heart, which is already torn to pieces by

aa nance ae hskbeeanenneeknettatratnaternrewennnnne eS: 90

Re sittcanfa cfadt weds a silaang aafta var eafa Saag: | 
BAaGHus: WAM KASH ge THI: Wat Wal fagela qeqaaxtaag: 120)

O cloud, your colour is as lovely and beautiful as that of our beloved Lord. Surely you are 
very dear to our Lord, the crown-jewel of the race of Yadu. That is why, bound to Him with 
ties of love, you are absorbed in His thought like us. With a heart full of anxiety you always 
pine for Him like us and recollecting Him again and again shed profuse tears. Oh, the very 
contact with Him is painful. (20)

frearaaerta aaa Wddsitfanaran fir | 
ara fear a fa aq A. afetanus alfa ie

O cuckoo, your voice is so sweet and melodious. It seems our beloved Lord has made 
it so sweet (by drilling it). You warble in notes as sweet as those of the honey-tongued Srj 
Krsna, Your songs bring life even to the dead. Please tell us what service we may render to 
you today. (21)

a uefa a aawenage fairer faaaa vere 
ama ad daqeatete aaa cmrmad eafeed1221

Oh, dear mountain, you possess a noble mind. It is you who support the earth by 
maintaining her balance. How is it that you neither move nor speak anything ? You seem to 
be merged in some serious thought. Oris it that you long to place the lotus-feet of our beloved 
Lord on your breast-like peaks (even) as we. (22)

Weaaia: aict ad fayocd: aaauRdHaesa spud: | 
Ue aa Ad: WirelaskHael Wpecal: Geenfeicl: B17 1231

O rivers, consorts of the ocean, (it is summer now). Your beds are dry. The beauty of the 
lotus (full bloom) is no longer to be in found in you. You have become very lean and thin. (The 
reason is notfar to seek.) (Just) as we have been robbed of our heart and have become much 
too emaciated, being deprived of the love-laden glances of (our beloved Consort,) the Lord 
of the Yadus, so have you been reduced to this wretched condition because the clouds no 
longer supply you with water from your beloved ocean. (23)

Ga APTA Meret GAN Seles BMe: Heat ad cat q facia sHlsiatera: KARA Sh AT | 
fe al agecled: ila a Hee VSI aa Alara sa raga Vaden BT fra, 12 
O dear swan, you are welcome. Take your seat (here) and have a little milk. Please tell

us something of our beloved Lord. We know you are His messenger. Is our dear Sri Krsn@ 
who is under no body's control, hale and hearty ? O brother, Heis very fickle in His friendsn'P- 
Once He told us that we were the most beloved of Him. Does He remember that profession 
of His love ? However, letit go. (If He can afford to be indifferent to us, why should we languls 
for Him ?) (Vile) messenger of a treacherous lover! we do not care to go to Him. (Or if He calls 
us just in order to make friends with us,) you might (as well) bring Him here, (so that we may 
have a direct talk with Him); but take care not to bring Laksmi with Him. (If He cannot come 
here leaving Laksmi alone, we ask you one thing.) Of all women, does Laksmi alone boas 
of Her exclusive love for the Lord ? (Is there none among us, who can claim to possess SUC

ese |

ral Rel, the (depth of) love and devotion which the consorts of Sri Krsna 
C nen sband, the Supreme Lord of great masters of Yoga; and throu h that 
tie Masalltalté Sch a ieee (25) The sports of the Lord have been sung in watts ways 
Basie mirid (avidth gS and poetry. (They are so sweet, so captivating that) they irresistibly

ra . eart) of women when they hear them. How much greater, then, should 
be the attraction of those who (are privileged to) see Him (with their own eyes 1) (26) And how 
could one form an estimate of the austerities performed by those (privileged) women who 
eat pleted agit? Teacher of the world (Bhagavan Sri Krsna) as their husband, 
ashe a ae washed His body, fed Him and served Him with other kinds of loving -

LG aa THATTET aa We: 1 ye rater Ygsestad, aa 12C1 
ame TH Ut oH Pee Tear | Se, Weareaea Alesse sraferen_ 1291 
Tat GRAMS TT: selec: | efeisge «= _ User arqyeiar: 1301 
Uhre Sl al HONS! Aaa ste arat srarentfatte: 1321 
qaTqeaatatoraB ez TERM: | Meagan «a «A UT 1321 
washessa dan wa Wlarst xAseafsangdcqisau:.133 | 
Ge 4 aases «=e: «Se: I feengideas afadata wa a 13x! 
wea was aa «Teles: | Nee aaa Sem: fuga efanuitga: 1341 
a oSfanot = eter eRe: | RTL, Adishregisyariegdaetrad: 135 | 
a aria ofan: ut Aiea SAR dd: | aseteMad Se Aleoraaalfea: 1301 
Tiersen, Aaa AAT: \ Yael: Weiaalsyeotaae + Add: 1321 
A Ma HS Wea SAAT sag: | aeargaiseuctatas areas GAT 1331 
deg det | faencedor eet A Maat Hay aatgdda 1Xo | 
fra: Fler: GeSOTASratarasl Al AAAAgHeraat: Parone ATL 1S | 
CEI Teal w: Beet ASA! SAAT Tsao A SAT: SR 
(Pariksit!) Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the (sole) refuge of (all) virtuous souls. Practising virtue 
as enjoined by the Vedas, He clearly demonstrated (to the world) more than once how (the 
three objects of life, viz.,) religious merit, prosperity and enjoyment of worldly pleasures could 
be attained by leading the life ofa householder. (28) Thatis why He had adopted the supreme 
Way of life of a householder. (O king, | have already told you that) the number of Sri Krsna‘s 
consorts was sixteen thousand, one hundred and eight; the principal eight of those jewels 
among women, Rukmini and others, as well as their offspring have already been named in 
Order of sequence. (29-30) The wives of Bhagavan Sri Krsna (other than these eight too) bore 
Him ten sons each. This should cause on wonder, the Lord is Almighty and of unfailing

resolution.(31) Of those sons of Si Krsna, all of whom possessed unbounded valour, 
eighteen were warriors of foremost rank and possessed excellent renown. Hear their names

LQLKAAMLELAAALNA ANAL HON KL KKK KAA Wr We Re Wx Re Kr Ke Br Kr My Ar Hr Kr Be Hr Ke Ar Ke Vr Kr Kr Br Wr Wr Br Ke Ke We Wr Wr Ke Ke Hr Ke Ke Ke Hr Sr Ay Rr Hr Hr Hr eneeene eS: 90 
Retr

from Me. (32) They were Pradyumna and Anirudaha, Diptiman and Bhanu, Samba, Madhu 
Brhadbhanu, Citrabhanu, Vrka, Aruna. Puskara and Vedabahu, Srutadeva, Sunandana. 
Citrabahu and Viripa, Kavi and Nyagrodha. (33-34) Pariksit, of these (eighteen) sons of Si 
Krsna (again) Pradyumna, born of Rukmini, was the first and foremost. He was equal to his 
father (in every respect). (35) Pradyumna, a great car-warrior, married Rukmi's daughter 
and out of that wedlock was born Aniruddha possessed of the strength of ten thousand 
elephants. (36) Aniruddha married the daughter of his own maternal uncle, Rukmi's son. 
Vajra was born out of this wedlock. He was the only survivor after the destruction (of Yadu's 
race) through the instrumentality of a piston (brought into existence by the curse of 
Brahmana sages). (37) Vajra's son was named Pratibahu, whose son was Subahu. 
Subahu's son was Santasena and his son was Satasena. (38) No one born in this race was 
destitute or weak, and none of them died early. All of them were devoted to the Brahmanas 
and possessed more sons than one. (39) O king, this race produced so many (famous and) 
distinguished men that it is not possible to enumerate them in tens of thousands of years. 
(40) | have heard that the number of teachers who taught the children of this race was three 
crore and eighty-eight lakh. (41) Who could tell the number of the high-souled Yadus in 
such circumstances? King Ugrasena alone was (always) accompanied by warriors 
numbering ten billions (10,000,000,000,000). (42)

carquededt «ada STRUT: 1A Ale Aq eM aq sare 1x31 
diated Shun skal cal Gal: Hei stadia: pod asdenieh Fz xx! 
Ta SAM Wa wyeaaMaE: 1a adakiaeta aqy: Udeleal: xu 
Wealeaalealolashishalanehag la fag: GAA GU: HOradca: ve | 
(Pariksit, in days of yore) many a terrible Asura was slain in the encounter between the 
gods and the Asuras; they were reborn among men. These proud and arrogant Asuras 
(reborn as human beings) began to molest the people. (43) In order to chastise and subdue 
them the gods under the direction of the Supreme Lord were born in the race of Yadu, O King! 
| This race was divided into one hundred and one families.(44) Bhagavan Sri Krsna was the 
ii sole guide and Lord of all the Yadus. All those Yadavas, who faithfully followed Him (and 
worked for Him) prospered (in everyway). (45) The mind of the Yadavas remained 
( constantly) fixed on Sri Krsna, so much so that they ‘lost consciousness of their body while 
sleeping, resting, walking, chatting, sporting, bathing and performing other duties (of their 
daily routine).(They carried on these functions like so many automatons.) (46)

ferenghra: deaaiqes asaahaat adaq ammeaq ixcl 
Pariksit ! the Ganga which washes the feet of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, is (certainly) very 
sacred. But, when the same Lord (the holiest of the holy) descended in'the race of Yadu, the 
glory of the Ganga naturally diminished as compared to the glory of His incomparable 
- fame.(How great, indeed, is the glory of the Lord's Form that) those wholovedHimandthos® 
who hated Him, both attained His state. Goddess Laksmi, who is sought after by other gods, 
keeps Herself (constantly) engaged in His service. His (auspicious) Name (once) hear dor

’ 
: 
° :

pis. 90 ] BOOKTEN

; gr fr Br Bx Br Br Bt Br Hr Sr Br Br Sr Br Br Sr 
SRR SD BAe fr tet tr etrtetet treetee ttt iceretre 
Ltt SS t.tts tees t ss tt ss 8

uttered Syne ee Of all forms of Dharma preachedand practised by the descendants 
of Ste areata (whic faye Sri Krsna is the founder (and fountaincReaeh He holds in His 
han ea Icnisa Symbol of the ever rotating wheel of Time the all-destroyer) 
airs Ba umstances, it is no wonder that He should relieve the burden of the earth 
fone © me). (47) Bhagavan Sri Krsna is the (sole) asylum of (all) beings. (He is 
ee eces everywhere, and yet) they say He manifested Himself from the womb of 
Devan unerLacaVva heroes (always) waited on Him (with joined palms). By (the strength of) 
His arms He put down (all) unrighteousness. (By His very nature, O king,) the Lord wipes out 
the sufferings of all mobile and immobile creatures. By His charming countenance full of 
winning smiles He kindled love into the hearts of (the women) of Vraja as well as of the towns 
He is the one conqueror of the whole world. (Victory to Him and Him alone !) (48)

4 We Porasiftrernssacitennitereqaafreent | 
eT UT se Edge 1xe | 
Tea FeTTET Ypasiepastauraldaraacaa | 
a SeNptaet ang at fafiysist age: 1401 
sta starred Het safest weet Sea cae sae 
MPOrARA Ta A AataaASAA: 10 |

(Pariksit !) the Supreme Person (who is beyond the realm of Prakrti) sportively assumed 
a (transcendental) Form with intent to vindicate the path of virtue chalked out by Himself, and 
enacted (many wonderful) sports appropriate to that Form. Everyone of His acts is capable 
of cutting asunder the bonds of Karma (of those who contemplate on it). He who:seeks to 
gain the privilege of serving the (lotus) feet of Bhagavan Sri Krsna, the crown-jewel of Yadus, 
Should (make it a point to) listen to the stories of His sports. (49) By listening to, chanting and 
contemplating on the charming stories of Bhagavan Sri Krsna every moment, man develops 
the devotion which leads him te the (supreme) sphere of the Lord. (True,) itis (most) difficult 
to reach beyond the jurisdiction of Time; but in the Lord's realm Time has no sway. Even 
rulers of the earth have left their kingdom and retired to the forest for (the performance of 
austerities with the object of) gaining that eternal realm. (Therefore, one should constantly

engage oneself in hearing the stories of the Lord.) (50) 
rege , sled " f rts of) Sri Krsna 
Thus ends the ninetieth discourse entitled “The Story of (the amorous spo 7 KFSI 
narrated," in the latter half of Book ten of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana,

nsa-Samhita d by the 
se known as the Paramahamsa: Samhita, compose 
sete Vedavyasa and consisting of eighteen thousand Slokas.

PREPS RRS NT

J

t pel 
~ eagee 
ax?

.

eee

i 
'

‘) 
7 
7 
‘ 
- 
: 
a 
ae. UF 
eh a

CS aan SESS. 
_ 5 oar. * #

UchIeRt: they: 
SID WAASATA:

The curse of the Rsis invoking the destruction of Yadu's race

Mog TAMA A 
Fal eaad HN: MIM aelida: | yalsannae wt Alay Aza Hie! g | 
Q afi: Wage Weg: WaedelteorHeaeoniahse | 
al fafaaatad: aaa ear aor fer. fafaseaiar: | 2 | 
yay 8 ae |=: «|S raTefeferaasaa: | 
Waist Wdisend fe wat aa aed Hose sifagaare | 3 | 
qarad: ukvdisa wad wafers frauds Feat 
Sicie aqHoe fama aueraa afafta anfaqu ami x | 
Wa Adiad Ws assed gat: 1 ween fast ais age fay: | 4 | 
SYA Claoavardaa Brad FON ite: Sat fad Teeatatal fepat: | & | 
Soe Sill Gach fatal GA F at | aAiscal aera BW varia: 1 9 | 
Sri Suka (son of Vedavyasa) began again : Attended by Balarama and the Yadavas; 
Sri Krsna destroyed the demons and, creating violent discord (between the Pandavas an 
the Kauravas) relieved the earth of her burden. (1) Making His instrument the Pandavas: 
whose ire had been repeatedly provoked by their enemies (the Kauravas), through deceitful 
gambling, humiliating insult, dragging (Draupadi) by the hair and in other ways, the Lord 
caused destruction of the kings gathered on both sides and (thus) relieved the earth of her 
burden. (2) Having thus annihilated the kings and their armies, who were a burden to the 
earth, through the Yadavas, protected by His own arms, the Lord of inscrutable way? 
thought:—"Though the burden of the earth has been removed, yet | do not take !t as 
(completely) removed so long as the unconquerable race of Yadu exists. (3) Having always 
been protected by Me, and grown uncontrollable through prosperity, this race of Yadu can

by no means be vanquished by others (even by gods). (Therefore,) just as a bamboo grove 
is consumed by fire (produced by the friction of the bamboos themselves), | shall destroy the

_ad

wit

_ babi BERG

-a &

aint) ways ang Pama re ng them, and (then) in peace shall return to My realm 
ss 2 : 1 a : 
brought about the annihilation of His ving thus resolved, the Lord of truthful resolution

; Own race throu 5 
pretext (or obvious cause). (5) Havin gh the curse of the Brahmanas as a

tn pe : 9 attracted the eyes of people by His (transcendent) 
ee a dispar aged beauty in others, and by His words the hearts of those wha 
remem 5 AAG dae suspending by (the sight of) His footprints the (movements and) 
actions O Se who Saw them: and having His fame spread in the world and sung in

charming verses and thinking that through such renown (when heard or sung) people would 
easily emerge from darkness the Lord retired to His realm. (6-7)

MATT 
TATA Sera Met Geer fesrena: ey quitat pertaTarL | CI 
afar: A a wat seat fara weeramt de ue ad aes aie |

The king (Pariksit) submitted : How did the curse of Brahmanas fall upon the Vrsnis, 
who were devoted to the Brahmanas, were liberal and always served their elders, and who 
had given their mind (in devotion) to Sri Krsna ? (8) O the best of Brahmanas ! what was the 
occasion of the curse, and what was its nature ? How did discord find place among those who 
were of one mind ? Do tell me all this. (9)

Myh Sara 
faue ay: Waodamaa antae wa qs: | 
SRN ATA TATU «Seen: Gadtasd che; feerdepasra: 101 
wait qaaaa qgela MaerticHeaemeater peal | 
loa add aacate usr aM ytat Prager: 122! 
fasnftorstaa: qual gafat waetser: | Haat amealstadtasr ANG: 1221 
Hist «= HAN Agra: Sue eet feria 1231 
y asirar alae: ara areadtqaa wat gefa at fas sradcafadanm ex! 
38 faesdt mana saeteeght: | Seterit Grea feakad aertaeata 134 
Ud woe wae: Baa qa i safaera at Wal Wao Hoey 1261 
Te Asher fer MEMS! AVA SETAE YH) TTR | 89 | 
fe aa maura: fs afgeaha at ot: i git fer@foat Aarne YAS aq: 1X¢1 
adedta wef uernqeie: iat sndemeg: adarectefaen 1eet 
sari fsa at a gee Wife sare ayYaEcleha: 120 
apie yas agua: a STeeh: | MARA Wreaieele aAretaartanry 122 1 
aren udteste aot aoeld: | SOA AoA Hara, feneetent: 1221 
Wea Welt Acetate: qeiota | aRNawTd GIS A Wed GelcHlsautel 123! 
amanda saarsfa qeaM aed Aed fasend aAeeraniad 12x! 
; efit SfteaTa FETA TAGE VfeaTAMPCAHA HAASE: 12

Sri Suka replied : Exhibiting a form embodying all graces in the world, performing most

auspicious actions with (all) His desires (ever) gratified, enjoying Himself in His cit | 
(Dwaraka), the Lord of widely established fame desired to destroy His race as that was the 
only work left unaccomplished (by Him). (10) The Lord had performed highly auspicious 
deeds, which (when sung) bring holiness and destroy the sins of the Kali age in those that 
sing them. Now He was residing in the house of Vasudeva as the Destroyer. He bade farewey 
to the sages—Viswamitra, Asita, Kanva, Durvasa, Bhrgu, Angira, Kasyapa, Vamadeva, Atri, 
Vasistha, Narada and others, and they went away to (the holy place of) Pindaraka (near 
Dwaraka). (11-12) The Yadava youths, while sporting (there), approached them and with 
mock humility clasped their feet and impudently asked them a question. (13) Having attireg 
Jambavati's sons, Samba; as a woman, they said (to the Rsis); "O Brahmanas of unfailing 
vision, this pregnant woman of dark eyes, soon to give birth to a child, and desiring to bring 
forth a son, wishes to know if she will give birth to a son or a daughter. She (however) feels 
shy to ask you directly." (14-15) O king, the sages, who were thus imposed upon, got angry 
and said to them: "O fools, she will give birth to a pestle which will destroy your race !" (1 6) 
Greatly terrified to hear that (curse), they at once bared the belly of Samba and actually found 
a pestle of iron there. (17) "What have we, unfortunate fellows, done ? What will people say 
(of us) ?" Thus perplexed, they returned home with the pestle. (18) With sad and pale faces 
they brought the pestle in the court, and in the presence of all the Yadavas narrated the 
(whole) incident to their king (Ugrasena). (19) O king, hearing about the unfailing curse of 
the sages and seeing the pestle (all) the inhabitants of Dwaraka were struck with wonder and 
got alarmed through fear. (20) Ahuka (Ugrasena), the said king of the Yadavas, got the pestle 
reduced to powder and thrown into the water of the sea. The remaining iron piece of the pestle 
(which could not be powdered) was also thrown (into the sea). (21) Some fish swallowed that 
iron piece, while the particles of the powder were borne by the waves to and deposited on 
the shore, where they grew into a kind of grass called Eraka. (22) The fish was caughtin the 
4 net alongwith other fishes in the sea by some fisherman. The iron piece found in its stomach 
ir was fixed to the point of his arrow by a hunter. (23) The Lord knew the whole truth and (being 
i almighty) had the power to nullify the curse of the sages; but He did not like to render it 
ineffectual. (On the other hand) He approved of it, being Himself the Destroyer. (24)

ee Thus ends the first discourse, in Book Eleven of the great | 
: and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known | 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

DSIRE SIS

31g Tedrarseara:

Discourse II 
Narada visits Vasudeva and reproduces the dialogue between

King Janaka and the nine Yogi$waras 
SAA

Tercera gait Bese! Salaianestent qari: |e | 
el I Witten Year a | ast, «Sad geeoTeraae: | 2 | 
weg g cai ageat yermmmiskht qaadwafiaeradit! 2 |

ge Be RCAC Re We We Wee We ee Me He we We We We He tases nnnnnn OOK ELEVEN 
wr

ri Suka began again - usd 
Pada very trequentiee } : raha fine best of the Kurus) ! eager to wait upon Sri Krsna, 
O king ! what mortal man, oe Shectabe wale was protected by the arms of Govinda. (1) 
lotus-feet of Lord Mukunda, which g sound senses, would possibly neglect to worship the

are fit to be adored b ql 
z Ff y the best of gods (Brahma and 
others) ? (2) On one occasion, when Narada (the divine sage) came to His ae and had

worshipped an 
peen BP d comfortably seated, Vasudeva greeted him and spoke thus:—(3) 
Wat Wadi waa 
| aa Reefer uUTAt sen fietemectenaciars |X 
es 7 SS 4 Gee agar fe wept aeEATATL! & 
aT cart cat aft ada am wa artafeen: aera deacon: 1 & | 
L AMTAATS | AGA SMT He Gat Mala | © 
ae fae Wid sone yf qnai suet a mera wed Ramer c | 
aet fafereree daft Gan Cetarsl dea a: anf Waa <I 
Vasudeva submitted : O venerable sage, (just) as the movement of parents is 
conducive to the welfare of children, and that of pious persons treading the path of the 
glorious Lord is meant for the good of those bound by worldly attachments, your visit is a 
blessing to all creatures. (4) The conduct of the deities may conduce both to the happiness 
and misery of created beings; but the conduct of pious souls devoted to Lord Visnu like you 
promotes their happiness only. (5) The deities, acting like one's own shadow, serve their 
worshippers even as the latter worship them, following the course of their Karma. Saints 
(however) are compassionate towards the afflicted (irrespective of their Karma). (6) All the 
same, O holy Brahmana, we request you to tell us those Dharmas (righteous courses) which 
delight the Lord, and hearing of which with faith the mortal man is rid of all fear. (7) Indeed, 
in my previous birth in this world | worshipped the immortal Lord, who grants Liberation, forthe 
sake of progeny, but not for (the boon of) emancipation, deluded as | was by His Maya. (8) O 
sage of noble vows, so instruct us that through you we may surely and easily be rid of (this) 
worldly existence full of manifold misery and beset with fear on all sides. (9)

Sy SATA 
Tag past agqear eaaisicemne alter: aekat WI: 1201 
sri S -O ki i i d vividly 
Sri Suka continued : O king ! questioned thus by the wise Vasudeva, an 
reminded (thereby) of the Lord's qualities, the divine sage (Narada) felt (much) pleased and

Said to him (as follows): (10) ae

ae ceafe «| Maa | AAT | SS APTS ees ra 18 8 | 
saisquisdt ama ana atgitfen: we: gait want ea fragetshe fe 1221 
wre UCT; uaaUTaatda: | eft eee Sat ATA AA 13 | 
srareqarecatiatinfaeret GUAT! STs A ale FaeeT Alcs: 1x1 
fend ara gat AA: Re A: | ceMetea A ETA:| AA: 1R 4 
a chereriragen | stacitot Yaad TRIG HATTA 1 NG

5 aoa: | fret ARNG AAA AINA 1891 
iy f we ee aie | soreitetrealt ON a srafyfats: 1221

We We Re We Me Se Me REE Re He Re RR ee RR REE ee We We Ke We Ke Vee He Hee He Mee Me Ke We We We We We Mr Mee Hee Hie He He Be WEB He He We He Hey, 
Wem

Jsi ava aAaguuddisel add: | Hdd UWenlaititfesttaa: 12 |

qamaq nee «ya oaeeifaa: ison aaa Stetfarentfaranze: 120)

aiaekedka: Sae: fae: isnfagaisa gfamsae: AAG: 129)

qa Wa wnat fat aanaletHd| sMeisattatau wad Sa AE 1221

aed sda: Giiagareradaarttenatcaniencar | 
Gand aaauydaeatanentssrtat Yea AMA 1231

a wea fa: waaqusmadesar | fanaa Hee: 12% |

a St Qader AIAN FA: | asaMisaat fam: ad walaaher 12k

faceernissa ARTAUTARTAUT I Sit: AUS Sieh STAARI. Bada: 12E 1

dH Vasa Be AMAA Aaa wastd: swaeaAd FA: 121 
Narada replied : O Vasudeva (the foremost of the Yadavas) ! you have resolved well to 
have inquired me about the virtues and duties that delight the Lord and purify all. (11) Heard 
of or talked about, dwelt upon, accepted with reverence or (even) approved (when practised 
by others), this righteous course purifies at once without doubt even those who are hostile 
to the deities, nay, to all creatures. (12) | have been reminded by you today of the almighty 
Lord Narayana, who is most auspicious and whose name, when heard or sung, brings 
merit.(13) In this connection the wise narrate the following ancient legend embodying a 
conversation between the sons of Rsabha and the high-souled Janaka (the king of the 
Videhas).(14) Priyavrata, the well-known son of Swayambhuva Manu, had a son called 
Agnidhra—of whom was born Nabhi, whose son was known as Rsabha. (15) The wise 
declare that Rsabha descended (on earth) for popularizing the cult (of renunciation) leading 
to Liberation, and that he had an element of Lord Vasudeva in him, He had a hundred sons, 
who were (all) well-versed in the Vedas. (16) Of them the eldest son was Bharata. He was 
really a devotee of Lord Narayana. It is after him that this wonderful land (sub-continent) 
came to be known. (17) After enjoying the pleasures of this world he renounced it and left 
his home and, worshipping Lord Hari through askesis for three (consecutive) births, finally 
attained His state. (18) Out of those (ninety-nine younger brothers of Bharata), nine became 
the rulers of the nine Dwipas surrounding Bharatavarsa. And eighty-one became Brahmanas 
and authors of treatises on ritual acts, while (the remaining) nine became highly blessed 
sages. Having laboured in the domain of knowledge of Self, the latter propounded the highest 
truth and, living naked, became adepts in spiritual knowledge. (19-20) Theirnames are: KavI, 
Hari, Antariksa, Prabuddha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa, and Karabhajana.(21) 
These sages beheld the universe, gross as well as subtle (the cause and its mutations) as 
identical with the Lord and without distinction from themselves, and wandered over the 
earth.(22) They go wherever they like as their path is unobstructed. They freely range over 
the regions of the gods, Siddhas, Sadhyas, Gandharvas, Yaksas, men, Kinnaras, Nagas; 
ascetics, Caranas, Bhairavas, Vidyadharas, Brahmanas and cows. (Being liberated souls); 
they had no attachment for any place or beings. (23) On one occasion they went of their own 
accord to attend a sacrificial performance of King Nimi, an enlightened soul, which was being 
conducted by Rsis in (that region of Jambidwipa called) Ajanabha (the old name of 
Bharatavarsa). (24) O king (Pariksit), seeing those sages, effulgent like the sun and (so 
earnestly devoted to the Lord, the sacrificer (Nimi), the (sacred) fires and the Brahmanas 
(who were performing the rites) all rose to welcome them. (25) Knowing them to be (great) 
devotees of Lord Narayana, King Nimi felt (much) delighted (to see them). When they had 
been seated, he duly worshipped them in the order of their seniority. (26) The nine sages

were resplendent with their own lustre, like the sons of Brahma (Sanaka and others). King 
Nimi was greatly delighted to see them. Bent low with humility he put questions to them (as

follows). (27) 
face Sara 
WY WTad: Man User at Rees: | fawitsfer otert rear arta fe 1221 
gout Aral tat afi SUITS: Lea ght oa Aqusfraesia 1291 
a Seite aa Gert sadism: | Cashes atorelisht Aer: SaaUM 130 | 
ai APTA Fel ale A: aa arm a: wea: wow ereenenamaa: 1321 
King Nimi said : | conclude you to be the direct attendants of Lord Visnu (the Destroyer 
of the demon Madhu); for (I know) His devotees go about the worlds to purify them. (28) The 
human body is a rare boon to embodied souls and that too is very transient. In the human 
life too it is very rarely that one meets the devotees of the Lord. (29) O pious souls, we, 
therefore, ask you what leads to everlasting bliss. In this world association with pious souls 
(like you) even for half a momentis (indeed) like a treasure to human beings. (30) If we are

qualified to hear of them, (pray) tell us those righteous duties and observances sacred to the 
Lord, pleased with which that birthless Lord confers His very Self upon His votary. (31)

SARE SATA 
wa a fiat gst agea dewm: | sftqeamaad Me aaeeedst 401321 
Narada continued : O Vasudeva, questioned thus by King Nimi, the worshipful sages

complimented the king, his priests and the supervisors of the sacrifice, and gladly spoke (by 
turns as follows). (32)

Placard 
HUSH sear Wreraquianraaaa Free | 
sergercerasare. «Ss fame Ga (Geri? Cs 13 
a a aad shel soe Meee | ae: Gamtaas fate amar fe ar 13% 
GARMAN Wer A Weld aHlefac! Mad Maier al Aa A Hae Udies 1341 
ead art webstat 9 qeaissaa 8 aqydeaMaldd | 
mit a a Wee WH Aaa wadaad 1361 
aa fadtarfsifaard: edlenedeer = faueiatsegic: 1 
Tae «= aC TT Cee) Weta 13091 
sfaemmisaasia fe saeatgffar wsedeet gen | 
ad adagciiancis att get feeaeyat dd: E12! 
swat qual wigaosint anit a aft we | 
aif 4 ara «ecient «0a faett «Ss fete: 1391 
vasa: 9 Sfearmateat | eget afer SE 
gaat = -_ Welter Uf mMmagqaeaqeaa Chala: 1¥o | 
@ aaa aie wa a sadie await fet gre! 
peagisy «RCN, OTM: Ive

afm: wera fates as fie Unanle: | 
TOA «| asId: «= RS: «OB: «= AUTAISTETTAL I? 
Sereqaetet WAM SATA afnatkndtacsate: | 
qaka & wMmaqe wie: wi wmbraqtfa manixat

Kavi said : | believe that, for the man whose mind is always agitated by mistaking this

worthless body etc., for one's own self, worship of the Lord's lotus-feet is the safest course 
in that through such worship (all) fear completely disappears. (33) All those courses of 
conduct which were actually taught by the Lord Himself for His own Realization without much 
exertion even by the ignorant, surely know them as conducive to His pleasure. (34) O king, 
resorting to those courses a man would never go astray; even if he follows them running (in 
a desultory way) or with closed eyes (ignorantly), he would not stumble or take a false 
step.(35) Whatever he does with his body, tongue, mind or senses, reason or intellect or by 
the force of his inherited nature, he should consecrate all as an offering to the supreme Lord 
Narayana. (36) He who has turned away from the Lord loses the memory (of his real self), 
thanks to His Maya, and falls a prey to the erroneous belief that the body is one's own self. 
He is then seized with fear engendered by identification with the body (which is other than 
the self). Therefore, a discerning person should worship Him with exclusive devotion, looking 
upon his preceptor as the Deity as well as his own self. (37) Though duality has no (real) 
existence, it does appear like a dream or mental image to the mind of one who dwells upon 
it. Therefore, a wise man should control that mind from which proceed ideations and doubts. 
Fearlessness will follow from it. (88) (Therefore) hearing of the most auspicious descents and 
deeds of Sri Hari (the Wielder of the discus) and singing His names denoting His descents 
and actions, well-known in the world, without any fear of being mocked at, one should move 
about free from attachment. (39) The man who, having adopted such a course of conduct, 
develops love for Him by singing the names of his beloved Lord, his heart melting in devotion, 
loudly laughs and weeps, screams, sings or dances like one possessed, transgressing 
conventions. (40) With exclusive devotion he bows to the sky, air, fire, water, earth, heavenly 
bodies, living beings cardinal points, trees and the like, rivers and seas and all created 
beings, considering them as the body of the Lord. (41) As one who eats (food) feels satisfied, 
gets nourishment and relief from hunger with every morsel, (similarly) in him who has 
resigned himself to the Lord, devotion, realization of the supreme Lord and aversion to other 
objects—all the three appear at once. (42) In the votary of God O king, who worships 
uninterruptedly as aforesaid the feet of Sri Hari (the immortal Lord) Devotion, a distaste for 
the enjoyments of the world and direct knowledge of God appear (simultaneously); and 
through them he directly attains (the state of) supreme peace. (43)

UAHNATA 
aa Utad Aq aga Aaa qi ae ata aa qa AfSesiratera: 1sv!

The king (Nimi) submitted : Now (kindly) describe the characteristics of the Lord's 
devotee among men, his disposition and course of conduct, how he behaves and what he 
speaks, and the distinctive traits which make him the favourite of the Lord. (44)

ERCaTaA 
aayey 8: URde WaSe: | y | oWaeeraS | Tada: 184! 
Smt deity aes fea ai dateiqaden a: wiht a wer: 1¥6! 
aaa RA US a: Aeded | A dehy UPVg @ Ww: Wend: Bt Ivy!

. dance) can never appear again. (54)

Dis. 2 ] 
ge Be Be BCRCH HEME He HEM Bee He He He semnmswenEMNmEREM OOK ELEVEN 523 
SASK VKKMAKKKKTKKEKMKMAKNTKMKKRAHKEAeAKRHENHHaHeR

et Hl weal | fanaa uaa a UNTaAAAA: 1SS1 
ee N at WUTTA ASAT eas: |

ee megiigdt oa: a suet oe SatletSchaa: 14% |

frgait wet 3 ce mraraficagnfifedtsertere: |

TTR eer: Wa walt wtaqsea SA: 14k! 
aid ASMA ASM Tee AearaeecareHy fetaSeaa: 121

Hari said : He is the foremost of the Lord's devotees, who sees himself established in 
all creatures as in the Lord (himself), and sees (all) creatures established in his own self as 
in the Divine Soul. (45) The votary who cherishes love for the Lord, is friendly to other 
devotees of the Lord, compassionate to the ignorant, and indifferent to his enemies, is a 
second-rate votary (because he discriminates among these classes, whereas the one 
described in the previous verse makes no discrimination). (46) He who does worship to the 
Lord with faith in an image only and does not serve His devotees and other beings is an 
Ordinary devotee. (47) He who sees the universe as (a creation of) Visnu’s Maya and, even 
though contacting the objects with his senses, neither experiences delight nor repulsion is 
indeed a devotee of the highest order. (48) He is the foremost devotee of the Lord, who by 
virtue of his (constant) remembrance of Sri Hari is never overwhelmed by mundane 
properties, (viz.,) birth and death, hunger (and thirst), fatigue, fear and ardent longing, which 
(really) belong to the body, vital air, senses, mind and intellect (and never to the Self). (49) 
He is undoubtedly the foremost devotee of the Lord, in whose mind the craving for enjoyment, 
the impulse for action and the seeds of future incarnation (inthe shape of virtue and sin) never 
Sprout, and to whom Lord Visnu is the only resort. (50) He is indeed beloved of the Lord, who 
never identifies himself with this body by virtue of his birth and pursuits, grade In society, race 
Or Stage of life. (51) He is the best among the devotees of the Lord, who makes no distinction — 
between his own and that belonging to others in the matter of his possessions and body. He 
looks upon all created beings with an equal eye ands (always) calm. (52) He is the foremost 
of the votaries of Lord Visnu, whose memory of the Lord is ever fresh, and who even for the 
Sovereignty of all the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) and even for 
half the time taken by the twinkling of an eye does not turn away from (the adoration of) oa 
Lords's lotus-feet, which are sought after by the gods and others whose mind is fixed on the 
invincible Lord. (53) Just as with the rising of the moon the heat of the an peas 2 
the fever in the devotee's heart, (once) banished by the cool lustre shed by the gem- ? e ie s 
Of the Lord's feet taking long strides (while dancing. with the devotee as during the Rasa 
The name of the Lord is such that, even when uttered 
oys multitudinous sins. That manis called the best

unde nsciously, it destr | 
of dovietacs witceameee the tad Himself does not leave as His lotus-feet are fastened by

the cord of Love. (55)

Thus ends the second discourse in Book Eleven of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PI-ISES Sm

BAM Tataseara:

Discourse III 
A Description of Maya and the means of transcending it;

an exposition of Brahma and the Path of Action 
UAT 
Te faite afar ale art afeqtrearmt smedt gad 4:1 2 1 
TH WS aset efter wae | AeA 2

The king (Nimi) submitted : We wish to know the (true nature of) Maya (the deluding 
potency) of the supreme Lord Visnu, which bewilders even those who are adepts in Maya 
(conjuring tricks). You revered sirs may (kindly) tell us of it. (1) | am a mortal sore afflicted 
by the sorrows of the world. Hearing your words narrating the nectar-like story of Sri Hari, 
which are the antidote for such afflictions, | do not feel satiated (desire to hear them again

and again). (2) 
STIR Jaq 
Way WAI Ayddeyst| Pasian: warrantee | 2 | 
wa get ania sfap: usrengie: | une eaenssam favsaqud qr! X | 
THON A YA siewselfad: WY: AA «se | UEUAe aaa! 4 | 
emi ata: pda ates eeydl dad. as Wed wade qaaml & | 
sa dts ACME: WAI syaea alsoaayasaa: | 9 | 
aga Ada Akh FSM! saileae: Het wWelnreamaHesta | ¢ | 
aaa |= eqisdiasraraon )8=—- far | aemreaferarenrant clentelta Satara |e | 
Ue eocdteoae sz aguuIqUaMe: | ceqedienat fagn acid araafa: 120! 
Madar AM atid Bt Bd AAI: | aafiehaeenfetad alec fare 12?! 
at feed aust: ysat ai stern faa gat fem game: 122! 
ag etre y: aeeata aeadi dies daw sifaprataencad 123! 
ated q Adal arial <sailfa: usted | gaeaiisamer ariufa «clad 12%! 
AICI EA AM sna Gladistsenfot wat ake: ae Acne | 
Meira Meg ht SANSA 12% | 
Tear Wat Wiad: aifwerdahont | faut afetarenth: far ye: straferaste 126!

ntariksa said : : oe 
Bren figuring is nd oom A ee one; Maya is that energy by which the most ancient 
lements (all) forms of life € of (the entire) creation, evolved with the help of these gross 
2 is (His particle : great and small, forthe enjoyment and emancipation of embodied 
eae ller on 1 f S). (3) Having thus (for the good of the Jivas) entered (as the Inner 
Controle b ke orms of life evolved by means of the five gross elements, the Supreme 
Reisen Spits Himsa Op (and appears first) as one (in the form of the mind) and (further) into 
ten (in the form of the ten Indriva = 
lindrlyas) and makes them (the Jivas) enjoy the (various) pleasures 
(throu gh them). (4) Enjoying the (various) pleasures of sense by means of the senses 
illuminated by the (said) Inner Controller, the embodied soul identifies itself with this created 
body and gets attached to it. (5) Performing with the organs of action actions prompted by 
interested motives and reaping the agreeable and disagreeable consequences of his varied 
actions (of past lives), the embodied soul revolves in this whirligig (of mundane life). (6) Thus 
undergoing (various) forms of existence brought about by his (past) actions and carrying 
many evils (with them), the soul helplessly goes through (repeated) births and deaths till the 
final dissolution of creation. (7) When the dissolution of the (five gross) elements is imminent, 
the Time-Spirit, endless and without beginning, actually draws the manifest universe, 
consisting of gross and subtle matter, towards the Unmanifest (primordial Matter). (8) (Then) 
there appears on earth a dreadful drought lasting for a hundred years. The sun with its heat 
increased by the said Time-Spirit torments the three worlds. (9) A (huge and terrible) fire 
rising from the (thousand) mouths of Sankarsana (the serpent-god) and, burning everything 
from the bottom of the subterranean world, shoots up in high flames and, propelled by the 
wind, spreads in all directions. (10) The host of clouds charged with universal dissolution 
pour down showers, as thick as the trunk of an elephant, for one hundred years (without 
pause) with the result that the cosmos is submerged in water. (11) Then, leaving his cosmic 
body, O protector of men, Brahma (the cosmic person) gets merged in the Unmanifest 
(Brahma), just as fire enters its unmanifest state (gets extinguished) when divested of 
fuel.(12) Denuded of its (distinctive quality) smell by the wind, the earth is reconverted into 
the state of water; and, deprived by the same of taste, water is reduced to the state of fire.(1 3) 
Deprived of (its attribute, viz.,) colour by darkness, fire gets merged into the air; and, deprived 
of (its quality of) touch by ether, the air merges into the latter (ether, its cause). (14) Deprived 
of (its quality of) sound by God in the form of the Time-Spirit, ether gets merged into the — 
(Tamasika) ego. The senses and the intellect, O king, merge In the ego of passion, and the 
mind with the deities born of the illuminated ego merges into the knowledge of the Self. The 
ego with its triple modification merges into the Mahat-tattva, which in its turn merges Into 
Prakrti or the elemental Nature and this (ultimately) merges into Brahma. (15) We have 
described (for you) the Lord's triple Maya (comprising of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) ee 
Creates, sustains and annihilates (the creation). What else do you desire to hear ? (16)

asaret 
dade o mrat | gegen: ewe: Weert wet FATT 1k

d-: It may (kindly) be pointed out (tome now), O eminent sage, 
s body as their self may easily get over this divine Maya, (So) 
have not been able to control their mind. (17)

WIG SAA 
anaaaniet eae Fas aq 1 uae Urenfarata etter omy 1 kc! 
fenfier fara STATI | TRITATAT TM: apt Sif: arfertsres: 1831

The king (Nimi) submitte 
how men looking upon the gros 
difficult to cross for those who

TW we WW feat aden! ages ae Husmafdary io!

qa WS Wedd fgg: Fa STAA! seg WL a Mend Taoqaarsay 122 |

qa UTaa wala fide Yaladad: | saa Aqelarenssseal |: 1221

Gad AAaISaSHa VE A AMY aa wat sex a yoga aetfer ia

sia aude a aa weaansiaqi saedaat a wad sedaal: 12x

aeaararataat Saad | fafareiaet ae SH Safer 1241

Tel UNTad waeaseaaaa «ala felsaetsdcus GD aa wWaenraft ire!

ga ait Bd wtedEd: iad a aadishandieaz ire

SB ad at wa ad sete: fre! eRe aa Te La ee aT RCI

Wa PONAA_ AASIH aD weeiaieal asst wed FW aay_ re

UNH Ulda wae: i faet vwdattiergMaiitia sine: 1301

ed: Was fietsatret she Vaan Sadat Ma favor Aa 1321

aie wetefada wfeata aeha aati: | 
qr Wailers ward quit aaa feat: 1321

Sat AMTad Gals ra ASM ASAT LATTA SENT 1331 
Prabuddha replied : One must observe how human beings living in pairs (as husband 
and wife) striving to gain happiness and remove misery obtain only contrary results. (18) 
What happiness can be derived from wealth, which is (so) difficult to obtain and can be 
earned only by means of constantly painful effort and which leads to one's death ? Or, what 
joy can one get from the possession of houses, children. friends or relations and cattle, 
transient as they are, and the fruit of one's actions ? (19) Similarly one should realize that the 
heavenly regions are also transient (and full of misery), their attainment being the fruit of 
one's actions; (and there too as in this world) there is rivalry with the superior ones, mutual 
discord among the equals and hatred towards those inferior to one's own self and fear of a 
fall, as there is here among chieftains. (20) Therefore, one desirous of knowing the highest 
good should resort to a preceptor who is versed in the Vedas (which embody Brahma in the 
form of words), has realized the ultimate Reality and who is free from attachment and 
hatred.(21) Under the preceptor, whom one should love as one's own self and as the object 
of one's devotion, one should, by rendering devoted service to him, learn the ways of life of 
the Lord's devotees, by which Sri Hari is pleased—Sri Hari, who is the Soul of the universe 
and gives Himself away to His devotees. (22) First the disciple should learn detachment of

the mind from all objects (body, children etc.), and attachment to the Lord's devotees. An 
he should also learn to cherish in all sincerity compassion, friendliness and humility towards 
one's inferiors, equals and superiors respectively. (23) He should (further) learn (to acquire) 
purity (external and internal), devotion to his religious duties, endurance, control over his 
speech, a habit to study the scriptures, sincerity, continence, non-violence and evenness of 
mind under the stress of dualities (like pleasure and pain, profit and loss). (24) He shoul

learn to see the Atma (as the intelligent substance) and I§wara (the Ruling Principle) 
pervading all, live in solitude, without any sense of possession for any dwelling, wear pure 
clothing or rags (stitched together) and feel satisfied with whatever he could get for food. (25) 
He should (also) learn to have faith in the scriptures celebrating the Lord, without disparaging 
other scriptures, and curb his mind, speech and actions (through control of breath, tongue 
and activity respectively), and to be truthful and able to control the senses and mind. (26) He

Dis. 3 ]

seneeteneeensneerentesttteeees:evescesnenraes apse 
SERB RB BER He ERM HEHE Me Me Me Me a er eee 
BE Be We We We Ke We We We We Hee ee er ee He Be

Ord all his sacrificial activities, gifts, austerities, 
us conduct, and all that he likes for himself, (nay,)

u (28) He should also learn to love devotedly those 
persons who have realized Sri Krsna as their own Self and as the Lord of their life: Rf serve

HE A aes ae anid arc tures (as the embodiments of the Lord); and (specially) to serve

g nem more specially those who adhere to their own duty and are 
devotees of the Lord. (29) He should (further) learn to expound and discuss among the 
devotees the sacred glory of the Lord, and in association with others find delight and 
satisfaction resulting in the freedom of the mind from egotism. (30) (Thus) remembering and 
reminding one another of Sri Hari, who destroys innumerable sins (in an instant), their 
devotion turning Into divine love, the devotees filled with rapture experience a thrill of joy.(31) 
Sometimes they weep due to the anguish of separation from Sri Hari, sometimes they laugh 
and rejoice and address Him (as if He were present by their side), indulge (joyfully) in dancing 
and singing, and sometimes thinking of the birthless Lord feel that they have reached the 
Supreme Person, and (thereby) become peaceful and silent. In this way their behaviour 
becomes altogether unconventional. (32) Thus learning (and following) the ways of life of the 
Lord's devotees and devoted to Him, his devotion developing into divine love, the devotee 
easily crosses the unfathomable Maya. (33)

his wife, children, house and his very life.

ARTO = AIT: 3S Oe: | Pes Al awh gat fe welfare: 13x! 
The king (Nimi) said : O sages, since you are foremost among those who have realized 
Brahma (the Ultimate Reality), pray, explain to us the real nature of Paramatma or Brahma, 
who is called by the name of Narayana. (34)

area Sara 
PO ee eat MC CEE IMEC CG ICS 
Sheree «oma aa welfamit dacfe ae AtRIR4I 
Saar fafa ane aaren sMifseniot a sarees: eT: | 
aastt atanteacssqeaatete det A freefate: 1261 
aa we sf faceael at aemefia sacha silat

aaa Ula Wee al: We aq ize 
sya waa A Afeata Aerisat 7 atta Metre atrenkon fe 
ada waeqraeiernast wot aaa tania Ad l3cl

aaq afrg aegfariaeg sot fe sfaqueraia da | 
aa afetzrmiset a Sqa Ree sreaga dagepfrt: 1381

AR oaA Waar Jaret fade Words | 
| afer ARPS SIHAA HS MTG AMTAMIGAM: Ter AHTA: sol a 
Pippalayana said : O ruler of men, know that to be the supreme Reality, which is 
responsible for the creation, sustenance and dissolution of this universe; and itself has no 
cause of its own: and that which exists in (all the three states of consciousness—) waking 
| upra-conscious state. (beyond the aforesaid

life, d leep, as well as in the s : 
three Stet onde tates by which the body, senses, breath and the inner mind (existand) :

6 4 = We Se

We We ewe ewe Re Re We RE Re RRR RR RRR RRR Re Ree eee eee We Wee ee ee ee Wewew: WeVe we x,

perform their functions. (35) Just as sparks cannot illumine, much less burn, fire (which is 
their origin), the mind, speech, eye, intellect, life-breath and senses cannot grasp or reach 
the ultimate Reality. The revealed word (Veda) too makes no positive assertion about Its 
though it is the (only) authority for Its existence. By denying itself the power to describe It, 
it speaks of It (merely) by import (inference). No negative description (however) would be 
possible if there were no Reality. (36) That which was one before creation became known 
as Pradhana (or Prakrti) of triple nature, consisting of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. Then by its 
active power it became known as the Sitratma and by its power of understanding it became 
known as the Mahat-tattva. (Again,) as a condition investing the Jiva or individual soul it 
became known as Ahankara (the ego). The incomprehensible Brahma alone shines as the 
deities presiding over the senses, the senses and the objects of senses and the experience 
of pleasure and pain. The (gross) effect and the (subtle) cause are all Brahma, because It 
is the Cause of both. (37) This Atma (Brahma) was never born and will never die, It neither 
grows nor undergoes decay, because It is the witness of the different states of those objects 
which come into existence and die away. It is omnipresent and eternally abiding pure 
consciousness; yet like Prana (life-breath) It appears as many under the influence of the 
senses. (38) The vital air, as a matter of fact, follows everywhere the Jiva, whether born of 
€gg, womb, sweat or sprung out of soil, and itself remains unchanged in the different bodies. 
(Even so) the Atma too remains unaffected (in the state of sound sleep) when the senses 
are oblivious and also when the ego is dormant, i.e., the subtle body has become 
functionless. (Its continuity even atthat time is proved by the fact that) we remember the Atma 
(on waking as the witness of the enjoyment of sound sleep). (39) Just as the light of the sun 
shines to clear eyes, so the truth of the Self is directly revealed to the pure heart of the man 
who is earnestly devoted to the Lord and intensely desires to obtain His holy feet, and has 
thus freed his mind from the impurities born of qualities and actions. (40)

{ eda dad 4: Geet a4 Wend: | faqaer awalfer tenet faced we ixel 
| T sags odeaages «86 fgthach | age, ASI: UAT HOTS I?

| The king submitted : (Pray) describe for us that Yoga of action through which man in 
1

| 
| 
| 
i his present life soon destroys his Karma and, thus purified, attains that supreme knowledge | 
i? which follows dissociation from all actions. (41) Formerly, in the presence of my father | 
(Ikswaku) | putthis question to the Rsis (Sanatkumara etc.); but those Rsis (sons of Brahma) 
did not answer it. (Pray,) tell me why they did not reply. (42)

Sara 
eMieticetia aemel a olf: | dam Baer at waht ea: 1¥3! 
Wigael 8 adaisd 8 MOMMAMeA | aden coaiior fat ue ae ive 
Tee Fe adkh waagisitdtsa: ifaedon geriot qebdagif a: 1s! 
acheta gait 8 feagisieiats temat ona fate tecrat mesa: <6!

Avirhotra said : Actions enjoined by the scriptures, prohibitions as opposed to the 
former and transgressions of the prescribed ones are to be known only from the Vedas an 
are not (mere) secular affairs; and as the Vedas are the revelations of God, (even) the 
learned get confused in distinguishing the three kinds of actions. (If the Rsis did not reply to 
your question, obviously the reason was that at that time you were a mere lad and would n° 
have understood the answer.) (43) The Veda has a deeper import than what the wor 2

oo

CE

LAME, Bd i

: Bild. eRe

Dis. 3 ]

apparently convey. The rea] purp

create interest in actions (The prescribed acti rence: 
getting ultimately freedom from actions), aaa and their fruits are described really for

a sy eaaate fistetf: ome: | ffitoete 8d aaa a Sig 
Celie Braid aA erahinri:-amaseetnctet ae 
we, Tea: | urea: | fos faeiter deareepaattschekaher xe t 
araiat wea arf germina: | geaferererfese ht reaver ster area 140 | 
Ureatqaencana afar aartea: | gereth: PIAA FSAAT Arata 1&2! 
agai aarsel ai at Olt Ward: | Ureetteratterel: SMaRAayast: 1421 
TRIAS ATS aaa: | Og weaysa faftad. aa: Meal Age 143 | 
STAM aaa ara Alt Aste: | Bearer fa Wareaqgra Wend 14s

Varadan «6 ea CS Lasdienmenaferger «=f: 14 
Sit AEM AST UAE StediaAcHleakhea TaaSeATA: 13 |

Whoever wishes to snap quickly the knot of heart (viz., egotism—the sense of | and 
mine—and mistaking the body for the soul) in the soul, who is no other than the Supreme, 
should with Vedic rites, accompanied by Tantric rites, worship Lord Kesava. (47) One who 
has obtained initiation (in the sacred texts) through the grace of a preceptor, and has learnt 
from him the mode of worship should worship the Lord in the image of his choice. (48) He 
should observe cleanliness and then, sitting in front of the image, purify his body by 
controlling his breath and other practices and fortify himself by duly assigning the various 
parts of the body to different deities and worship the Lord. (49) First he should purify the 
articles of worship (flowers etc., by removing insects and SO on), the earth (by sweeping it), 
his own self (through calmness) and the image (by removing the coating of sandal-paste 
etc.), and thus make them fit for worship. Then he should sprinkle water on his seat, keep 
ready water for washing the hands and feet etc., of the Deity with and other articles. Then 
with a concentrated mind (he should) invoke the Deity (in the image) and, having installed 
the Deity in his heart and other parts of the body, adore the Lord, with the available articles 
of worship, in the image etc., OF in the heart chanting the fundamental sacred formula or 
Mantra. (50-51) He should worship the image of the Deity including His (various) limbs as 
Well as the emblems He wears (e. g., the discus Sudarsana etc.), and His retinue (Sunanda 
and others), repeating the sacred syllables pertaining to that Deity, offering water for washing 
His hands and feet and rinsing His mouth, and so on, bathing the image, robing and 
decorating It with ornaments, offering Him sandal-paste, flowers, unbroken grains of rice (for

nd food. Thus worshipping the Lord with

adorni dwith), garland, incense, light a 
His Oe oe aan the prescribedrites, the devotee should sing hymns In praise

of Lord Sri Hari and prostrate himself (before the image). (52-58) One should duly worship 
the image of Sri Hari while thinking himself as permea

*

ioe 
1 tn, 
te

ted by the Lord; and then, placingthe = | is

holy relic (offered flowers etc.), on his own head, (finish the worship and) deposit the 
worshipped image at its place and the Lord in his heart. (54) He who thus worships the Lord, 
the Universal Soul, in the fire, the sun, water etc., or in his guest or his own heart surely gets

liberated very soon. (55)

Thus ends the third discourse, in Book Eleven of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ta ee et Tt 
PSR SSAA

BAY ATaSeara:

Discourse IV

A description of the Lord's Descents

| Usara 
ad arte walt aad: wascsrafa: iach aula wal at alten garg a: 1 2 1 
King Nimi said : Pray, narrate to us those various deeds which Sri Hari performedin this 
world during His different incarnations, assumed according to His free will and tell us those

-deeds also which He is performing now or will perform (in future). (1) 
Sle Sara

a a sada Witte A gq alee: | 
wid wate aad mea Aatkaoaknena: | 2 | 
qadat using: wt fant faa afer 
ere fas: geafteragq anrem aiieea:1 3 | 
qld we Yaqaaiaden aafadeaqyarauarsaritr | 
Wea Gd: AAA Aentst set Graal: fafawatsa sufemal i x | 
Meas wee al fae: fet maufatiaertaa: | 
VISA AHH UH: U sel saleaheiaea: Wad seg | & |

The sage Drumila said : He who seeks (completely) to count the endless qualities of

the infinite Lordis really a person of puerile understanding. One may (possibly) count anyhow 
in course of time the particles of dust on earth, but in no case the excellences of the 
omnipotent Lord. (2) When Lord Narayana the first and foremost Deity, created, with the five 
primary elements evolved by Himself, the universe as His body and entered into it by a part 
of His (as Its Inner Controller), then He acquired the name of Purusa. (3) The three worlds 
constitute His body; through His organs come into being the twofold organs (of action and 
knowledge) of all creatures, and by Himself He is Consciousness; His breath is the source 
of the bodily and organic strength and activity of the world; through Sattva and other qualities 
(Rajas and Tamas) He is the first author responsible for the creation, subsistence and 
destruction of universe. (4) United with Rajas, that most ancient Person appeared in the 
beginning as Brahma for the creation of this universe; in association with the quality of Sattva 
the same Lord appeared as God Visnu for the continuity of the universe and for the

Dis. 4]

se cee neces ese neetvaveessaseeee ee 
ESOS ER BER ee eRe MRE MR RRR eT He eT 
= Br Ws Be He Ke Be He He Me We He He We Ke He He He He He

maintenance of Dharma amona the twice. a 
with Tamas He appeared ac Auaeaaee Dorn and for giving the fruit of sacrifices; endowed

BIN. or the destruction of th 
Brahma, Visnu and Rudra e universe. Through these 
: veatures in each Kalpa, ey Proceed the creation, preservation and destruction of the

oe Sagierte yet arreot ay safinat: sara | 
THAGTTTATS Ta eet atsenfe set wafers: |G 
Fa fererasre ree Fagen aoe sag aero weer |

a Ye Ut Wet Arad Saaeat yea at afemapafind qe | ‘1

He was born as the foremost of the Rsis, possessed of perfect tranquillity, viz., Narayana 
and Nara, of Murti, daughter of Daksa and wife of Dharma. They preached that kind of action 
(viz., worship of the Lord) which leads to the knowledge of the Self and themselves practised 
it. Their feet are worshipped by the best of Rsis and even today They (Nara-Narayana) are 
performing that (very) action. (6) Suspecting that the sage (Narayana) desired to take 
possession of his domain (heaven), Indra sent Kamadeva (the god of love) with his 
attendants to Badarikasrama (which owed its name to its grove of jujube trees). Kamadeva 
did not know His prowess and he went there with a bevy of celestial nymphs, soft breezes 
and the spring season, and tried to disturb His mind with the arrow-like amorous glances of 
the women. (7) Narayana, Knowing that Indra had done that misdeed, loudly laughed and 
without astonishment or haughtiness said to the trembling visitors, “O (powerful) Kamadeva, 
O wind-god and celestial damsels ! do not be afraid. Accept our hospitality and fill this 
hermitage by your presence." (8)

sul qauad aed tat: asilstaRe: ayo Aq: | 
Jaq fast alfa aise fafet wnmeiktenaramenal | ¢ | 
eat Aad APM TCASAUAT: lent aA UA Asta TE a 
sare aftr ae eet: MMI, ot Ue ABfact ale fawales 1201 
eHfad | 
ler aia fare aat ve Wesiha gees qetcqed 1281 
SOTat «AST faaisaererit: | aatararea yet fete: Seicitfetey: gt 
ae ee sifta wiaut: |e = - AMER Suleriacdisa: 123 1

Sa ree ceeaneerat ~Acal ad Aearan: | saat: ABI Tal fea aq: 1kel

sare weft sad frizatenarl | wearers §«— eta «fete: 1241

5 ra m fearless and spoke thus, (Kamadeva and) the (other) 
O king! when Narayana made iit said to the merciful Lord, "If You remained unaffected

- ‘ n we : | 
gods bent their heads with shame, 4 ‘ter for surprise, as Youare beyond Maya and subject

b A a) itisnoma ( 
erase a oe es are adored by hosts of sages who have conquered their senses

ipping ion of the gods 
i ersons worshipping You transcend the region of the ¢ 
. ai see vali See eas deities put many obstacles in their path. But the other one

he deities their shares in the form of oblations into ae

IS Not (So) obstructed—he who offers tot : | ‘allobstacles.(10) 
votee tramples overallobstacles.(10)

the sacred fire. (Yet,) You being the Protector, the de p : ae

Some people get over us in the guise of hunger and thirst, cold, heat and rain (the 
distinguishing features of the cold and the hot weather and the rains), control the air, the 
palate and the sexual urge, which are (so) difficult to cross like endless oceans; but they fal 
victims to futile anger and thus render useless their hard austerities. They are like persons 
who having crossed oceans get drowned.in the hollow caused by a cow's hoof." (11) When 
Kamadeva, Spring etc., thus praised Him, the almighty Narayana (produced and) displayed 
women of wondertul beauty, fully adorned (with ornaments), waiting upon Himself (And thus 
the pride of Kamadeva and his retinue was humbled). (12) Those attendants of Indra saw 
these women, as beautiful as Goddess Laksmi, and got enchanted by the fragrance of their 
bodies; they found their own beauty faint when compared with their surpassing beauty. (13) 
Lord Narayana laughingly told the humbled Kamadeva and others that they might choose 
from among those women one like themselves who would be an ornament to heaven. (14) 
Obeying this command with the word "Amen !" Indra's attendants offered their respects to 
Narayana and choosing Urvasi, the best of those celestial damsels, returned to heaven 
following her. (15) They bowed to Indra in the court of the gods, and described to them, eager 
to hear, the prowess of Narayana, hearing which Indra was astonished and got dismayed.(16)

BAAS Beart ad: HAR WAM WTaM faa =: | 
fay: fra smiai Heated Hae: ada ware 1291 
TRISAa AARewAay Ae chs ect felt SarsTa: gAr7 | 
ad qaiskadaen gs aed soAfsmaqsedy 12! 
Aa SeahaSsaNTNs Wh A qaqa sfasq | 
cdraaisat@e fafeat stra waesatsava aat afae 1291 
caret ofa a caudh, quel saraty Yaaaae. Heats: | 
Yar AAT SAAR Ad: Bl Aleataded AAeleled: aed: 1201 
Fahad TW a B-agHal we eaHpomaurtartz: | 
Astel Are alate Pos Mlaafisiata claeatid: 1221 
WATER sy wa: aff quia aenaftr | 
Aefdnteaht agepdisdeei, sr, wet farfarysit eae 122 | 
Tatas auiftt sam a sed: i gif yftasret aftia aensyst 1231 
eid A eMad AEM Use Beda Uqaiseaa: 11 
Appearing for the good of the worlds in (varying) digits as the divine Swan, Lord Dattatreya; 
the Sages Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanatana and Sanatkumara, and our father, Lord Rsabha, the 
immortal Lord Visnu Himself taught the knowledge of the Self. In the form of Hayagriva He killed 
(the demon) Madhu and recovered the Vedas (from him). (17) In His descent in the form of the 
divine Fish the Lord rescued at the time of universal dissolution the Manu (named Satyavrata) 
and protected the earth as well as (the seeds of) the (different) foodgrains. Lifting the earth from 
(the bottom of) the ocean in His descent as the divine Boar, He killed the demon (Hiranyaks@)- 
Inthe form of the divine Tortoise, He supported the mountain (called Mandara) on His back when 
the ocean was being churned for nectar, and rescued the distressed king of elephants from (the 
jaws of the) alligator when the former sought Him (for protection). (1 8) The Lord eed the RsIis

(known as the Valakhilyas) who (being of the size of a thumb and) having grown weak through 
austerities had fallen into a pit (as though into the sea) andhad been duly praising Him. (Similarly)

He saved Indra, who had incurred the sin of Brahmanicide by having killed Vrtra (a Brahman »

by birth), and further rescued helpless celestial women who stood imprisoned in the houses °

a ee ee -

pis. 5]

—«e fAARARLAALAA ENA UMMM MEHR RH eE OO K ELEVEN 033 
I RINE ilar a NE 
Ltieteetiet tt sett tit tithe ik te

s. And during His de , 
Rearuler of the Abired in pie the Man-Lion (Lord Narasimha) He killed, Hiranyakasipu 
(t Wien the coda ane denon Ls His devotees (like Prahlada) of fear. (19) And in the war 
oe Pent Manvantarasthtatee ane led the demon chiefs for the sake of the gods, and in 
dl f the divi g ( itérent) part manifestations protected the worlds. Assuming 
the form © i Ine Dwarf (Vamana) He obtained on the pretext of asking for alms the earth 
* from Ball and gave it to the gods (the sons of Aditi). (20) Descending as Paragurama, the fire 
born of the Bhargava race for the destruction of the Haihayas, He swept the Ksatriyas off the 
surface of the earth thrice seven times. And (in His descent) as Sri Rama (the Spouse of Sita) 
He bridged the ocean and killed the ten-headed demon (Ravana) and destroyed (his capital) 
Lanka. He is (always) victorious everywhere and His fame destroys the sins of the people.(21) 
Though birthless, the Lord will appear in the race of Yadu in order to remove the burden of the 
earth, and perform deeds which cannot easily be accomplished even by the gods. (Then 
appearing as Lord Buddha) He will bewilder (and confuse) by His arguments those who 
perform sacrificial rites though unqualified for them. And (appearing as Kalki) at the end of the 
Kali age, He will destroy the Sidra kings. (22) Oking of mighty arms ! many such descents and 
deeds of the Lord of the universe, of immense glory have been recounted (by the wise). (23)

Thus ends the fourth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cat Pacat Pct Fh 
PIS

37 GSalseara:

Discourse V 
The Fate of non-devotees; different methods of the Lord's worship 
according to the different Yugas 
Usiara 
° * © Q 
Wad Et wat a Asrenaiada: | ATAgI AHA hl Prarfertrrt ear, 
The king (Nimi) submitted : O jewels among those (sages) who have realized the Self!

what will be the fate of those who do not generally adore Lord Sri Hari and whose desires 
have not been satiated and whose mind and senses are (yet) uncontrolled ? (1)

ddd sad 
aaTERATe A: qereTst: Gg aa At ant qurfesea: yur | 2 | 
aq Tal — ATES | A ASAT CAAT: AAT: 1S

ateftanan: araregraittat: | fart: YseaTa AsqHraT ANGI! | 
i ee saraent | Wgremarranfed: 1 & 1

aaduaenr feral: fem: | ahha TGR ST eT TET PTT: |S 
aT oe Pee areata: | atfesrent Afra: Ure fagerereaeisay | 8 | 
deta A searerqUrfacthearat 
Fara STA aaa (aT qa

fa fayaieea fas ama wo aca ado

Maer: WIN addsanaha ska ew: 1 e |

way eayeaferd eT TIT

aad a A AVadsqa AARMAA Yada aldat igo! |

aa aan fer wit fe aq aie |

aaherey fraTeaMATART Frafaftsr 192 |

Ta aden ad a wi aqqqqanta |

Ty Ghd mea A A waha gradi iee

az ome fafed: quae wie a fear

Wd aaa: wa A wa so faye a fag: wad igat | 
q wadaasadt: MeN: Pelsaisa: | washed aan: Wat Tera A aX I | 
fad: Ug SIM setae gah aes Agee: TTT: 1241 | 
q haces A adlasy year Aafian Walon sam adaka a 12a 
WW SAGAS BAM Waals: | diewadHal FS HisesasAaaM: 1201 
facaterararfadt Tees: 1AM faarararal aca: 1221

Camasa replied : From the mouth, arms, thighs and feet of the Lord were (respectively) 
evolved the four Varnas or castes with the (four) ASramas or stages in life. And they were 
distinctly divided into Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Stdras according to their Gunas 
| (or qualities of Sativa, Rajas and Tamas and their combinations). (2) Among these they who 
th do not adore the Supreme Person though knowing Him to be their direct Originator and Ruler 
iy and ignore Him, fall from their status and go down to hell. (3) Many women, Stdras and others 
ii, are remote from (through neglect or distaste) hearing the Lord's stories or discourses on 
ii them and also from singing His praises, and deserve to be pitied by devotees like you. (It 
Wh should be your duty to bring them to the right path). (4) Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas 
Stand (very) near the feet of Sri Hari by virtue of their birth and Vedic Sammskaras (ceremonies 
for the twice-born). Yet they get misguided by the Vedas as they miss their real meaning and 
interpret them literally about the fruits of actions. (5) They do not know the secret of action; 
though foolish, they consider themselves learned and become conceited; they indulge in fine 
talk and are fascinated by the honeyed words describing the transient fruit of actions. (6) 
Being dominated by Rajas they resolve upon cruel deeds; their desire for pleasures /s 
insatiable; their anger is like that of a serpent and they love ostentation and show pride. Such 
sinners laugh at the devotees of the Lord. (7) Living in homes where sexual pleasures 
predominate, they remain devoted to women and talk among themselves of the pleasures 
of sense (alone). They perform sacrifices without observing the rules and without distributing 
food and giving money to the Brahmanas and only kill animals for sustenance, not realizing | 
the sin involved in destruction of life. (8) Blinded with pride born of their wealth and power: 
pedigree and learning, munificence, comeliness of form, physical strength and actions; | 
those wicked men despise not only the saintly, who are beloved of Sri Hari, but the Lord | 
Himself. (9) Those fools do not heed what the Vedas say about the Lord, viz., that like the sky 
He is eternally presentin all creatures as their very Self andas the ultimate object of all human 
pursuits. They interpret the Vedas as discussing only the objects of desire. (10) Man !S 
naturally inclined towards the enjoyment of sexual pleasure, flesh and wine. No rules enjoin 
him to indulge in them. A certain check is provided over these tendencies (by the Sastra) PY

BOOK ELEVEN

Dae arnking of wing aa a ae wife, meat-eating at the end of an animal 
S autramani sacrifice (i 
addicted to these); the (real) intention (of the Sastr pe Soaiese alia er

a) is to tur 
only fruit (Proper use) of wealth is Dharma or ; Ne Cee a ale

lety which gives knowledge and direct 
€ or Liberation. Those who use wealth 
get death, the formidable enemy of their 
nce of their religion. Only the smelling of

realization and forthwith leads to supreme peac 
(solely) for their own comfort or of their family for 
pody. (12) They do not understand the pure esse 
wine Is sanctioned (in a Sautr amanisacr ifice) and animal sacrifice is allowed for the adoration 
of the deities and itis not permissible to kill them for meat. Similarly, sexual relation with one's 
wife is allowed with the motive Of getting an issue and not for the sake of enjoyment. (13) Those 
who are ignorant of this real Dharma and. though wicked and haughty, account themselves 
virtuous kill animals without any feeling of remorse or fear of punishment, and are devoured 
by those very animals in their next birth. (14) Those who hate others, in whom also dwells 
the same Self or Hari, hate Hari Himself and, being deeply attached to their mortal body 
and other relations, fall into hell. (15) Those who have not attained the knowledge of real 
truth but have passed the stage of utter ignorance, and are attached to the threefold objects 
of existence (Dharma, Artha and Kama), but have no time to pursue the path (of Liberation) 
are sure to bring about their ruin. (16) They kill their own self, and, being devoid of peace 
of mind, regard ignorance as knowledge (confuse action for knowledge). They do not 
experience fulfilment and, being frustrated in their aims and thwarted by the Time-Spirit, 
become miserable. (17) Those who are averse to the Lord are obliged against their will to 
forsake their home, wealth, children and friends, gained with great difficulty, and enter the 
dark hell. (18)

Usnara 
HRA Sale Gt Ua fe AUT: Galaga FPA: | ATAT aT Geet fatter Youd aigererarey 129 1 
i imi i | | | hat forms and 
The king (Nimi) submitted : Pray, tell us now in which ages, assuming wl : 
colours ae Tee the Lordis known, and by what prescribed rites He is worshipped

wt Am get a afeftay aya: arraifrenart ara faftread 1201 
FA 8 8eAdatestlect arHOreR: | PUNTA ferg qUSHAISG 12 I 
TTI wat ara aT: BE AA AeA ATT at ST SAT IRR 
a: quuif Aquat eat atarisac: | Pat: yeas: UaTHa “fier 123 
Sarat | umauifset «4 aaalefertae: | fewaayeretet | AAAI: 12S 
4 aq uam ad adeand ahi asea free ven ats starter: 1241 
fampia: feel; weft seape: | awenfiaraas SeeTea pela 121 
Bray aes taarer rage: | sitacantataegs _Taarereretiae: be 
4 aa ued wal paraRT Saft ertaTaT TE ASeaTTEAT YT RCI 
ae aa aise get Wiad AA: ze 
ananassae ETT | faa fama aayaiert AA: 1R01 
st aa dia SrtA | AAT ALATA Hora Aa Ay 132!

The sage Karabhajana replied : Lord Kegava in the ages of Satya, Treta, Dwapara ans 
ge Ka a

Kali assumes different colours, names and forms and is worshipped in different modes. (20) 
In the Satya age the Lord is of white complexion, has four arms, wears matted locks andis clag 
in barks and deerskin. He puts on the sacred thread and carries a rosary of Rudraksa anq a 
staff and a Kamandalu (water-pot made of wild cocoanut shell). (21) In that age men have as 
a matter of facta calm mind, entertain no feeling of animosity towards anybody and are friendly 
towards all creatures; they look upon all with an equal eye. They propitiate the Lord by their 
Tapas (in the form of contemplation) and by their control of mind and the senses.(22) (In the 
Satya age) the Lord is called by the names of Hamsa, Suparna, Vaikuntha, Dharma. 
Yogeswara, Amala, ISwara, Purusa, Avyakta and Paramatma. (23) In the age of Treta the Lord 
is of crimson hue; He has four arms, wears a triple cord about His loins and has golden locks. 
He appears in the form of sacrifices as described in the three Vedas and wields on His person 
a Sruk, Sruva (ladles for pouring ghee into the sacred fire) and other accessories used in the 
performance of sacrifices. (24) In that age pious men who are teachers of the Vedas worship 
through the Vedic lore Lord Sri Hari as an embodiment of all the deities. (25) (In that age of 
Treta) He is called by the names of Visnu, Yajna, Prsnigarbha, Sarvadeva, Urukrama, Vrsakapi, 
Jayanta and Urugaya. (26) In the Dwapara age the Lord is of a dark brown complexion, remains 
clad in yellow silk, wields (in His arms) His own weapons and emblems (viz., the conch, discus, 
mace and lotus), wears the Kaustubha gem and is distinguished by the marks of Srivatsa (a 
curl of white hair on the right side of His bosom) etc. (27) In that age, O king, men seeking to 
know the ultimate Reality worship the Supreme Person, who is characterized by the regalia 
proper to a monarch (such as the umbrella, fly-whisk etc.), as indicated in the Vedas and the 
Tantras. (28) Hail to You, Vasudeva; hail to Sankarsana and hail to You, the almighty Lord, as 
Pradyumna and Anirudha ! (29) Hail to the sage Narayana, the almighty, all-pervading, all- 
embodying Ruler of the universe, dwelling in the heart of all. (80) O king, it is thus that people 
adore and praise the Lord of the universe in the Dwapara age. (Now) hear how they worship 
Him with various rituals prescribed by the Tantras during the Kali age. (31)

eorant fap aguisateti ast: astamddata fe water: 1321 
Ba deal ukvanasise diate firafakiqa ava | 
Fats Woda vaemtd ae nees a aroma 133! 
wa Ueesigitamnaaean aig andtaara aemawar 
mar daddiarramag ad names a axon 13x

It is well-known that (in this age) wise men worship, through sacrifices mostly consisting 
of chanting the names of the Lord and singing His praises, the Lord who is of a dark colour, 
though bright by lustre, perfect in all limbs, adorned with ornaments, furnished with His 
weapons and waited upon by His attendants. (32) O the most exalted person, O the Protector 
of devotees, | bow to Your lotus-feet which are worthy of being constantly meditated upon: 
put an end toall discomfiture, yield all desired boons, which are the focus of all sacred places: 
are extolled by Siva and Brahma, afford shelter to all and dispel the distress of devotees 4N 
which serve as a bark for crossing the ocean of mundane existence. (83) O the most exalted 
and righteous Person, | bow to Thy lotus-feet, which ran after the illusory deer sought after 
by Thy beloved one (Sita). You resigned the royal fortune—which was coveted by the gods

and was most difficult to forsake—(merely) at the word of your father and went away (in exile) 
to the forest. (34)

wa ones war qrakif: iaqiicat wr saan sft: 134! 
ae Cea WM: AM: 1a aghatta ad: wreifsfiresaa 136!

a

aft ae et, ee ee

| rat Tet mug pif ad se wafafay: xt

Thus, O king, Lord Sri Hari— the Bestower of (all) blessings (including Liberation)—is 
worshipped by men belonging to different Yugas under a name and ina form appropriate to 
the age. (35) Elderly and discriminating persons who appreciate the merits of the Kali age 
and choose the essence of things, extol this age, in which by merely chanting the names of 
the Lord one can attain all the desired objects (which could otherwise be had through many 
virtues Only). (36) (Therefore,) for men lost in this world indeed there is no higher gain than 
the chanting of His names, whereby one attains to perfect peace and as a sequel to which 
the cycle of birth and death comes to an end. (37) (For this reason) O king, those living in 
the ages of Satya, Treta and Dwapara seek birth in the Kali age. O great king, in the Kali age 
(only) here and there men will be devoted to Lord Narayana; but their number will be large 
in the Dravida territory, wherein flow the rivers Tamraparni, Krtamala, Payaswini, the most 
sacred Kaveri, Mahanadi and Pratici. O great king, men who drink their waters generally 
become pure-minded devotees of Lord Vasudeva. (38—40) O king, renouncing all 
obligation (or the notion of separateness from the Lord), he who whole-heartedly and 
completely resorts for protection to the protecting Lord is no more a servant of or debtor to 
the deities, Rsis or other creatures, relations or other men (newcomers) and deceased 
ancestors. (Such a person discharges all his responsibilities merly by seeking refuge in the 
Lord.) (41) If a beloved devotee who has forsaken all other attachments and sought shelter 
in the soles of feet of the Lord incurs any sin for any reason (although as arule he is incapable 
of sin), the Supreme Lord, Sri Hari, enshrined in his heart, washes off all that sin. (42)

ARG sara

ani wade aara FPA: | AAA AA Mit: ATA, AGS, 1S | 
ddsaceR fag: Waele Wad: | UT qalqaidsaat 9 UAT Wt Ie

SAA AMT Ta, APTadoyAt | Tere: HAM Gel FAS ATS TET S41 
qa: we quatre ufed S| Gaara Aq al WTA Be: ise l

aatafexg arena: SRTATAA SISTA: | STAT AT Tete: oe a 1v'9 | 
au a yada aftfacratactcatel: |

, SATA APTA RHA YA: fear ixéi 
iasatnee, wit qatar | Aa geaaTea Youd asad ise!

wangunrdeda Wd wart sadiote fadet aait ate fadad i4ol 
osition) of these courses of conduct

é a. = earin (the exp z 
the sage Narada eth Mithila) with his priests and preceptors delightedly

_ Dleasing to the Lord, Nimi 
[S65] B.M. Part II—46_,

Kali assumes different colours, names and forms and is worshipped in different modes. (20) 
In the Satya age the Lordis of white complexion, has four arms, wears matted locks andis clad 
in barks and deerskin. He puts on the sacred thread and carries a rosary of Rudraksa and a 
staff and a Kamandalu (water-pot made of wild cocoanut shell). (21) In that age men have as 
a matter of fact a calm mind, entertain no feeling of animosity towards anybody and are friendly 
towards all creatures; they look upon all with an equal eye. They propitiate the Lord by their 
Tapas (in the form of contemplation) and by their contro! of mind and the senses.(22) (In the 
Satya age) the Lord is called by the names of Hamsa, Suparna, Vaikuntha, Dharma, 
Yogeswara, Amala, ISwara, Purusa, Avyakta and Paramatma. (23) In the age of Treta the Lord 
is of crimson hue; He has four arms, wears a triple cord about His loins and has golden locks. 
He appears in the form of sacrifices as described in the three Vedas and wields on His person 
a Sruk, Sruva (ladles for pouring ghee into the sacred fire) and other accessories used in the 
performance of sacrifices. (24) In that age pious men who are teachers of the Vedas worship 
through the Vedic lore Lord Sri Hari as an embodiment of all the deities. (25) (In that age of 
Treta) He is called by the names of Visnu, Yajna, Prsnigarbha, Sarvadeva, Urukrama, Vrsakapi, 
Jayanta and Urugaya. (26) In the Dwapara age the Lord is of a dark brown complexion, remains 
clad in yellow silk, wields (in His arms) His own weapons and emblems (viz., the conch, discus, 
mace and lotus), wears the Kaustubha gem and is distinguished by the marks of Srivatsa (a 
curl of white hair on the right side of His bosom) etc. (27) In that age, O king, men seeking to 
know the ultimate Reality worship the Supreme Person, who is characterized by the regalia 
proper to a monarch (such as the umbrella, fly-whisk etc.), as indicated in the Vedas and the 
Tantras. (28) Hail to You, Vasudeva; hail to Sankarsana and hail to You, the almighty Lord, as 
Pradyumna and Anirudha ! (29) Hail to the sage Narayana, the almighty, all-pervading, all- 
embodying Ruler of the universe, dwelling in the heart of all. (80) O king, it is thus that people 
adore and praise the Lord of the universe in the Dwapara age. (Now) hear how they worship 
Him with various rituals prescribed by the Tantras during the Kali age. (31)

eure faust aeuievandeiaad: ashamed fe era: 1321 
ert wal uftwammieaé dated frafatifad oom 
Yates Woe vareatd ae Ueget aA axoneferaq 133 
wad deesmgianrisat aig sandaaa aameway | 
Ter dfadditaraenaq ae names a amie iax

It is well-known that (in this age) wise men worship, through sacrifices mostly consisting 
of chanting the names of the Lord and singing His praises, the Lord who is of a dark colour, 
though bright by lustre, perfect in all limbs, adorned with Ornaments, furnished with His 
weapons and waited upon by His attendants. (32) O the most exalted person, O the Protector 
of devotees, | bow to Your lotus-feet which are worthy of being constantly meditated upon, 
putan end to all discomfiture, yield all desired boons, which are the focus of all sacred places, 
are extolled by Siva and Brahma, afford shelter to all and dispel the distress of devotees and 
which serve as a bark for crossing the ocean of mundane existence. (33) O the most exalted 
and righteous Person, | bow to Thy lotus-feet, which ran after the illusory deer sought after 
by Thy beloved one (Sita). You resigned the royal fortune—which was coveted by the gods

and was most difficult to forsake—(merely) at the word of your father and went away (in exile) 
to the forest. (34)

wa aie wer gnafaf: iaqiiead wert steariiet eft: 134! 
ale Gata Wien: anh: i aa agidata ad: wrefsfiresa 1361

aq gd: Vat oat eieat wren ad faea amit ana azar Gala: 1201

aaiey, IS Ike aetiewsra Tsai met We vfs AREA: 1321

aad, arate sfasq a afte: i amaut adi ax qaaien dafadt 13¢!

ala A Aaqua sdtett a nedtia fafa se areal aa Aqsa | 
Tat UAT wats arqeasuenaraMt: 1¥o |

catia «=fiqt «a fest oar 6a USM 
aalett a: ART aa COREE TLIO 
eared 8 wd: haa aeramag at: are: 
fand aaruitdt mae aft ad ae afafap: xe

Thus, O king, Lord Sri Hari— the Bestower of (all) blessings (including Liberation)—is 
worshipped by men belonging to different Yugas under a name and in a form appropriate to 
the age. (35) Elderly and discriminating persons who appreciate the merits of the Kali age 
and choose the essence of things, extol this age, in which by merely chanting the names of 
the Lord one can attain all the desired objects (which could otherwise be had through many 
virtues only). (36) (Therefore,) for men lost in this world indeed there is no higher gain than 
the chanting of His names, whereby one attains to perfect peace and as a sequel to which 
the cycle of birth and death comes to an end. (37) (For this reason) O king, those living in 
the ages of Satya, Treta and Dwapara seek birth in the Kali age. O great king, in the Kali age 
(only) here and there men will be devoted to Lord Narayana; but their number will be large 
in the Dravida territory, wherein flow the rivers Tamraparni, Krtamala, Payaswini, the most 
sacred Kaveri, Mahanadi and Pratici. O great king, men who drink their waters generally 
become pure-minded devotees of Lord Vasudeva. (88—40) O king, renouncing all 
obligation (or the notion of separateness from the Lord), he who whole-heartedly and 
completely resorts for protection to the protecting Lord is no more a servant of or debtor to 
the deities, Rsis or other creatures, relations or other men (newcomers) and deceased 
ancestors. (Such a person discharges all his responsibilities merly by seeking refuge in the 
Lord.) (41) If a beloved devotee who has forsaken all other attachments and sought shelter 
in the soles of feet of the Lord incurs any sin for any reason (although as a rule he is incapable 
of sin), the Supreme Lord, Sri Hari, enshrined in his heart, washes off all that sin. (42)

MG Sad

mia armada sar fates: | eran qa Me: BloreaTa DISA 143 | 
Taser fat: adele wea ite aaiquiasaam aM Tit Iss 
SAQA HEMET Tab, APTA! See: sree eh PRAT ATTA TL 1S | 
Waa: we queda ya WTI warm aq at ware eft: ise! 
Seles ares: STAATAAMITA: | STAT At Unfaat: FON US Naat: vo

Ro g qaqa: fremenveneanad wefaerafretare: |

Med Bendiera: SRSA aerate YA: fee isc 
Wreaterpe: pal aaleribat | memes youd atsed xe 
FURR aetas 17a Sarl stadt fidet aa teh fadad iyo

The Sage Narada resumed : Hearing (the exposition) of these courses of conduct — 
Pleasing to the Lord, Nimi (the king of Mithila) with his priests and preceptors delightedly

°65] B.M. Part II—46

ee _

adored the sons of Jayanti, the (nine) sages (mentioned before). (43) Then those accom- 
plished sages vanished out of sight while all the people stood looking on. Following the 
aforesaid courses of conduct, the king attained to the highest goal. (44) O Vasudeva (the best 
among fortunate persons)! following these righteous courses pleasing to the Lord, which you 
have (just) heard of, full of faith and free from attachment, you too will attain the highest 
goal.(45) The fame of you both, husband and wife, really fills the (whole) world because the 
aalehty Lord Sri Hari has chosen to be your son. (46) Cherishing parental love for Sr 
Krsna, you have both purified your soul by His sight, embrace and conversation with Him, 
as well as by sitting, sleeping and eating with Him. (47) When (even) Sisupala, Paundraka, 
Salva and other kings, thinking of Him with the feeling of enmity while sleeping, sitting or 
eating, had His gait, graceful movements and glances etc., imprinted on their mind and 
(accordingly) attained similarity to His form, what to say of those whose mind is attached 
to Him. (48) Sri Krsna is the Universal Soul, the almighty Lord, though He has concealed 
His divinity by assuming a human personality as a matter of sport; He is above and beyond 
‘i all and is immortal. You should not look upon Him as your son. (49) To destroy the devilish 
i kings who had become a burden to the earth, and to protect the virtuous, Sri Krsna has 
appeared on earth. It is for the liberation of all men that He spreads His fame throughout

the world. (50) ; 
Ursa neat axgeaisitfaferd: cant a AMET Aeqaleae: 142 | 
efrerafind ype aag a: aafed: 1a faye wae saya Segiselhsy 
Sit Sead ASM URAES SGI GSAISeaTa: 141 
Sri Suka continued: Hearing this, the highiy f fortunate Vasudeva and Devakt felt much 
astonished and they overcame their infatuation (ceased to look upon Sri Krsna as a mortal 
or their son). (51) Whoever with a concentrated mind retains in his memory this sacred story

shakes off his delusion during his life-time and becomes qualified for attaining oneness with 
Brahma (after death). (52)

Thus ends the fifth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ZIAD WRSeara:

Discourse VI 
The gods entreat the Lord to return to His divine realm and Uddhava

approaches Him on the eve of the Yadus' departure for Prabhasa 
AIA SAT

AA Aesscwea: IWNAASad| Vay yauedt sat weida: | |

$A Aehatinarnige aaatshaat | uals val fad areata eae: | 2 |

qreratearen arm: fagarunigent: |saea: faada afaenenfaz: | 2 |

Dis. 6 We We We We We eRe He WH, BOOK ELEVEN 039

grargreasrg: = ae RSE at Wa Atelehaaa: |

Gant fact wlehy wdetenreme | xX | 
qe fauna wget vedi: | araernfaqaren: PUMA | & | 
aA AAS Sqr | titfssaceattragash ete, 1&1 
Sri Suka began again: Now (when Narada had finished his discourse to Vasudeva and

left Dwaraka), Brahma, surrounded by his sons (Sanaka and others), the gods and the lords 
of creation, arrived and so did Lord Siva, the Ruler of those that have gone by as well as those 
that are yet to come, accompanied by goblins. (1) (Similarly) the glorious Indra with the 
Maruts (the forty-nine wind-gods), the Adityas (sons of Aditi), the (eight) Vasus, the (two) 
Agwins, the Rbhus, the Angiras, the (eleven) Rudras, the (class of) gods known as the 
Viswedevas and the Sadhyas, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Nagas, Siddhas, Caranas and 
Guhyakas (Yaksas), Rsis as well as manes, accompanied by Vidyadharas and Kinnaras— 
all went to Dwaraka, eager to see Sri Krsna, who captivated the mind of the (entire) human 
race, in that (charming) form by which He spread in (all) the (three) worlds a glory that 
destroyed the sins of the whole universe. (2—4) In that brilliant city abounding in all kinds of 
superior wealth they saw Sri Krsna of wonderful beauty with unsatiated eyes. (5) Covering 
Sri Krsna, the foremost among the Yadus, with flowers that can be had in heaven (alone), 
they praised the Lord of the universe by means of (laudatory) hymns couched in charming 
words and full of charming ideas. (6)

am: WW a aa wenfee aeifamomataants: | 
aferaasdele Mayas: HAA | 19 | 
Alea Vrassar efaaet ah Ystelata Sara AqUTA: | 
Sadana sifted a al A Weasaatedsfedisa: 1 ¢ 1 
ast A qd adver quar faenaaearada:fae: | 
STN F AMA WASMaRAM ACVTAATA TMT TAL! et 
URRaeraaaaed: aa at Afritusectaam: t 
a: aaa: aAfayaa sneataciestta: Aaa: wuftsHara 1201 
area saaaifaeat aa fremfaftte eferféter | 
seer sa aire frais: aeAartad: UetB: 1281 
usar aa fat aqmieda ceateltt strat sfctaictarcet: |

wufa aay Gorgas WAL We: Gd Wea Asa A: 1231 
Teena ga Ta al Haha aeletetqya fareart: | 
wee A wephaerat: WT BM Ae SM: WSS ex! 
stent «6 aqeeifIATAeRpsiaedm «=| AIGA: 
st fonfifaerad Nad: Set WT SHARIR 1241 
aa: YA Bahra aa aad ot Herdisa TMA: 1

eRe Re Re Re Re Re Be BEER BREE BERT ER RE RE ERR BERR BEE RR BE RE RE RE ERE REE BERT ME Be BT BE Be Be We He Ke We Ke He Be Be Br He Be Be Ke We Be Ke Be He He Re Be Be KEG Be Be He He He Ke Ke Be He Hy y, 
sao SS a a a ed)

Sst Aaa Be susalet eh wast aferawleda 126

TUES was Yared anaadtenuiataatar |

atatgquata eitead a feat asad wa: akeataa fasaia w 120

_ Baad laa waeypusestledandasaahue:

Tag wercrmgandatsa fanfad ww faser: igi

fsarandntedeiaia: Welsh: Wot ea!

sqsd «| aidiehnmgaeeied Bfasaet saegatit eet

The gods said : With our reason and senses, body, mind and speech, O Lord! we bow

to Your lotus-feet, which are meditated upon in the heart by those who are full of devotion 
and seek to be freed from the stout shackles of Karma. (7) O invincible Lord ! presiding over 
the (three) Gunas born of Your Maya You create, preserve and destroy this manifest 
inconceivable universe in Yourself through Your Maya consisting of the three Gunas, and 
yet remain ever unaffected by these actions, being free from (all) blemish (in the form of likes 
and dislikes etc.), and since You remain completely absorbed in the unobscured Bliss which 
constitutes Your (very) nature. (8) O praiseworthy and supreme Lord! purification of men of 
impure mind is not so radically effected through worship, study of scriptures, (acts of) charity, 
austerities, ritual acts etc., as of pure-minded persons through mature and genuine faith, 
developed by (constant) hearing, in Your glory. (9) May Your feet serve as a fire to consume 
all our unholy cravings—the feet which are being contemplated upon with a heart moistened 
with love by ascetics for the sake of blessedness; which are worshipped by devotees through 
individual divine manifestations (Vasudeva and so on) for attaining a glory similar to that of 
the Lord; and by the wise (as many as) three times (a day) in order that they may transcend 
heaven (and ascend to Vaikuntha); (nay,) which are contemplated, O Lord, in the sacrificial 
fire (by those well-versed in sacrifices) taking in their outstretched hands the material for 
being consigned to that fire according to the procedure laid down by the three Vedas (Rk, 
Sama and Yajus); and which are contemplated in the course of their Yogic practite for the 
realization of the Self by strivers seeking to obtain an insight into the Maya that veils the true 
character of the Spirit, and are worshipped everywhere by the highest devotees of the 
Lord. (10-11) Like a co-wife this divine Sri (the goddess of fortune, appearing as a golden 
streak on Your bosom), O Lord, vies (even) with a faded garland of sylvan flowers (adorning 
Your bosom alongwith Her). You (nonetheless) accept the worship duly offered (to You by 
Your loving devotees even) with such a garland. (So partial You are to Your devotees !) May 
Your feet serve as a fire to consume our evil tendencies. (12) O almighty and omnipresent 
Lord, may Your foot cleanse our sins, who worship You—the foot which took three strides

(in order to measure the three worlds and thereby to oust Bali from heaven) and (on reaching 
Satyaloka, the highest heaven in its second stride) stood as a (tall triumphal) flag with the -

Ganga flowing through the three worlds as its streamer and (as such) inspired terror and. 
instilled fearlessness into the titanic and the celestial armies respectively, and which, - 
brought heaven to the righteous and spelt ruin to the unrighteous. (13) May the feet of the -

Supreme Person in You augment our joy—You who are superior (both) to Prakrti and Purus@.

we

(Matter and the Spirit) and who are the Propeller of all (as the Time-Spirit) and subject t0 
whose control, like bulls held by the nose-string, are Brahma (the creator) and other °

embodied souls who are being tormented by one another. (14) You are Purusottama (the |

Highest Person) in that You are responsible for the creation, continuance and destruction ° 
this universe; the Vedas speak of You as the Controller of Prakrti, Purusa and the Mahat- 
tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence); and You are also Kala (the wheel of Time

revolving In the form of a twelve-month) consisting of three navels (each of four months), 
engagedin the destruction of all and possessed of imperceptible speed. (15) Having derived 
its power from You and (thus) acquiring unfailing energy, the Purusa (Spirit) in conjunction 
with Maya deposited the Mahat-tattva, corresponding as it were to the seed of this (visible) 
universe. Equipped with that (very) power the Mahat produced out of itself the golden 
effulgent) egg of the universe enveloped by its (seven) external sheaths (in the shape of the 
earth, water, fire, air, ether, ego and mind). (1 6) Therefore, O Propeller of the Indriyas, You 
are the suzerain Ruler of the immobile as well as the mobile creation, because even though 
enjoying (in the form of the Jiva) the objects of the senses evolved through the modification 
of the Gunas brought about by Maya You remain unattached to them: while others (the Jivas) 
remain afraid of sense-enjoyments even when they have been renounced by them- 
selves.(17) (All) Your sixteen thousand (and odd) wives could not even shake Your mind by 
their shafts of Cupid and other charms skilled in conveying the message of love despatched 
by their arched eyebrows fascinating with the sentiment expressed by their suppressed 
smile and sidelong glances. (18) The streams (of Your glory) bearing the water of Your 
nectar-like stories and rivers (like the holy Ganga) that have washed Your feet are capable 
of destroying (all) the sins of the three worlds. Those who take pains for the purification of 
their self resort to both these types of holy waters—the former, in the form of Your glory sung 
in the Vedas, by means of their ears and the latter, emanating from Your feet, through the

contact of their body. (19) 
ATS aa 
satapa faq: Oa: waite sasad ated. sored: 1201 
SriSukaresumed: Having thus extolled and bowed low to Sri Hari, alongwith the (other)

gods, Brahma, accompanied by Lord Siva and standing in the air (all the while), submitted 
to Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows):—(20)

quad yt faqied: wal) arenteterctedataraariads, 1281 
miss woitd: aq aIaNT a aa l aids fea fafa Adele 1221 
Had aadat fave SUMMA | Srv feqta SASHA: 1231 
am & aftarier aqen: alla: Het Wed: aida Aer AA: 12¥1 
Agaaisacdtutear Wad: GAC aed ada wsiaenfee wa 14! 
Tet asfaenen anlage a farendt apsaAyfeey 1261 
Wt: wer ua fara ale ata | dolaleotenrierta: ule aguotHetrt 1291

Brahma said: Formerly You were entreated by us to remove the burden of the earth, O 
Lord ! That has been accomplished (by You) precisely as was desired by us, O Inner ~ 
Controller of all ! (21) Righteousness has been firmly established by You among the virtuous 
Pledged to truth and glory, which is capable of destroying the sins of all men, diffused on all 
Sides, (22) Descendingin the line of Yadu and manifesting a form unsurpassed (in elegance),

OU Performed deeds of extraordinary valour for the good of the world. (23) Hearing of and 
celebrating, O Lord, those exploits of Yours thathave been mentioned heretofore, pious men 
the Kali age shall easily get through (the darkness of) ignorance. (24) Acentury and twenty-

Ve years more have elapsed, © Lord, since You appeared in the race of Yadu, O Supreme

Erson | (25) O Support of the universe, no part of the gods’ purpose now remains to be 
“€complished: and this race of Yours (too) has become well-nigh extinct through the curse 
ofthe Brah manas. (26) Therefore, return, if You please, O Visnu, to Your transcendentrealm

We We Be Re Re REE RE RE RERRE REBRER RERERERERE RERE RR E ROR VEER RE RE RE RE Re Re Ree EME Re Me Me Me Me Ae Hee He BE Be We We Ve We We We He We Br Be Fe SESE Be Bee He He Be He He He Ke He He Hey, 
ca ——————Ke

(Vaikuntha), and bless us, Your servarts, the guardians of the spheres, alongwith the 
spheres (by visiting our realms and accepting our homage). (27)

J ?

staan a Fete fageen iad a: awrdakae wasitisaata: 1221

dee ean adtdatdiirteni oth faa eg A aAwda Tela: 1291

Tea dat aaat fags Heiner olaisaygen ferrgaict 1301

Si Aa set: Gee freuen wat seadad Tae 1321 
The glorious Lord replied : What you say has already been decided upon by Me, Oruler 
of the gods ! All your purpose has been accomplished and the burden of the earth 
removed.(28) Made insolent by prowess, heroism and fortune and inclined to take posses- 
sion of the (whole) world, this (celebrated) race of Yadu has been kept in check by Me as the 
ocean by its shore. (29) If | depart (from this world) without destroying the huge race of the 
Yadus, who have grown (so) insolent, this (entire) human race will meet its destruction 
through this ocean, that has (already) transgressed its limits. (80) The destruction of this race

has (already) begun through the imprecation of the Brahmanas. When its destruction is 
complete, O sinless Brahma, | shall ascend to your realm (en route to My own realm). (31)

MIP SAA 
Sal Clee Way: site aide eamida: we WAGE 1321 
AA TM Aad saat Ape! fasted Wa AesEr AAPA, 133 | 
Sri Suka continued : Told thus by the Lord of the universe, god Brahma (the self-born) 
fell prostrate before Him and duly returned to his realm alongwith the host of (other) gods. (32)

Presently noticing grave portents appearing over the aforesaid (city of) Dwaraka, the Lord 
spoke to the elderly among the Yadus, that had assembled (there). (33)

Tt a Gee afexile ada: 1 aos a: Hoendia wea axes: 3X

1 089 - aeteaiterentatsisttaghirdan: | werd qaequa areaisea ar fac 134!

aA Gal SA Yeldt Aaviterte | faa: faierar ae AA ya: Hee 136 |

aa a diag waft fqd ar! aistfeeatst fa, AMR[UTadreTaT 1319 |

TY Git WAg sega dela diate aera eaatafartaq isc 
The Lord said : These exceptionally grave portents are particularly appearing on all 
sides here, and a curse from the Brahmanas, that cannot be easily overcome, has overtaken

our race. (34) We should no longer stay here, if we wish to live on, O respected ones ! We 
shall (accordingly) shift this very day to Prabhasa, a most sacred place. Let there be n°

delay.(35) Having bathed there, the moon-god (the ruler of the stars), who had been seized.

with tuberculosis due to a curse pronounced by Daksa, was at once rid of his trouble and 
began to enjoy once more the waxing of his digits (as before). (36) Having bathed (in the 
sacred waters) there and gratified the manes and gods (with offerings of water), fed good 
Brahmanas with (delicious) food of various tastes and bestowed valuable gifts on those 
worthy ones, we shall through those gifts get over our sins (even) as people cross the ocean 
with the help of ships. (37-38) :

“¥ 
|

Sri Suka went on : Thus directed by the Lord, O delight of your race, the Yadavas made 
up their mind to undertake a journey to the sacred place (Prabhasa) and began to get ready 
their chariots. (39) Seeing this and overhearing the utterance of the Lord and observing the 
fearful portents, Uddhava, who was ever devoted to Sri Krsna, approached the suzerain Lord 
of the universe in seclusion and, touching His feet with his head, submitted to Him with joined 
palms (as follows). (40-41)

SEA SATA

caqaet ST Quataurentda | Gach Ge et teh Grae War | 
fasraa Basis Taea AA: 121

ae dalatinne aoe ceai ap Ayes Al MeN Aa amie x3

da famtfed POT FU UANge! HUCeaa Aa sa: XX!

WAAC ATA hl Sterne lea al aaa aa aHeasale xu

aaa yHaAPaaMasogs Rata: [shaswtiset aareta aat wants ise!

anar @ Bad: sO Heda: | ware aa a aha Ae: Gearlsaisaen: 1s 1 
ad fae velit wad: awdaciqimedar dftemenandernt da: 1X21 
wet: aida Ham alent ai meeerdamedies agernfassaay 1s

Uddhava said : O Ruler (even) of the adored of gods, O Master of Yoga, the very hearing 
and chanting of whose names and praises makes one sacred, having exterminated this race 
You are surely going to leave this world for good as (is evident from the fact that) You did not 
(choose to) counteract the Brahmanas' curse, though able to doso, almighty as You are.(42) 
| cannot bear to abandon Your lotus-feet even for half a second, O Ruler (even) of Brahma 
and Lord Siva! (Kindly, therefore,) take me as well to Your (divine) realm, O Lord! (43) Having 
enjoyed (with their ears) the story of Your extraordinary pastimes, whichis most auspicious 
to hear andis (sweet as) nectar to the ear, people give up the craving for other objects. (44) 
How (then) could we do without You, our beloved One, (nay,) our very self—we, who have 
(constantly) waited on You, while You lay in bed, sat or rambled, (with us), stood (beside us), 
bathed (in our company), were engaged in (some) sport or dined (with us) and so on ? (45)

€ are Your servants who have been adorned with garlands, sandal-paste, raiments and 
ornaments etc., used (and given up) by You, and ate the remnants of Your food. (As such) 
We shall conquer Your Maya (Weare notafraid of Your Maya but of separation from You).(46) 
&@9es who have (absolutely) no covering on their body beyond the belt of airabout their loins, 
ave taken great pains on devotions, are lifelong and perfect celibates (lit., have directed the 
llow of their generative fluid upwards or stopped its downward flow for all time to come), are 
free from passion, have renounced (all) enjoyments, and have no (trace of) impurity left (in 
their mind)—they (alone) attain to Your glorious state known by the name of Brahma. (47) 
e, however, O supreme Yogi, even though we are revolving in the alleys of Karma in this 
World, shall get over the darkness of ignorance, which is (so) difficult to surmount, through 
alks about You carried on with Your devotees, dwelling upon and celebrating Your doings 
nd utterances, Your gait, smiles, glances and jokes and whatever You did in imitation of

Se We We We Wee Ke Bre Re Be Be We Be Be We Ke Be We Be Be Be Be RE We Ke Kee Be ee Be Be Ke Be Ke Br Be We We Me Bee Be We Ke He We Be Ki We Be Gee We Ke We We Ke He We Ke Ve He We Ke We We We Ve We We Ke We He We Hew, We Hew, 
ee wy

human beings. (48-49)

NY SAAT 
wa famitdt ws war daa: Gas Ba Yet AAAI 140! 
Sha Stead ASM GRAS SecaAHieaRpa TSISEAA: 16 |

Sri Suka said : Entreated thus, O king, Lord Sri Krsna (the Son of Devaki) spoke (as 
follows) to His beloved servant and absolute devotee, Uddhava. (50)

Thus ends the sixth discourse, in Book Eleven of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SIT AAAISeaTa:

Discourse VII 
The Legend of an Ascetic—the Story of eight (out of twenty-four) 
preceptors (from the earth to the pigeon) recognized by him 
MTA {AAT

aqeat A AeTarT «afaentfeada «A He Wal Glenalen: ate Asitenihsat: | gt

na 06offenfed «6 AC Came SNGa: | Geeaadiuisedary Halonieta: 1 2 1

So a wud Aguas! age: AAiseaat gi a yrafaertr 1 3 |

ada Aa awl Stalsa ABAee: | alesse areal cafes free: | x |

a aeel aaa Wa Gh Addo i smisedefeads afore amet gti 4 t

a qd aa Ue Ae Vora | Wend ma: cee anata mH!

aieg AAI area aanat sauniafh: iat qaant a fate arama wo |

Weisdpel AMIa wa: Byorelate | Halndiacntia wurerafera fers c¢

qeae Ghia Uhfad sé Wii sneriea faaqaara wveqeitati e |

Wega «sey: «= - ARO sre qMadEret ARMaasAa 120 |

qaenvadiat faerst ffaddi quan a fated a mala sensi: 122!

Hayes Welagaasa: | wga, Ae fad a faaea a ga: 1221 
The glorious Lord began again : That alone which you have asked Me (to do), O highly 
blessed one, (in verse 42 of Discourse VI above) is intended by Me. Brahma (the creator), 
Lord Siva (the Source of the universe) and the (other) guardians of the spheres (too) long 
for My presence in heaven. (1) Indeed | have wholly accomplished the purpose of the gods 
(viz., the removal of the earth's burden) for which, as requested by Brahma, | descended on 
this earth with My part manifestation (Balarama). (2) This race (of Yadu), which (is the only 
surviving burden on the earth and) has (already) been consumed by the curse (of tne

Brahmanas) will surely perish through mutual strife; (and) on the seventh day the sea wil 
overflow and submerge this city (of Dwaraka). (3) The moment this (mortal) world is forsake”

DIS. 7 We We We ee ee ee Se Ree ae ee ie BOOK ELEVEN 045

py Me it will be assailed by Kali (the Dark Age) and before long, O pious one, all its 
guspiciousness will be gone. (4) You should in no case live on this terrestrial globe when 
abandoned by Me; for the Kali age having set in (then), O good Uddhava, people wil 
conceive a liking for unrighteous ways. (5) Completely shaking offall attachment for your own

eople and kinsmen and fully concentrating your mind on Me, for your part, go you about the 
earth looking upon all with an equal eye. (6) Whatever is being apprehended with the mind, 
speech, eyes, ears etc., know It to be a creation of the mind and therefore (merely) illusory 
and transient. (7) Aman with an unsteady (wandering) mind falls a prey to misapprehension 
consisting in the perception of diversity,which (in its turn) leads to the sense of good and evil; 
and in the eyes of an Individual having the notion of good and evil there exists the distinction 
of prescribed action, Inaction and prohibited action. (8) Therefore, having controlled your 
mind and senses, visualize this world (of senses) as projected in the Self and see your own 
self existing in Me, the Supreme Lord (as one with Me). (9) Possessed of knowledge (of the 
meaning of the Vedas) and realization (of what has been taught by them) and with your mind 
sated through Self-Realization and becoming one with the self of (all) embodied beings, you 
will no longer be baulked by (any) impediments. (10) He who has transcended the sense of 
good and evil does not refrain from wrong-doing because he perceives any evil in it; nor does 
he perform prescribed duties because he thinks well of it; he (merely) acts (by force of habit) 
like a child (whose actions are never premeditated). (11) He who has gained certitude about 
the Self through knowledge (of the true spirit of the Vedas) coupled with realization (of the 
Truth), who is a friend to all created beings, whois full of peace, and who beholds the universe 
as one with Me, never undergoes suffering (in the form of transmigration). (12)

Myc Sava 
Saest «6 Ta «OTT. SU Sea: | ee «| areetsigiTeeq_ 123 | 
Sri Suka resumed: Thus instructed by the Lord, Uddhava, the great devotee of the Lord, 
O protector of men, fell prostrate before Him and, being eager to know the truth, spoke to Him 
(as follows). (13) 
3&qI 3d 
ana amare ae arrest | staat A SHRI: AAAS: 1 2X1 
Sis seat yee saat fava: |Get aha aaleaerphit A aft: 1241

aise unetta yeahtidnexacaa fara arr 
aera fered saat aare Gera wTaayae YerT 1k | 
ae a Med wen Aeris aorta fageagia aaa | 
ai frifiafraera Wea senereqydt afereiren: 1201 
Tae - Hara AeA AeA adatiamquctagustaway | 
faffourize, @ gfrmftadt anract Aaa BOT sel 1k 
Uddhava submitted : O Lord (Rewarder) of Yoga, O the ultimate end and support of 
Yoga, O the embodiment of Yoga! O the Fountainhead of Yoga! (it is) for my highest good 
that this cult of renunciation without any expectation of return has been preached by You.(14) 
_all-pervading and all-embracing Lord ! guch renunciation of the pleasures of sense is 
difficult (nay, well-nigh impossible) for those attached to sense-enjoyment, and more so for 
©Se who are not devoted to You: such is my conviction. (15) |am ignorant, O Lord; for! am

attached to this body and children, which are the creation of Your Maya. | am immersed in 
€ Notion of 'I' and 'Mine'. Therefore, instructme, Your servant, that | may easily attain to that

renunciation which has been taught by You. (16) O Lord, | do not see, except You, anyone 
even among the celestials, who can give me instruction about the self-revealed Atma, the 
only Truth. (Even) Brahma andall these beings are deluded by Your Maya as they look upon 
external things as real. (17) Therefore, afflicted as | am with sorrows and with my mind turned 
away from the world, O Lord, I, seek refuge in You, who are (no other than) Lord Narayana, 
the friend of (all) living beings, devoid of (all) defects, eternal and infinite, omniscient, the 
supreme Ruler of all, whose abode is the eternal Vaikuntha |! (18)

TAU Aas cle Slendwafaaaon: | AGethd 9 — MINAAT MATAR 128 1 
sie etda «eset «fase: 1a, TTA Sal Seeqferad 1201 
Gea a At ak: area: | snfaent soraha adeaquafedy 1221 
walgererdeael ARUIGIATE: | AEA: Git TE: TETRA A teat rar 1221 
3a At Abate! Gert sate Jemunisemresqamn: 1231 
BaTaelerd aiden Wat stage «ae Stee HTE: 1 2X1 
aay Test ated a | hla Filet deul aq: wes ata 1241

The Lord replied : In this world those who are engaged in investigating the true nature 
of this world often lift themselves up by their own efforts and rid themselves of the craving 
for the pleasures of sense. (19) The Atma itself is indeed the (infallible) guide of one's own 
self, especially in the case of man, inasmuch as by direct perception and inference he can 
work out his own good. (20) In their human birth persons of ripe judgment and knowing the 
secret of Samkhya and Yoga (the paths of Knowledge and Action) directly and clearly 
perceive Me as their own Self endowed with all faculties. (21) Numerous forms of living 
beings with one foot, with two, three, four or many feet and also without feet stand evolved 
by Me. Of them (all) the human body is (most) dear to Me. (22) (And) here (in the human body) 
those who are ever vigilant directly discover Me, the Supreme Ruler—who cannot be 
perceived (by ordinary means of perception)—-through assumption* based on evidences in 
the shape of material instruments (such as the intellect), which are (themselves) open to 
perception, as well as through inference on the same grounds. (23) By way of an illustration 
on this subject they narrate the following ancient legend in the form of a dialogue between 
an ascetic of a high order and Yadu of great prowess and intelligence. (24) Perceiving 4 
youthful Brahmanaj with an unclean body, though full of wisdom, roaming about fearlessly, 
Yadu, who knew what is Dharma (piety), put (the following) questions to him. (25)

IGead

Ga Geka eld: dfaeneeti amare valeote faster area 126!

meat aaidenrty fataetat A aa: i tata Adlea staat aera: fora: 1201

a qd hea: iad: Qarisqaae: 1a aal Aga fenfsrsrerrafaareac 122!

wag eaany, PMMA | A AAAS YAAl STS: sa fea: 1231

a fe 4: Ged aac! He «wallace «Wad: macna: 1301 
* The assumption is that material instruments such as the intellect cannot lead to perception of objects unless they afe 
themselves illumined by some self-effulgent principle such as the Self or God. And the form of the inference is that just 45

appliances like a hatchet can be wielded only by an active agent, so the intellect etc., too are being used by some intelligent 
agent.

TA reference to Il. vii. 4 leads us to conclude that the Brahmana was no other than Lord Dattatreya.

| 
| 
|

. on ee ees eeerssess «6s ltti‘éie” © lS CUllt—~—é—Ci it SO SS ee en’ Oe

sooo °°R bol” Ro Sek). eR Pee & we See ee:

\

Yadu said - Remaining Inactive, O Brahmana sage, whence did you get this highly 
enetrating wisram obtaining which you, though enlightened, go about the world like an 
(innocent) boy ? (26) Generally men strive after religious merit, riches and enjoyment, as well as 
after self-enquiry only from the motive of acquiring longevity, renown and fortune. (27) You for 
ourself are able-bodied, learned, skilful, good-looking and sweet-tongued; (nevertheless) you 
do nothing, covet nothing, and behave like adunce, amaniacoradevil. (28) Inthe midst of people 
burning with the wild fire of concupiscence and greed, you remain unscathed by that fire, and 
donot get scorched by It (even) like an elephant standing in the water of the Ganga. (29) (Pray,) 
tell us, WhO are making this enquiry, O Brahmana, the cause of the joy abiding in your mind, 
even though you are living singly and are devoid of enjoyment (of the pleasures of sense). (30)

AM ATTATTATA 
agta |= ASTM eI «ATE OS: asia: wre weadd fest: 1321

The glorious Lord said: Thus honoured and questioned by Yadu, who was exceptionally 
intelligent and devoted to the Brahmanas, the highly blessed Brahmana sage addressed (in 
the following words) Yadu, who stood bent low with humility. (31)

Mel SAA 
Gra A Wal Wer seat aegarrn: i adt agua amiserite away 132 
yiaeat 9 arauenramarmaistisrs ta: | matdissme: fay: ads Beene TT: 1331 
ager eho dia: fager putste: | Hat aad ad sori: qeepd 13x 
GW A Wat wigafaaricrasrn: | ran arafncar-ariattercts: 1341 
ant aeqientt aer at Ase dda yee fat aera a ize 
Wats A eaaenat: ide faga aeramiaateat fadsicy 1301 
Wacariwkeade: UUs: | Ae: Ratt wysyat ATT: TIAL 1321 
MUTA AYA MAarsasa: | A AM A Akad Aaenledd AAs: 1381 
faragier anit aries ada: Woes A aKstt aad i¥ol 
aide ey sfaseaqumaigd gad abit wedatgharmeg ive 
sted Persigry AEA ATAA aaa | 
TSS aived fade Waa 12 | 
Asisoaaataterelatgane: \at MRA AVEtE HIST: TAL Ise 
Sw: venfaa: fer meats get: Fare faotttatoatantda: 1x 
asret ame ate geateriem: | aaiaatshe Sw Ted Aeatad sy 
wT: BI AS SUA: HT SHAT Ye AAA STG eT ATMA 1G | 
wae «ype «wcuemant fay:isfas = gad crinaenistiaata ixio | 
ffanien: suena Bal Aaa A: | HOA AHA AleAeHaAy 11 
wed great wari quart | frerafa a aeadt strerasaetentatary ie | 
Wrist amas faqaiaia ag gad abit aifaat ga maf: 140 
Sem Qa aq cafner ga Aaa: HAMA Wea Aeaerdishad 14k |

The Brahmana said: Many are my preceptors, O king, selected by my keen sense,

acquiring wisdom from whom | wander in the world free (from all turmoil and worry). Please 
hear about them. (32) The earth, the air, the sky, water, fire, the moon and the sun, the dove, 
the boa-constrictor, the sea, the moth, the honey-bee, the elephant, the honey-gatherer, the 
deer, the fish, Pingala (a courtesan), the osprey, the infant, the maiden, the forger of arrows, 
the serpent, the spider and the Bhrnga (a kind of wasp)—these twenty-four have been 
accepted, O king, by me as preceptors. From the conduct of these have | learnt all that | had 
to learnin this life for my good. (83—35) | (presently) tell you, O tiger among men, what| learnt 
from whom and how, O son of Yayati (Nahusa's son); (please) hear it. (36) | imbibed from 
the earth her vow, viz., that remaining unperturbed even while being oppressed by beings 
following the will of Providence, a man should not deviate from his course (of righteousness), 
conscious of the fact (of their being subject to the will of Providence). (37) Apious man should 
learn from the mountain (a modification of the earth itself) that (like a mountain) all-his 
movements should ever be guided by altruism and that his (very) birth is Solely intended for 
(the service of) others. (Similarly) as a disciple of the tree (another modification of the earth) 
he should learn (complete) submission to the will of others. (88) An ascetic should remain 
fully gratified with bare sustenance after the manner of the life-breath (a form of the air, which 
is sustained by mere subsistence) and should not pamper his senses by means of articles 
which are delightful to them. He should (only) so manage that his cognitive faculty may not 
be lost (through starvation), nor should he indulge himself in such a manner that his speech 
and mind may be diverted. (39) Though moving (freely) among (and enjoying) all (sorts of) 
objects (of the senses) possessing diverse characteristics, a Yogi should not get particularly 
attached, to them any more than the (external) air, his to mind remaining unaffected by their 
merits or demerits. (40) Although clothed in earthly bodies in this (mortal) plane and 
(appearing as though) endowed with their characteristics (pDlumpness, slimness and so on), 
an ascetic who has his eyes fixed on the Self is not (actually) endowed with those 
characteristics any more than the air is with the odours (of various kinds, which really belong 
to the particles of earth wafted by the air and not to the air itself). (41) Though clothed in a 
body, the ascetic should, by identifying himself with Brahma (the Infinite), visualize the affinity 
of his all-pervading soul with the sky in the shape of freedom from (all) limitations and 
absence of attachment because of its interpenetrating all mobile and immobile organisms 
at once. (42) The soul is not touched by material adjuncts (like the body)—(which are) the 
creation of Kala (the Time-Spirit) and are constituted of fire, water and earth (in the form of 
its products,viz., food-grains)—any more than the sky is by phenomena like the clouds, 
tossed by the wind. (43) Bearing (close) affinity with water, an ascetic is transparent, soft by 
nature, sweet and a seat of purity and purifies people through (mere) sight, touch and 
utterance of his name. (44) Full of glory and made brighter by glow (in the shape of austerity), 
formidable and having no vessel other than his belly, the Yogi, like fire, does not imbibe any 
impurity (in the form of sin) even though consuming anything and everything (although he 
never consciously eats any impure substance). (45) (Like fire, again,) he remains hidden

- from view at times and becomes visible at others, (thereby) earning the respect of those who

seek blessedness. And burning the past as well as the future sin of those who make an 
offering to him, he eats everywhere (only that which is offered by others). (46) (Again, even) 
as fire (though having no definite shape of its own) assumes the shape of the firewood 
through which it reveals itself, (so) having entered a particular body (viz., that of a divinity O! 
a sub-human creature) possessed of noble orignoble characteristics and evolved by His ow" 
Maya, the all-pervading Brahma appears endowed with that (very) form. (47) The (various) 
states beginning with birth and ending with death, brought about by (the passage of) Time: 
whose course cannot be perceived, belong to the body alone and not to the soul, just 45

-_

is. 7] B

pearance and disappearance etc., occur only to the digits of the moon (and not to the 
moon itself). (48) Though taking place every moment by force of Time, which flits with the 
rapidity of a stream (of water), the birth and death of bodies assumed by the Spirit are 
not perceived any more than the rising and going out of the flames of fire (which likewise 
take place every moment). (49) Like the sun sucking the moisture (in summer) and 
releasing It (during the monsoons) by its rays, a Yogi (engaged in the quest of the Spirit) 
enjoys with his senses the objects of the senses and parts with them according to the 
needs of the moment but is not affected (by the act of enjoyment or gift).(50) (Even) as 
the sun reflected in a reflecting substance (e.g., a vessel full of water), is perceived by 
men of gross understanding differently (though one and the Same) as though existing in 
the vessel etc., so is the (one) self clothed in a vesture (like the body) understood 
differently by those who recognize the physical body as their self, though one by itself. (51)

wee: WAST at cade: anf tafe aay fea want aoe sa deft: 1421 
aad: HATA past aaeadt | Hater wader arelaare alate Gar: 143 | 
pure aaqftrdacat Teattuit | gS qargust alex Aga Aad: 1 4X1 
VAAN STATA A sh STS eA ifaeitya 4 faeet ard 4s | 
a 4 aqeet a wWiedteacqaitod i dd aad eM peut: 14S | 
aad wat mt Wedt art sid | avs aya AS waa: afaelt adi gel 
a act ala Cadeadar et: | winhidtdstent: amenediea: 1421 
WaT: que: whl aadt yaaceit | yuan pied arent Pde Horne: 148 | 
deat 8 Uaet: Get: pistedreretba: i washed fuatt Waqarad:1 got 
Pelqagecalaaat fanaa | fatfedt daeret reel qaqa: Wei: 1&2 | 
Uhet wageenaret dt qeftadhiuita: ara dferaedt orgie 62 
Set diecetn: wie aque Atat I aye Merida td: waretahdeh 183 | 
HN HUrdl W Use Gelert ad weve eilsqusimg: 1 axl 
Had Sy Med AHA AL | ATA AY HITAY YRS =a | Ge 
Wapeaeniura4 SRSA | Tae ae ra Segre UVa: 1 GS | 
Sse sEMesatreary, Bary wat arereat ett factetatig: Raa: 1 G19 t 
sat YC Upacoramcuquaea «= GHA: Laiquemparehet Yeetafteer ads ect 
wea wa aa a Ghacaal | YA YS At Gea UA: Kaa ATTN: 1 
ase wa ae a gael gave: fewitfas fact ar tagqy gasitfad: 101 
: fred: | at a HUTT: Arex WTAE STA! 98 | 
aT Meat CelH: He Had WH | Haidar Hail a etek: Waa Faq ©? 1 
Ud a ge Tahar | TUT FSA PIT: AIHA sSaMIALT | 83 | 
a wre Ae cid AmeaMs | Jey Gad Awe Sed Tag: 119% |

sft StearTad FET UAE Alecia ATAISEA: 119 |

Excessive fondness or attachment should never be conceived for any person or object by 
anyone. The mind of a man who does so becomes unhappy and he comes to grief like the 
(famous) dove (of the legend). (52) Having built a nest on a tree, a certain dove lived in 
2 forest with its mate, the female dove, for some years. (53) With their hearts bound through 
Ve and enjoying the pleasures of copulation, the pair knit their understanding with

understanding, eye with eye and body with body. (54) Free from fear or reserve (in relation 
to one another), they slept, sat, flew about, stood, chatted, sported and ate together in the 
rows of trees of that forest. (55) The male dove, whose senses were out of its contro} 
procured even with (great) hardship whatever enjoyment its mate craved for, inasmuch as

the latter gratified it (in every way) and was (in turn) treated with (great) sympathy. (56) 
Conceiving for the first time, the female bird, who was devoted to the male, laid eggs, when 
the time came, in the nest by the side of its mate. (57) At the proper time there emerged from 
the eggs fledglings with delicate limbs (fully) evolved by the inconceivable potencies of Lord 
Sri Hari (in the form of the Time-Spirit, destiny, nature and so on), and covered with soft 
down.(58) Hearing their cooing and delighted by their sweet chirping, the pair, fond as they 
were of their offsprings, nourished them with (great) affection. (59) The parents derived 
(great) joy through (the touch of) the feathers, (so) pleasant to touch, (Sweet) chirps and 
charming movements of their happy youngs and their coming forth to meet them. (60) With 
their hearts knit together by mutual affection and deluded by the Maya (enchanting potency) 
of Lord Visnu, the parent birds brought up their young brood with their mind (ever) distracted 
(through solicitude for them). (61) Desiring food for their offsprings, the pair, that now had 
a (large) family (to support) went out in search of it, and wandered all about the forest for 
long.(62) A fowler,who roamed about in the forest, appeared there by chance and, seeing 
the little birds sporting near their own nest, spread his net and caught them. (63) (Meanwhile) 
the male and the female doves, which were always anxious to nourish their progeny and-had 
gone out (in search of nourishment), returned to their nest with the nourishment. (64) 
Perceiving its young brood caught in the net and wailing, the female dove felt extremely 
miserable and flew to them screaming. (65) Bound by (ties of) affection bestowed (on them) 
more than once through the Maya of the birthless Lord, the female dove, afflicted in mind as 
she was, forgot that it might likewise be caught in the trap and (even though) seeing the little 
ones entangled, was caughtin the trap itself. (66) Sore distressed to find its offsprings, dearer 
than itself, caught alongwith its mate, which was as dear (to it) as its own self, the male dove 
helplessly wailed (as follows):—(67) "Oh ! behold my ruin, scanty of virtue and evil-minded 
aslam. Though! am (still) unsatiated (with the pleasures of sense) andam yet unaccomplished 
of purpose, my household life, which was the (only) means of realizing the threefold object 
of life has been brought to an (abrupt) end. (68) My mate—that looked upon me as its object 
of veneration, was agreeable (to me in everyway) and was a match for me (in every 
respect)—is going to heaven with its innocent (guileless) offsprings, leaving me once for all 
in this desolate dwelling. (69) Such as | am, whose mate and progeny are no more, what for 
should | seek to survive as a wretched widower leading a miserable life in my deserted 
habitat ?” (70) Seeing them entangled in the net and struggling in the jaws of death, the 
foolish and feebleminded dove likewise fell into the trap of its own accord. (71) Having (thus) 
secured the male dove, the master of its household, as well as its mate and progeny (the 
young doves), and accomplished of purpose, the cruel fowler returned home. (72) Maintain- 
ing his family in the aforesaid manner, any householder of unquiet mind, revelling in the pairs 
of opposites (such as joys and sorrows) and attached to the pleasures of sense comes to 
grief, like the aforesaid dove, with (all) those connected with him (viz., his wife and 
children).(73) The wise recognize him as having fallen from a height on (once) climbing UP 
to it, who, having attained a human body, which is an open door (as it were) to (the mansion 
of) final beatitude, remains attached, like the (aforesaid) dove, to his household. (74)

Thus ends the seventh discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CISION

|

pis. 8 ] BOOK ELEVEN 551

AAA SATA: 
Discourse VIII 
What the Avadhita learnt from the nine preceptors 
MAT SAA

garhsrs WH wt ae we a aft aq ae em wena aL ae: 1 2 
mM Gas fad wert eeta ar gemdtamhd Taersmmistena: | 2 1 
aefierery eaten Proertisquanm: 1 afg aewig ort werfefta eye | 2 
siseeaedd =86faywe «6otenedeisemt 6 aldfiesy «0 BRAReaeTafT 1 x | 
qa: seeTsikt geimat «aaa: | sao waite: fiafdte sarfa: 1 & | 
ager dat at ano am:iaeda a yea aftheka arm: 1 € | 
qt faa cama aserfdtsa: seria: ware ant udgai © |

Are feg TAT AOA esa Arana Ye: |

Searistarea4r wave Udgaaeatet asefe: 1c t 
Sich ich Waa we eet ada aad yemfeaatase ahi madi ar: 1 | 
SUPA ASAD Wears: Heel At: | Add: RAE GWA sa Bella: 1Qol 
Aad set at a aged fafaaiaitomteran afeha 3a Basel 122! 
Wer wet at A Ayala fra: | aia ga Aged Ge ct farzaia 1¢21 
vera gad fuer wale anda wan aia ava aia sige: 1231 
wTRrres fad oa: afeerqeaie: | aeons: @ eta aeist ae ex 
qT tit aowrd a welde cuafead! Yar dale det aegareiane ik! 
We: Glaristaearanrarat Tee: | Agee «Yeh afad eater 1261 
arenita adr: wracifiaa efone aerqraritaateart 12091 
pl Sear | Sat sistent Aza WEST WMbAa: 1261 
faa wt wieantfed: | IaSaMa eit” afsaraat 1291 
Sfenin wag fret aifoiatiean ¢ wa die aad 1201 
Mafsatset A ae fatararsa: TAM! 7 Wid tat Gated ad fa T1221 
fiser am azassdiq face gaiden A ferfardt feiss: Foret 1221 
a fvdea arm wed SRE se ae atealt frat wag 1231 
art amresdl lat Gee Geada | aegecna farted: Hira AAselearaeer 12% | 
smTayaag «=a aeardasitfedt | start fertart ish ardent ya: 12&I1 
we oan oat ataeradh | Prterit sfeertt Preitet wader 126 
ten frag qeracare dade: | fae: cet set fermted: Walae: 1201 
Ten Paftoonferaren whe sya ae AA rele STRATA YETET TAT MA: IRC | 
7 gennahda aaa frarafa tae faaredt wast aAaT FT 12e1

t 
» 
'

We We We Re We Pe Ke Bee Be ee RE We RR E eRe RR E BEHE BEVE Be Be Be Wi Bi We Be Be Ke Ree ee Bee Ve Re Bi We Be He We Be We Be We Me We Ke Me Ke Me He We Ge We We Be We We Wee Ke Me We Ke He-wvy Be Re Ke Hey, 
EEE SDSL) aa aia ae. f°. .2°e us. @eaee oe... ae, .+ oe

The Brahmana said : O king ! pleasure and pain which come through the senses are 
experienced in heaven as well as in hell by embodied beings; therefore a wise man should 
not seek them. (1) Like a python one should eat food, obtained without effort, whether it be 
more or less and sweet or bitter. (2) If no food reaches one, (then) like the python let one go 
without it and make no effort to obtain it. Let one sleep for many days patiently believing that 
it is Fate which provides food. (3) Bearing one’s body actionless even when one is strong of 
body, mind and senses, and lying down, though sleepless, one should do nothing, though 
having the strength to exercise senses. (4) An ascetic should be quiet and grave like the calm 
deep sea. He should be inscrutable, dominated by none and unaffected by time and space 
and unperturbed by likes and dislikes. (5) An ascetic devoted to the Lord, whether he has 
or has not the desired objects, should feel neither elated nor depressed just as the ocean 
does not swell when rivers flow into it nor dries up when they do not. (6) When the man who 
has no control over his senses sees the Maya of the Lord in the shape of a woman, he is 
allured by her gestures and falls into the darkness of hell just as a moth falls into fire. (7) The 
ignorant man allured by the gold ornaments, clothes etc., of a woman for the sake of 
enjoyment of these objects, which are-the creation of the Lord's Maya, loses his discrimina- 
tion and is destroyed like a moth. (8) An ascetic should take food in small quantities (from 
householders), without giving them any trouble, and barely enough to maintain his body, and 
thus adopt the course of the black bee. (9) Like the bee collecting honey from (many) flowers 
a discriminating person should gather the essence from all scriptures, great or small. (10) 
He should not keep in store for the evening or the following day the food collected by begging; 
his hands (alone) should be the vessel and belly, the receptacle for food. He should not be 
a hoarder like the bee. (11) A mendicant should keep nothing in store, either for the evening 
or the day following; he who does it perishes like a bee with that collection. (12) A begging 
ascetic should not touch even with his foot even the wooden figure of a youthful woman; if 
he touched it, he would be chained like the elephant brought in contact with a she- 
elephant.(13) A wise man should never seek a woman, who is his death (as it were); (for) 
he might be killed by other more powerful persons (after her) just as an elephant is killed by 
stronger tuskers. (14) Riches amassed with great pains by misers are neither enjoyed by 
them nor gifted away; they are enjoyed by some other person, who like the honey-gatherer 
discovers the hoard (and appropriates it). (15) Like the honey-gatherer, the ascetic really first 
enjoys the riches of householders who have amassed them with great pains andwitha view 
to enjoying them. (16) An ascetic, living in a forest, should never hear vulgar songs. He 
should take this lesson from the deer, which attracted by the music of the hunter gets 
snared.(17) Enjoying the vulgar dance, instrumental music and songs of women, Rsyasrnga. 
born of a deer, became a plaything in the hands of women. (18) Enraptured by love of taste, 
a foolish person, through his uncontrollable tongue, is destroyed like the fish by the 
hooks:(19) Through fasting wise men can soon control their senses, except the tongue: 
which becomes more powerful in the case of a fasting person.:(20) One may have subdued 
all other senses; but, unless one conquers the sense of taste, one cannot be said to have 
gained self-control; all senses get subdued when the sense of taste is conquered. (21) Now 
hear O prince, what | learnt from Pingala, a courtesan, who at one time lived in the city of 
Videha (Mithila). (22) One day that courtesan decorated her person at night and in order to 
take her paramour in the pleasure-house she sat just outside the house at the door. (23) O 
the best of men, on seeing the passers-by she, desirous of money, took them as rich men 
seeking pleasure on payment of money. (24) Seeing the passers-by gone, she, who lived 
upon her solicitations, began to indulge in the hope that some other rich man would come

ae

and give her plentitul money. (25) Waiting at the door thus frustrated, and having lost her ‘ 
sleep, she kept going Inside and outside the house till it was midnight. (26) Her mouth was 
parched and she felt dejected through hope for earning money; but ultimately the sense of 
frustration leading to happiness dawned on her through thinking as mentioned below. (27) 
Now duly hear from me the song she sang in her utter disappointment; because for people 
_dispassion Is like a sword to cut asunder the noose of hope. (28) For no person, O King, who

has not acquired this feeling of disgust for the world would snap the bodily ties any more than 
he who is devoid of discretion could give up the sense of my-ness. (29)

stat OAtefadht «= ceacfafstarea: | at area: Rl Ha aa arisen 1301 
ad wt wo ofa faase frei fae 
alae e:avaeancn alee que WAST 1321 
steal Hassett. Uftenfadt «gen )©= aS aaenfafereiardan | 
Surette ateigaisastreart «ea fat thereat 1321 
cekashaareasaeyt «= aeC (és TE: frei 
facet Gt alaaedeha yee: | afesaaetemeld HAA 13% I 
Ged. BAA Ara set ae aiferaid famlaeae Wstt sat TT 134 
fad fa 4 as HM A HME AU: | Ada Vala eat al Hl@laga: 13& 1 
qa A waar seat fay: aaa acon delsd quae att sid: Walae: 1391 
aq wieuram: aan fdedda: 1 aaeet Pea gee: wagesia 3c! 
ope «= fT APM: | area SIAM: BROT ST aH 1381 
wa 480 seNaaoeTsa |= ladt i ferent «= MTT at 1X0 
aan Ufa —«- ferere aA aTOL | Tet SHIOTSAISSeIM HIST: 12 | 
sna eet we fatale aerhaend| sad sq URE Tet Hine SUITS I 
Pingala said : Alas ! how senseless and of uncontrolled mind am | ! Behold the extent 
Of my foolishness; ignorant as | am, | have expected the fulfilment of my desire from a trifling 
mean paramour ! (30) Forsaking (the adoration of) the eternal and real Lord, who resides in 
the heart and gives joy and wealth forever, fondly have | sought a poor man who cannot 
satisfy my desires and who only gives grief, fear, worry, sorrow and infatuation. (31) Lo! how 
Uselessly have | afflicted my soul by leading the life of a courtesan and living by such a highly 
reproachful profession; | expected wealth and satisfaction from a lustful, greedy and 
lamentable person through my body sold to him! (32) What female other than myself would 
lind enjoyment through a (paramour's) body, which is like a house of which the framework 
IS Of bones, covered with skin, hair and nails, which Is full of urine and excreta and has nine 
doors through which constantly flows foul matter ? (83) Among the (wise) citizens of Mithila 
lam the Only foolish and wicked person in that | expect satisfaction from anybody else than 
the immortal Lord, who bestows his own Self. (34) He is the friend, most beloved Lord and 
Self of all embodied beings; to Him shall | offer myself as a price and find enjoyment in Him 
like Laksmi, who sports with Him. (35) To what extent have mortal men and even celestials,

Subject to the ravages of Time, been able to give satisfying pleasure or enjoyment to their 
Wives ? (36) Forsooth, Lord Visnu has been pleased with me for some action of mine, as in

Ere 
ned 
aus

os i

my heart, full of vicious hope, the feeling of disgust for the world has been engendered, which 
will lead to happiness. (37) Had | been unfortunate, | would not have met with miseries which 
have produced the feeling of disgust for the world. Itis this despondency through which man 
attains peace by snapping the fetters of home etc. (38) Placing on my head the benefit 
rendered by Him and forsaking vicious hopes of sense-enjoyments, | shall seek refuge with 
the said Lord. (39) Feeling contented with whatever | get and living upon it, and trusting the 
Lord, who is my own Self, | shall now sport with Him as my husband. (40) My soul is fallen 
in the well of worldliness, the senses have deprived me of discrimination, and | stand 
devoured by the serpent of Time. Who else but the Lord can save me? (41) When one 
carefully sees the world devoured by the serpent of Time and feels disgusted with worldly 
objects, one realizes the fact that one's Self is the only protector. (42) 
May sara 
wa safeantidet 9 aardatie fedora 9rearqufadar AT 1x3 
stan fe ut aa Ted UM Geni aM dia aria Ta Ty Myer ise 
Sf ASP Tad ASM TRAST SfecaAHeg HSE: 1 |

The Brahmana said : Thus determined, she abandoned the vicious hope born of lust 
and, resorting to peace, she (quietly) sought her bed. (43) Hope is the greatest misery and 
the absence of it is the greatest joy; for Pingala, getting rid of the hope to get a paramour, 
enjoyed a peaceful sleep. (44)

Thus ends the eighth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31D AGH Searea:

Discourse IX 
Story of the seven preceptors, the osprey and others; and the 
end of the Avadhita's discourse 
MAT SATA 
unae fe gaa aq aleadh For! saad Gaara ae fer aEatens: | 2 | 
Ma Gt weet a Frofie: ida ues a qa anferadi 2 | 
1H aaah at 3 fart tegen snes anenfatiamdte areas 2 | 
wea fade Wet WAS siya | at feaqen set arel at ae: aaa: | ¥ | 
Plad HA Ala GUAM Fear! Ma aaeaara arta Mag ATT! & | 
cera We ele | Uifeia | ataeren: wegeNaE: Bet: AEM! & | 
ST cea weal Aedt sitfsat aa: | eeetchener: Mer st st Uaarsa | © | 
SwaRaye Met Wawen: BH Weal: | aah frfietsweraa aft: | ¢ |

Dis. 9 ] BOOK ELEVEN 555

¥ 5 
we 40 2098 we we 9 WE EF We Wow We Wee Me We Oe Bee Re 0 we He ee OY; Be BE We Br We BE We We BE Be We Be eC He RC Be We Ke ERC HE Hee BERBER OWE HE EWE We WE He ME Re ORE OH He He HE

srariatant = aT BUTE | CleMateadicelenarafalacadan 1g 
aa Seat See Ase arat ganiti usa wa awed Haat ga eT: 1201

The Brahmana said: The source of misery is indeed the acquisition of whatever men 
love most. One who knows this and desires no acquisition enjoys everlasting happiness. (1) 
The stronger ospreys which had no flesh attacked the osprey which had it. The latter then 
dropped the piece of flesh and felt happy. (2) | feel neither honour nor dishonour: | have no 
care which householders have for home and children. Like a child (free from care) | wander 
in the world sporting in the Self and devoted to it. (3) Only two are free from cares and 
anxieties and are immersed in supreme bliss—the ignorant and guileless child and he who 
has transcended the three Gunas (and realized the Supreme Being). (4) In a certain place, 
a maiden herself had to attend to the comforts of those who came to her house to choose 
her for a bride when her relations had gone away to some other place. (5) O king, while she 
was pounding paddy aside to provide them food, the bangles of shells on her wrists made 
a loud jingling sound. (6) The (wise) girl, feeling much ashamed of doing the humiliating task 
herself, broke the bangles one by one, and retained only two each on her wrists.(7) Even the 
two bangles produced sound as she pounded (the paddy), she again broke one each (so 
that) the remaining one each did not produce any sound. (8) And the following lesson | learnt 
from her, O subduer of enemies, as | wandered in this wide world to know what was desirable 
and what was to be shunned. (9) Where many dwell together quarrel would ensue; even 
between two living together there is talk. Therefore one should wander alone as the single 
bangle on the wrists of the maiden. (10)

Tl Ut dasafermarel frees: | aerarareana fereraroredhsa: 122 1 
af wt wemd aes: wisi ado

Qt Gat sea Ssfagee—Css rao arerie2

qeameaaaesgett a aa fase aferat at

aque Wald ssrdfet wae aA aaat aes igst 
United: eee Wea: | steeAMT ««strentdfateiscasret: 1s 
TEeRanstie: aa farnosngqarer: | ad: Utehd aq wfaea Wahad 1241 
Ut Anau 2a: wes MaMa deel Honea Heard seria: 12a 1 
Ue = - wanferitalsyereremistaensa: | areaiengaeat areal Atay ary |

CAT aGATOT: HAATEAAT: 1 R19 t

WIM um ste Maciea: | HaclaMardarctel Frearfire:. 1221 
Saorenqaas werat fqn sale Estee Tat Waar 189 
aM Petrdi faraqar | afer, Se fast aa Wad GAL 101 
aivintenat ete aedida fae WAR Fadia Heat 12zI 
Ul ua ual sat aaa Bae far! Seq eme AAG ANY Ala TAL 122 I 
aie: Dera eae Heat Aa Naha: art AMSA TSH, YATE 123 | 
Wi [RE wee wat A firfara Ale: | eratofateat ae TY A aga: THY Ry!

Sa qeta farkadataied a weber aaadehH

aaa faganfr ae anit unease frame: 1241

APEAELEAAKLKEKAKAALLKK SKA L LAL KLKLKAHKHLK KN KWH HHH AHHH Be We Be Mee Hr Mr Hr Mr He Wr Wr Br Me Hr Hr Mr Br Br We Hr Wr Br Hr Hr Br Br sk Ar Hr Hr Br Br te Bt Be Be he He Br sr fe Beg, 
ee Sa a eine lf

Taesreagyeyaaaiy qa alwatant{aar fadaq 
Tard apweddest: Wee Geared aismaaiafa gare! 26 | 
figndsqaredia ate aa Pretsadeayat aaut palvaq 
WMUisaAdyaieieh Gh A Haima: Airs sa Neat qf! Vol

qui ada 4 Udaqae aafa:staara fava: Gea Add: CATA! 221

* Saat fasraeies suet i fae ndaat amagiaceafa: 1301

A PHeald Tigit Cet Sid AH | aeldafadta =A wtad agers: 1 ae 
One should steady the mind on one thing by controlling it as well as the breath, and 
by acquiring a steady pose and remaining vigilant practising dispassion and 
concentration. (11) The mind is to be steadied on That One, established in which it slowly 
renounce the desire for actions and, developing the Sattva Guna controls the Rajasika and 
Tamasika impulses and in their absence attains absorption in contemplation. (12) Just as 
i} the maker of arrows absorbed in his work did not see the king passing by him, so the man 
ne who has concentrated his mind on the Self does not know anything inside or outside. (13) 
Wh Again, an ascetic should wander alone, have no fixed abode; and ever vigilant and living in 
Ub a Cave, unrecognized by obvious marks, he should be without any support and sparing of 
speech. (14) For man with his perishable body to build a house is useless and fraught with 
great misery. The serpent happily inhabits the hole borrowed by others. (15) The one almighty 
Lord, existing by Himself and the support of all, destroys this previously created universe 
through His Time-Energy at the end of a Kalpa. And then He remains One alone, quite 
undifferentiated. When by force of time, powerful in itself, all the energies inthe shape of 
the three Gunas get merged in the Unmanifest (when the creation ends), the most ancient 
Person, the Lord of Matter and Spirit, attainable by Brahma and other liberated beings, 
exists. He remains the absolute and unconditioned, and self-manifest Bliss, fit to be 
called Liberation (itself). (16—18) O slayer of enemies, with His own unassisted power He 
agitates His Maya, consisting of the three Gunas and first creates Sutra or 
Mahattativa. (19) They say that Sutra is the manifestation of the three Gunas, capable of 
creating the universe of multifarious forms, through which it runs like a thread and the 
individual soul gets into the world. (20) Just as the spider projecting the web from its heart 
through mouth, sports with it and then swallows it, so does the Supreme Lord creates, 
preserves and destroys the universe. (21) On whatever the embodied being deliberately 
centres its mind in its entirety, through love, hatred or fear, it attains that very form. (22) O 
king, the larva confined by the wasp in a hole in the wall and contemplating on the wasp; 
without discarding its former body, transforms itself into the latter. (23) O king, | thus learnt 
this wisdom from these preceptors. Now hear as | tell You.what | have learnt from my own 
body. (24) This body, subject to birth and death and constantly and ultimately a source of 
afflictions, is my preceptor as it promotes renunciation and discrimination. Though it helps 
me to contemplate on realities, it really belongs to others (who devour it). Realizing this | 
wander renouncing all. (25) Man earns money with difficulty in order to enjoy pleasures 
and maintain the growing number of wives, children, possessions, cattle, servants, houses 
and relations and friends. Like a tree which when ultimately destroyed leaves behind 
seed for another tree to grow, he too dies leaving seeds for his next birth. (26) His tongue 
drags him to one side, thirst to another and the organ of generation to some other; so do the touch,

at

is. 10 ] 
Dis BOOK ELEVEN 557

stomach and ear Ta some other directions; the sense of smell in another and the restless eye 
to something else; and every physical organ draws him in a different direction. Thus like the 
lord of the house torn up by co-wives, his senses and organs pull him onall sides. (27) Having 
created through His Innate energy the bodies of the different species of living beings, such 
as trees, reptiles, animals, birds, gad-flies, fish etc., the Lord was not satisfied. He rejoiced 
(only) when He created the human body endowed with reason and capable of realizing the 
Supreme Deity. (28) Having after many births in this world acquired the rare human body, 
however frail, which Is still the means of attaining the object of life, a wise man should speedily 
strive to attain Liberation, before this body, constantly subjected to annihilation, is not 
destroyed. The enjoyment of sense pleasures can of course be had in all species. (29) 
Having thus freed myself from all attachments and egotism and developed dispassion, and 
possessing the light of knowledge (acquired from several preceptors), | wander in this world 
established in the Self. (30) Stable and comprehensive knowledge cannot be acquired from 
one preceptor. This Brahma, without a second, has been variously sung by Rsis. (31)

SMTA Tara 
saat A ag fase sieht: | afediswafeict Ua Gat stat aera 132 | 
aged: seat yet a: a Yds: adagiamdm: afl aya F133! 
Sf srEMad ASG UAC Aecasleaha ATHISAA: 18 |

The Lord said : The Brahmana of deep wisdom having thus spoken to King Yadu and 
greeted and adored by him, took leave and delightedly went his way. (32) Having listened 
to the discourse of the AvadhGta (Dattatreya) our remote ancestor (King Yadu) rid himself 
of all attachments and gained the steady equilibrium of mind. (33)

Thus ends the ninth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

“st T.-et P. +4 
(I PIES I OD

BIA SRASeaTa:

Discourse X

The emptiness of earthly and other-worldly enjoyments exposed

Walfedgated: eg HAHA: | ATAHoTAAA «=: PATER

aaritest aa RaaM eR: we vehi Te Wea Aare! | 
aut zat frit qealed: | taeisdisergraaaarg on 
WENT eRe Aaastaau ag aq: wet ue wayelitrerert: et

~ a ,

- ht a

> 5 a ae ig os “

ee 
a -*

fama: Wegente egerlad ew | aafialaun alee alecHlsaA: Wena: 1c | aa 
Piaayseata Achd YU seaesas set Ua SU We: 1 8 
asa Wifaad east esa: fei denefetsa ger feenfesae: 1201 
AASGSAISSAAAIR chao UTLiasa menses seremaiees 
3Treraisttunel: MICKA: \aAaMA Naot fara: Warlae: 1221 
amet fctfatesiseitia = Ta eT 
Tis Gel aad Sa Ba wraeate aenfy: 1231

aaet adeno ap Gaga: AMAA Aaa Slory 1 eX | 
Waa WdwarMi Gen waft aMiadaeasver sad feed a afi: eu 
Wane «86 fet Cee: | Hoag: AA Ala SeasaaH 1 ke | 
sty ato aia A Med! Apa aaa: at aat faa Usiq_ 119 | 
a feat qa fae faced fagsmiida a ga ASM qaeswi ae! 
ate sity faa a aera qee-wal: | ase a fagait qa sae ae eet 
fl ad: Gade HMA al Ganha | stead Aaa aeaea a Aiwa: 1201 
Si wd dad gs welqaeaed: | senuaamam peat fren 122! 
armenia ae et: wafsa: cafe ffi werd ger mehr aaa 1221 
Spe cad! aa: Wel ata arfaen: | Yalta taaaa A fers Montstar 123 | 
mua «Cf «So sutitad i erdidery «aed «adil $4weaueey 1X1 
aia: armada fafsvisieated | mleq A aero quenlsy fda: 1241 
Mad, Wied it Bad quel Aare | aura: vadalnias cloeted: 126! 
aed: Upgiaddat atfetrdthset: | Hare Haun wer: But yatatsac: 1201 
UYaaeissra | TACO aS ARN Sethe area «aa: 121 
Sui galenil Hat eet a: UA: eens aq fe qe aelerftior: ize 
CaM leaMiom Ast cersitfear| ceoist wa wnt fxocefauaga: 1201 
Tn: Ysa Hatin Woisrgsd WI! sited YOR yeh arlene 138 | 
Ted, Ue WAT MAASAI: | ARIA Ola UNS ada fH 132! 
Taeeataa = Aa MEL A Ue TATA Wea Benita: 133

The Lord said : Attentive to the righteous duties taught by Me, and depending upon Me, 
and forsaking all desires, man should follow the conduct prescribed for his caste, order and 
family. (1) Having thus purified his mind, he should observe how the actions of worldly men 
attached to sense-pleasures, who consider them to be real, produce contrary results (cause 
misery). (2) As the dreams of a sleeping person and the fancies of one drowned in a reverie 
are of no value, being of a diversified character, so is the notion of differences produced by 
the Gunas illusory. (3) One who is devoted to Me should perform all obligatory or occasional 
duties but should forsake all actions prompted by desire. If one is fully engaged in an inquiry 
into the Self, he need not attend even to his prescribed duties. (4) My votary should devoutly 
practise austerities and at times observe sacred vows (too); and he should wait upon his

we

Dis. 10 ] BOOK ELEVEN 559

receptor of tranquil mind who has realized Me as identical with Myself. (5) He should be free 
from pride, jealousy, sloth and attachment: he should be firmly devoted to his preceptor and 
cool, and a seeker after Self-Knowledge he should not be fault-finding and one indulging in 
useless talk. (6) He should not feel attached to his wife, children, home, lands, relations and 
wealth etc., and should find his purpose equally in all. (7) As a burning fire, that shows things, 
is different from the plece of wood thatis burnt and illumined, so is the self-manifest soul, the 
witness Of all, distinct from the subtle and gross bodies. (8) Just as fire burning a piece of 
wood assumes Its qualities of destructibility, coming into being, smallness or magnitude, and 
variety, so does the soul assume the attributes of the body when it enters it. (9) The subtle 
as well as the gross body is constituted of the Gunas controlled by the Lord; and transmigration 
of the soul is the result of identifying it with the body. This misapprehension can be dispelled 
only by the real knowledge of the Self. (10) Therefore, through inquiry one should gradually 
realize the transcendent and absolute Self, permeating the body etc., and the latter as unreal 
and different from the Self. (11) The preceptor is the piece of wood underneath, the disciple 
is the upper one and the instruction is the middle one or churning rod; and (Self-)knowledge 
is the delightful fire produced by friction. (12) The perfectly purified wisdom obtained from an 
efficient preceptor dispels Maya, the product of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and these 
Gunas too; and ultimately the intellect itself becomes quiescent as fire with its fuel 
consumed.(13) If you admit the variety of souls, the agents of actions, subject to happiness 
and misery; if you maintain that the regions, time, the Vedas and the soul are eternal; and 
if you hold that all objects while constantly changing are eternal and that the whole sense of 
perception is engendered by the objects perceived and then changes with the objects; then, 
O Uddhava, you will have to admit that all souls associated with a body are subject to time 
and repeatedly to the states of birth and death etc. Then it is evident from your.standpoint 
that the doer of actions is surely subject to pleasure and pain and for one so dependent there 
can be little happiness. (14—17) Even learned persons, because they have bodies, enjoy 
no happiness, and even fools are not necessarily unhappy. Therefore egotism on the part 
of both is simply vain. (18) Even if they know how to win happiness and overcome misery, 
they surely have not been able to discover means of averting death. (19) What happiness 
can wealth or any sense-enjoyment bring to man when the nearness of death gives him no 
Satisfaction, just as a victim being escorted to the place of execution cannot enjoy any 
pleasure ? (20) Like the worldly pleasures, the bliss of heaven is also vitiated by envy, 
jealousy, evanescence and decay. There are many impediments in attaining to that bliss and 
itis fruitless (at times) like cultivation. (21) You should also hear how one attains the region 
through the successful performance of religious duties unbalked by interrruptions. (22) One 
who performs sacrifices in this world and propitiates the gods through them goes to heaven 
and enjoys there heavenly pleasures, gained through his actions, and feels happy like the 
deities. (23) He assumes a beautiful form and flying in a celestial car earned through his 
Meritorious deeds and surrounded by heavenly damsels and sung by heavenly singers he 
90es about blissfully. (24) But while merrily sporting with the celestial damsels in heavenly 
Pleasances and flying in a celestial car, adorned with small bells and whose speed is 
Controlled by the will of the rider, he does notnotice his impending fall. (25) He enjoys heaven 
SO long as his meritorious deeds bear fruit; but when his merit is exhausted, driven by time, 
though reluctant, he has to take birth in the lower regions. (26) lfa person associates with

© wicked and delights in impiety, or losing control over his senses indulges in low worldly 
Pleasures and becomes mean, avaricious, lustful and oppressive to living creatures, and 
(misled by the wicked) kills animals ignoring religious sanction, and worships eines and 
s0blins, he inevitably goes to hell and assumes bodies of low ignorant creatures. (27-28)

: :

Clothed in a body man performs actions which result in misery. In consequence of those 
actions he assumes another body and thus living in the world the mortal man enjoys little 
happiness. (29) The regions of the universe and their rulers who live till the end of a Kalpa 
are afraid of Me; even Brahma who lives for two Parardhas only is afraid of Me. (30) The 
senses bring about actions and the Gunas prompt the senses to act, and the said Jiva, being 
invested with bodies and senses and identifying itself with them, reaps the fruit of 
actions.(31) Solongas the diversity of the Gunas prevails the Atma will appear manifold. And 
so long as the manifoldness of Atma lasts dependent state will continue. (32) So long as the 
state of dependence of the Jiva continues there is fear from the Lord. Therefore, those who 
take to these Gunas get deluded, and come to grief. (33) Time, Atma, Sastra, the world, 
Nature and Dharma are the various names by which | am called when the equilibrium of the 
three (illusive) qualities is disturbed or they are agitated. (34)

SEF SATA

mm adams SeeGAUldd: | WU agad tet agua at met fast 1341

ea add fata cal waa mat: i fH yelda faguesdiaria afd arise

West A we sa safact ati fag faa wH wala A wT: 1301

sft SMerad Fe URAee “Sfedasleskha Wragsddale SAAS: 1201

Uddhava said : O Lord, though associated with a body etc., why should not the Jiva be 
bound by actions begotten of body ? Or having no connection with them, how does the soul 
get tied to them ? (35) How does a person liberated or bound behave or sport and by what 
characteristics is he to be known ? How does he eat, ease nature, sleep, sit or walk ? (36) 
O Acyuta, the foremost of those expert in answering questions ! (pray) answer this question.

My mistaken notion is as to whether the same Atma is (both) ever bound and ever liberated 
(too). (37)

Thus ends the tenth discourse forming part of the Dialogue between the Lord and Uddhava, 
in Book Eleven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

cB Pack Paced 
DIDS Bac Prey

21 Nep lea Sea:

Discourse XI

The characteristics of bound and liberated souls as well as of devotees

MATA TAA 
ae} Ue Sit AEN Word A A aed: | We wae A Mat aA aR 2 | 
wei Ya ga teas AAT | ast AMISSHA: Tale: Aah qf area | zt 
faenfaet aa aq fagaea aritftome nerd ene ara a fait 3 | 
Ueda wae vflada emai aeisenfaeamietea a adaz: 1x |

pis. 11 ] BOOK ELEVEN 561

aa Tee Gre suas aah Ji fegativiena fieadwehiirs 4 
gaat wet wart yeaa eis a gai 
Tarat: wet faoemaant fist aaa ar & | 
ae A a dq fase a aq fiona: 1 
astern oR Aq fame fremet a: a aq free: 10 | 
qeeists 7 cee faa ware waif: | stewishh See: Haft: NETL AMT! SI 
sfaafttsndg ogre ay ai yemntgd gaia fam aeataina: 1 <1 
caret ase TUT arto adanissea aateift fread igol

The glorious Lord began again : The characterization ofa Jiva as boundor emancipated 
is determined by its being subject or not to (the influence of) the (three) Gunas (modes of 
Prakrti) controlled by Me, and has nothing to do with its essential nature. And the Gunas 
being rooted in Maya (which is under My control), there is neither emancipation nor bondage 
for Me. (1) (Even) as dream is an illusory aspect of the mind, grief and infatuation, joy and 
sorrow and embodiment (or the loss of one's body) are falsely attributed to the Self. (Hence 
even) transmigration (of the soul) is not real (but is ascribed to it through ignorance alone).(2) 
Know that Saving Knowledge and Ignorance are My potencies, specially brought into being 
by My Maya, and have existed without beginning, and make for release and bondage 
(respectively of the Jiva), O Uddhava ! (3) Though | am one, O highly intelligent one, it is in 
relation to the Jiva alone, a reflection of Mine, thatbondage has existed from time immemorial 
through ignorance; anditis in relation to the Jiva alone thatthe other state (release) is brought 
about through Knowledge (in the form of Self-Realization vouchsafed by Me). (4) Next | 
(proceed to) tell you the distinction between the one in bondage (viz., the Jiva or the individual 
soul) and the other who is liberated (viz., God), characterized by contrary properties (viz., 
Sorrow and joy respectively), though (co-) existing in one and the same individual, O dear 
Uddhave! (5) The two (viz., the Jiva and God, the Inner Controller of the Jiva) are (distinct 
from the body like) a pair of birds (dwelling on a tree yet apart from it), Kindred (in character 
as being spiritual in substance) and settled as (constant) companions in the same nest (of 
the heart) on the tree (of the body) by force:of Maya (the divine Will). One of them (viz., the 
Jiva) partakes of the fruit (in the shape of joy and sorrow to be experienced) in the peepul 
tree of the body (as a result of past good and evil deeds); while the other (viz., God), though 
going without food (in the shape of those pleasurable and painful experiences) is (always) 
Superior (to the former) in strength (the strength of wisdom etc.)." (6) (Of the two 
aforementioned,) the enlightened one (viz., God), who does not partake of the fruit of the 
Peepul tree, knows Himself as well as the other (the Jiva); but not so the one who partakes 
Of the fruit of the peepul tree. Again, the one whois characterized by ignorance (viz., the Jiva) 
has been in bondage from eternity; while He whois all Knowledge (viz., God) is ever free.(7) 
An enlightened soul (a Jivanmukta) is not tied to the body even though he remains in the body 
(by force of his past Samskaras), any more than one who has awoke from a dream (remains 
tiedtothe dream body, though continuing in that body in thought). Amanof perverted intellect 
(Who looks upon the body alone as his self) remains identified (on the contrary) with his body, 
though not (essentially) confined within it, (even) as one who is (actually) seeing a dream is 
Identified with his dream body, though not (actually) present in it. (8) Remaining unaffected

a 
* This Very idea finds expression in the following Sruti text:-—

ol fmt wasn warn aa gai waco | aditer: frre Tagersasshrareeia

while the objects of sense—which are no other than modifications of the three Gunas are being 
apprehended by the senses, (which are) modifications of the (same) Gunas, he who is 
enlightened does not feel that he is apprehending them. *(On the other hand he feels that 
itis the Gunas themselves in the form of the senses that apprehend their objects, which are 
made up of the same substance). (9) Functioning in this body controlled by his Prarabdha 
(destiny), the ignorant Jiva, (however) remains tied to it through the (egotistic) notion that he 
is the agent, as a result of actions which are (actually) being performed by the Indriyas (which

are the modifications of the three Gunas and as such identical with them).t(10) :

wa face: 2A Weeder | ahartnusmsramiay 1221 
q qm aaa fast area Wr! safaetsarcdeam ae @ afaahres: 1221 
aaeleraratge tartar ford: site ga Weta fafrada ie3i

Ta Udiaasen: wefan qua: a fart sewisie fe aaa: 1ee 
were fee feeds fafie caesar steia at afer a afafmad ge: 124i 
A Wala a fread Gea: Gees ati aadt qurerenat afsia: anaaqh: 126 
a ala aed fear Arad Vea aT | STRAIT SAa quent faettisisarq: 1e1

Thus remaining free from passion while (lying) in bed, sitting, moving about, bathing, 
seeing, touching, smelling, eating and hearing etc., and allowing the (three) Gunas (in the 
form of the senses) to enjoy the various objects of the senses, the enlightened soul does not 
get bound (by such actions) like the ignorant man. Though continuing in his psycho-physical 
organism (which is a modification of Prakrti) he remains unattached to it like the sky, the sun 
(which remains unattached to the water in which it is reflected) or the wind (which remains 
unattached even though blowing everywhere). (11-12) With (all) his doubts resolved by (the 
sword of) his penetrating intellect whetted by (all-round) detachment he turns away from the 
sense of diversity, even as one who has woke up from a dream turns away from it. (13) He 
whose vital, organic, mental and intellectual functions are absolutely free from deliberate 
thought remains as a matter of fact altogether unfettered by the three Gunas operating 
through his body, though dwelling in it. (14) A wise man is he who is not (adversely or 
agreeably) affected when his body is tormented by mischievous persons or by chance 
treated somewhat with honour by someone at some place. (15) The sage who has 
transcended (the sense of) good and evil and sees equality (everywhere) would neither 
praise those that do or say (anything) good nor censure those who do or say (anything) 
evil.(16) Reveliling in his self, a man given to contemplation should neither do nor contem- 
plate nor speak anything good or evil and should roam about like a stupid fellow and live in 
the aforesaid manner. (17)

Tease eon A Hera wt ael sme smaHet waa ard: 1ec!

“Compare Srimad Bhagavaggita III. 28:—

dala Aertel Wresfasrra: | MN AE Ada Sha Aca A AS |

~ He however, who has true insight into the respective spheres of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and their actions. 
holding (as he does) that it is the Gunas (in the shape of the senses, mind etc.,) that move among the Gunas (objects of 
perception), does not get attached to them, Arjuna !"

+Cf. Srimad Bhagavadgita III. 27:—

Wed: feasts AW: HAI WA: | AeeaRfaqern Halelata AAA 1 7

“All actions are being performed by the modes of Prakrti (primordial Matter). The fool (however), whose mind, is deluded 
by egotism, thinks: “ | am the doer".

a gece a out a unin a 
ay cadinms at dat um CCRC ELT 
war TR eg oat flregmerorterrer | 
CloraMRaT aT we eat fit at faa efit: 1201

If one, though well-versed in the Veda (the Supreme revealed in the form of word), has 
not attained perfection in the Knowledge (realization) of the supreme (Brahma), his labour 
(on the study of the Vedas) has ended in labour alone like that of a man who tends a dry 
cow.(18) The man who maintains a cow that has been milked for good (offers no more 
prospect of yielding milk), a false wife, a body depending (for its support) on another and 
an unworthy son, nay, who guards wealth which is not bestowed on worthy recipients and 
cuitivates, O dear Uddhava ! speech which does not glorify Me reaps misery after 
misery.(19) A wise man ought not to cultivate such barren speech as does not glorify, O 
dear Uddhava, My purifying activity responsible for the appearance, continuance and 
exiinction of this universe and does not describe My advent (in the form) of Sri Rama, Sri 
Krsna and so on), which is so dear to the world, among My (numerous) descents taken for 
the sake of sport.(20)

wi 406 freee «So arawamreamisarea fae uatt wee adie 
aan ana wat seat fseqinf aalftt aatfin fade: are 1221 
STaIGH HM: YS GAs HleHUlet: | Wea, HA wt alsa YE: 1231 
wet 8 8=6adamatara «= «Reus: loud get Ah Weega ald 12v1

: Wael Afa at a safaaia aa aid alegre fad GaI24I

Having cast aside, through inquiry on the lines indicated in the foregoing verses, the 
mistaken notion of diversity with respect to the soul, and focussed one's mind, free from (all) 
impurities, on Me, the omnipresent Lord, one should retire (from all activity). (21) If (however) 
you are unable to fix your mind irrevocably on Brahma, do all your (allotted) duties efficiently 
ina disinterested spirit for My sake. (22) Hearing with reverence My stories, which bring merit 
(to the hearer) and purify the worlds, chanting them (if there is someone to hear) and 
constantly recalling them (even when there is none to chant or hear them), arranging 
dramatic representation of My advent and pastimes again and again, (nay,) pursuing 
righteousness, enjoyment and wealth for My sake and depending on Me, O Uddhava ! one 
develops unflinching devotion to Me, the Eternal. (23-24) Equipped with Devotion acquired 
through the fellowship of saints, he becomes My worshipper. (And) such a worshipper 
undoubtedly attains with ease to My state as shown by the righteous. (25)

SET SAA

aedrimscta va: aighaa: siti aieerequgeat anlgel Alsattea 124 |

a wal ua aa gee: Wad: UX: | Aadisha WI VestoNgeag: 1221 
_ Uddhava submitted : What kind of man is considered by You to be a pious soul, O 
llustrious Lord ? And what kind of devotion has been esteemed by the righteous and may 
€ directed towards You ? (26) Let this be pointed out to me, bent low (before You), devoted 
lo You) and fallen at Your feet, O Ruler (even) of Brahma and others (the highest souls), the 
Controller ofthe spheres, the Lord of the (enti re) creation ! (27) Youare the supreme Brahma, 
laintless like the sky, the Spirit beyond Prakrti; yet, O Lord ! You have descended (on this 
©arth) having assumed a distinct (finite) personality at Your own (sweet) will. (28)

MATA LAAT 
PUT peialeetitar: Vaca | AAAS «AA: alae: 1221 
eURediedt Fe: BWrearfeesr: | ste ayy are: ert aww gm: 1301 
sat «ten «= tfaanferagegqer: 1 STAT ae: Heal Fa: areftre: afa: 1321 
Tala TOM Sa ASSES S| AA STS: Va AT Usted A AAA: 1321 
WARIS A 4 Al AA AM Aes: | WreAAMsA A A WHAM Tat: 1331

The glorious Lord replied : A pious soul is compassionate to all embodied souls, harms 
none, is forbearing, has truthfulness for his strength, faultless of mind, equipoised (in joy and 
sorrow) and beneficent to all; his judgment is never clouded by (attachment to) the pleasures 
of sense; he is self-disciplined, soft (by nature), pure (perfectly moral in his dealings), 
resourceless and effortless, lives on a scanty meal, is free from passions and constant, solely 
depends on Me and is given to contemplation and vigilant, remains unexcited (even when 
there is room for excitement) and firm (even in adversity); he must have conquered the six 
waves (viz., cold and heat, greed and infatuation, hunger and thirst), does not seek honour, 
though bestowingit (on others), is capable of imparting knowledge to others, sincere altruistic 
and possessed of right knowledge. (29—31). He (too) is (likewise) the best of (all) virtuous 
men, who—having completely neglected all his duties, though prescribed by Me, while 
knowing full well the virtues (resulting from the performance of duty) and sins (incurred by 
neglecting them)—worships Me (alone). (82) They are considered by Me to be the foremost 
of (all) devotees, who worship Me with exclusive devotion, knowing in reality how great! am, 
what | am and what like | am, or (even) not knowing this. (33)

lua 9 wait: = swequHatqniday 13%! 
Tea et Tee i aderaiaet arent 134 | 
Tstedeet At Ualqaled| Madveaaiemnsiadaelca: 131 
am aed a waddaiieadqiafent afant dat adlaadenr i301 
TA sgl Md: Weel Alea: | SellcaatHlequaParHatar Yar 
aasiaaeanat Aanvssads: | TeWAI «Ae cade AHA 13! 
Saas PAM! Sa dataeteh A Aaqataafedy Ivo | 
aq adiesad aim aalfaiane: iddideaatel daa ameud 1X2!

Devotion to Me consists, O Uddhava ! in beholding, touching and worshipping My 
representations of (in the form of images etc.,) and people devoted to Me, rendering (bodily) 
Service to them (such as kneading their feet), extolling them, bowing to them and repeatedly 
recounting My excellences and exploits; developing reverence for hearing My stories, 
practising contemplation on Me, offering all one's gains to Me, offering one's body (to Me) 
for service; narrating the stories of My advent and recounting My deeds, celebrating festivals 
connected with Me (such as the Janmastami festival connected with My advent) and 
conducting festivities in My temples with vocal and instrumental music, dance and Puranic 
discourses; visiting holy places in procession and conducting (special) worship (with 
flowers etc.,) on all annual festive occasions (particularly on every Ekadasi during the four 
rainy months), initiating men into certain forms of Vedic and Tantrika worship etc., and 
undertaking vows sacred to Me (such as fasting on Ekadasi days); enthusiasm in installing 
My images (in temples specially built for the purpose) and individual as well as collective 
effort for laying out gardens, orchards and pleasances, erecting boundary walls round towns

and constructing temples, keeping my temples tidy and clean after the manner of a servant 
by removing their dust and plastering their floor with cowdung etc., washing their floor and 
decorating it with ornamental designs and diagrams in a guileless way (without any 
expectation of return); absence of pride and hypocrisy and refraining from making known 
one's own services.” One should not uset (for one's own benefit) even the light of a lamp 
offered (by oneself or anyone else) to Me (or, to interpret it in another way, one should not offer 
to Me even the light of a lamp (already) offered (to Me or to any other deity).4(84—40). One 
should (on the other hand) offer to Me whatever is most favoured with the world as well as 
whatever is most liked by himself; for such an offering is capable of yielding immortality. (41)

qaishataon Wet aera: GS Teste! ye aay ws genoa Axe 
a gq feet ven efaarat ata am anfaeda gq fa ages gaara iva 
ame aye we W emg at yearn aa sears: xx! 
waftses TARTAR | aot TA, BARA AA AMIS 
feoagight aqEd Weeererge: | ab aust qed eee warled: 1s! 
saga AMA at asa |= ofed: ord af aakh uefa: aedaat vel 
sant nat | ae feaga | tore faerd Gere set fe warmer ive 
aA, UW Ug Wad aera! Alem aan aa yea: HELA Xe 
ofa Ser Tad ASM USE GlecaeeaHe VIS AUSEAR: 122 |

The sun, fire, the Brahmana cows, a votary of Lord Visnu, the sky, the air, water, earth, 
one's own body and all living beings are the media of My worship, O good one! (42) In the 
sun one should worship Me by (waiting upon Me with) hymns forming part of the three Vedas; 
in (the sacred) fire, by (pouring) oblations; in a worthy Brahmana, through hospitality of 
course; and in cows, through green grass etc., O dear Uddhava; in a votary of Lord Visnu, 
through attentions due to a relation; in the cavity of one's heart, through fixity in meditation; 
in the air, through the thought that it is the life-giving principle running through the entire 
universe; in the water, through articles of worship followed by water (itself); ina raised ground

"A Smrti text says :- wt: ata aldard! ; 
"A virtue is spent by being made known through one's own lips." areis “at 
titis for this reason thatin orderto guard against the offence of seeing things with the help of such lightit has been enjoined

thata light offered toa deity should contain a double wick. Of course, this does not debar us from accepting for one's own use 
ina Spirit of devotion the offerings made to a deity in the shape of eatables, sandal-paste, garland and scent etc., which has 
been extolled in the scriptures as conducive to sage The scrip furs Sy ae qa eT 
. acne l fasniaaetadaa 
a ae am Aaaqet wi: | Ueleh Praied Fen Aer sega

Mn the Kali age the same virtue accrues from the food offered to Lord Visnu to those gee ca one eee: oe 
to result from a fast undertaken for a whole month as many as six times. He is identical with Lord Visnu, who carries a mental 
image of Lord Si Hari in his heart, His name on his lips, the food offered to Him in his stomach, nay, the water in which His

feet have been washed and flowers etc., offered to Him on the head."

+Th =f 
© Smrti says : ‘ mes | fageadte. az se 
s a ! s A cengea | WRATH! TET: fades wat SAT: I 
‘ “One ought to propitiate other deities by means of food (already) offered to Lord Visnu (the Supreme Deity); nay, it should 
© Offered to the manes as well (during the Sraddha ceremony), as such consecrated food (if offered to the manes) is capable 
Of Yielding an immortal fruit. In-the case (however) of him who offers the food already offered to the manes to Lord Sri Hari,

De Supr me Spirit, the manes who were responsible for his birth undergo (great) suffering.“

(duly) levelled and cleared (through consecration) by means of mystic formulas. In one's own 
body, one should propitiate the soul through amenities (permitted by the Sastras); and in a} 
created beings one should worship Me as the conscious Self through undifferentiateg 
vision. (43—45) Through these media one should contemplate and worship with a concen- 
trated mind in the aforesaid manner My serene and four-armed personality equipped witn

a conch, discus, mace and lotus. (46) He who worships Me as aforesaid with a concentrated

mind through (Vedic) sacrifices and acts of pious liberality (such as the gift of food; enjoined 
in the Smrtis) attains true devotion to Me and through service to the righteous follows My 
(constant) remembrance (or realization too). (47) Ordinarily there is no royal road (to My 
realization) other than the discipline of Devotion preceded by association with the righteous, 
O Uddhava; for! am the greatest resort of the righteous. (48) Therefore, hear this (following)

sovereign secret, O scion of Yadu ! | shall tell you even that which deserves to be

scrupulously guarded; (for) you are My servant and sincere friend. (49)

Thus ends the eleventh discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

SIN FISaseara:

Discourse XII 
The Glory of Satsanga; how to perform one's prescribed duty 
and how to relinquish it ? 
MTA TATA

4 Wea At art + arei ad wa AIA eeaaeaearn Asad a afer @ | 
aM Grecia dai faa an: iamaead aag: adage fe AML! 2 | 
Gaga fe Stat aaa wn: wm: | Wear ArT: TagiQnurieet: | 3 | 
SER ASE Aza: Yet: Feralas: | rere «| ASAT |X 
aed Ade 8 MEReIBaTaaea: | qacal afeaton was fasiteor: 1 & | 
sil eat Ast Ze aforeqa: | ana: Hem aA Wen asus | & |

Teaser §=8§=—- ararfaaaeaan: | staaragqaqa: Aagraaria: | 9 | 
ended fe Mea Wat Mat AM AM: | Asa Aeferat arm: fees uritaera | c | 
4 4 aa Set deaddiseat: | omemenearrdae: sTyereaararawy |e

wa are TUT) saefeaet «= Weenie: | |

famemiet = TO fereidiioneniiset «= cag; «= erat 1201

wet: a: sedtt at ada 8 qeraantetor |

auiieam: Ute det gat wal aaa aya: 1221

mT Aaa 8-H eateg era: AAA |

am ware | eetsfeerta «Fer: «ofa sa aR 1221

<< eee et eee + --- ecw — =

pis. 12 ] BOOK ELEVEN 567

near | TA aT acfadisten: | Ta At Ue WY: AsTeaaee: 1231 
qaredeaest «cient siretermisat a fad a siaet aaa a ex 
mmeat =| OTT ee ale Galera war SM Mepis: 1241

The glorious Lord began again : Neither Yoga (consisting of eight limbs enumerated 
in the Yoga-Sutras of Patajfijali) nor Sankhya (knowledge of the distinctive character of the 
different categories discussed in the Sankhya system of philosophy) nor righteousness 
(consisting of non-violence, benevolence etc.), study of the Vedas (or Japa of the Divine 
Name), austerity and renunciation nor pouring oblations into the sacred fire and works of 
public utility (such as the digging of wells and tanks and the laying out of gardens) nor (the 
bestowal of) gifts, (observing) fasts, worship of gods, muttering secret spells,resorting to holy 
waters and places of pilgrimage, (undertaking) sacred observances (such as purity of body 
and mind) and the (five) forms of self-abnegation (non-violence etc.,) gain Me over as does 
Satsanga capture Me—Satsanga, which actually puts an end to all (other) attachments. (1-2) 
For, thanks to the fellowship of saints, a number of Daityas (the sons of Diti), Yatudhanas 
(ogres), beasts and birds, Gandharvas and Apsaras, Nagas, Siddhas, Caranas and 
Guhyakas (Yaksas), Vidyadharas, and among human beings (even) Vaigyas and Sidras, 
womenfolk and the lowest born, possessed of a Rajasika and Tamasika disposition, such as 
Vrtrasura (son of the god Twasta through a Daitya mother), Prahrada (son of Kayadht), 
Vrsaparva, Bali, Bana, Maya and Vibhisana, sub-human (beings like) Sugriva, Hanuman, 
Jambavan (a bear), the (celebrated) elephant (of the legend), Jatayu (a vulture), Tuladhara 
(amerchant), Dharmavyadha (a hunter by profession), Kubja (a hunch-backed damsel), the 
Gopis (cowherdesses) as well as the wives of Brahmanas (engaged in performing a 
sacrifice) of Vraja and others ascended to My realm in different Yugas, O sinless 
Uddhava ! (3—6) Although they had never studied the Sruti texts, had never waited upon the 
most exalted ones (for the said purpose), had not observed any sacred vows nor practised 
any austerities, they (nevertheless) attained to Me through the fellowship of saints (alone).(7) 
Through mere love indeed the cowherdesses and cows, (nay,) trees and antelopes, cobras 
and other dull-witted creatures accomplished the object of their life and easily attained to Me, 
whom one cannot reach (even) with (great) exertion through Yoga or Sankhya, liberality, 
Sacred vows, austerities and sacrificial performances, exposition of sacred texts, study of the 
Vedas (or Japa of the Divine Name) and renunciation. (8-9) When | was taken to Mathura 
alongwith Balarama by Akrira (the son of Swaphalka), the Gopis—whose mind was 
attached to Me through intense devotion and who suffered acute pangs of separation (from 
Me)—did not look upon anyone else than Me as a source of delight. (10) Those very 
(autumnal) nights (of ineffable sweetness) which had (during the Rasa dance), been spent 
(by them) like half a second with Me, the highest object of their love when | was present (by 
their Side) in (the woods of) Vrindavana, hung heavy on them like a Kalpa (a thousand 
revolutions of the four Yugas) now that they were bereft of Me, O loved one ! (11) With their 
mind fastened on to Me with (chords of) love they were no longer conscious of their own 
People or (even) of their (own) self, much less of this world or the next—any more than 
Sages lost in Yogic trance are conscious of (this world consisting of) names and forms— 
2nd merged into (become one with) Me like rivers that lose themselves in the waters of the 
"cean. (12) Full of passion for Me, thinking Me (only) as their lover, nay, paramour, women 
tof Vraja) in their hundreds and thousands, who did not know My essential (divine) 
c aracter, attained to Me, the supreme Brahma, through the fellowship of the righteous.

Therefore, turning your back upon injunctions as well as upon interdictions, (nay,) 
“enouncing worldly activity as well as cessation from activity, and rejecting that which has —

been learntand that which has (yet) to be learnt, O Uddhava, seek as your refuge Me alone. 
the one Self of all embodied creatures, with all your being; for with Me alone (as your 
Master) you can be rid of fear from all quarters. (14-15) 
SEI SATA 
Ga: Wad aad aa atetaia Hada siete aa unafa A aa: ies 
Uddhava submitted : Even though | am hearing Your discourse, O Lord of (all) Masters 
of Yoga, the doubt in my mind (as to whether | should really abandon all activity or not) does 
not cease, so that my mind stands bewildered. (16)

STAT ATA 
a wa siat faamga: soa aan ye sofas: | 
Tima ge wa aa wa aul sit was: lev 
aac: USGA aed creuafemeaan: | 
3: Usidt gas aed ada A aed fe anit iec 
wa wie: wd ufadani aor wt ae ae: safc 
Usetiageaaanaar: wa Wi: aradatfaean: 122 1 
safe «CSlafaacoraiers «Sat SC aes: I 
fakosaiknaeta aid ate at sige aad iol 
area = area re TC fet: I 
a WW Wade: Ga: pai: YEH Waa 12e! 
2 Fa at wef: ws: dss: | 
calcein faquuitiskaacnat famelsch STAB: 1221 
Seed dh ROM FE AA 8 Whawaalen: | 
em 4 Wh ageutwaniamd aq a aq aarieei 
W Weurddevan faamora fdr er: | 
faqeal Ha: «= IAS TTL 12% 1 
ed ASMA A WAS ASAP STERSEATA: 1221 
__ Theglorious Lord replied : The aforesaid Supreme (who gives life to all) is self-evident 
in that Fle reveals Himself (as follows) in the (six) Cakras (spiritual centres existing in the 
human body). Having (first) entered the Adhara Cakra (located near the anus) alongwith the 
sonant Prana (known by the name of Para speech) and assumed the subtle forms composed 
of the mind-stuff (and known by the names of Pasyanti and Madhyama in the Maniptra and 
Visuddhi Cakras located near the navel and throat respectively), He (finally) manifests 
Himself (within the mouth) in the grossest form (known by the name of Vaikhari speech and) 
consisting of Matra (measure of time taken in uttering a vowel sound ), accent (Udatta etc..,) 
and articulate sound. (17) Just as fire, existing in the form of (unmanifest) heat in the sky; 
appears in a minute form (as a spark) when being repeatedly churned with force out of (a 
block of) wood and (fanned by the wind and) growing larger (in course of time), blazes forth. 
with the help of oblations (poured into it), even so | appear (by degrees), as a matter of fact, 
as (the Para, Pasyanti, Madhyama and Vaikhari forms of) this (Vedic) speech. (18) Likew!S¢ 
articulation, work done by the hands, locomotion, evacuation of the bowels and the bladder, 
perceiving smell and taste, vision, perceiving the touch and audition, conception, cognition

ae

and intellection and self-identification with the body etc. (the function of the ego), permeating 
things (the function of Prakrti) and the entire range of objective existence (consisting of the 
Iindriyas, the modifications of Rajas, the deities presiding over them, the modifications of 
Sattva, and the five gross elements, the modifications of Tamas) are My manifestations. (19) 
This God (the, life-giver of all) is indeed one and unmanifest (in the beginning); for He is the 
first to become the support of the three Gunas and the source of the lotus of the universe. 
Having by force of time purposively embraced His potency (in the form of Maya), He appears 
manifold as it were (even) as, having founda (Suitable) soil, seeds assume diverse shapes 
(in the form of trees etc.). (20) This universe is in no way other than God, in whom it stands 
woven warp and woof like a piece of cloth, which owes its existence to the expanse of 
threads. (Just as threads exist even independently of the cloth, but not so the cloth, the 
universe owes Its existence to God but God exists even independently of the universe.) This 
tree of mundane existence has no beginning, is characterized by activity and puts forth 
flowers and fruits (in the shape of enjoyment and final beatitude). (21) (Virtue and sin—) two 
are its seeds, innumerable are its roots (in the shape of cravings); (Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas—) three are its stalks; five (viz., the five elements) are its main boughs; it yields five 
(kinds of) saps (in the shape of the five objects of senses); ten and one are its secondary 
branches (in the shape of the ten Indriyas and the mind); it bears (on it) the nest of two birds 
(viz., God and the Jiva, the individual soul); three are the layers of its bark (in the shape of 
the three humours of the body, viz., wind, bile and phlegm); it bears two (varieties of) fruits 
(viz., joy and sorrow) and spreads as far as (the sphere of) the sun (there being no 
metempsychosis for those who have penetrated beyond the sphere of the sun). (22) Full of 
carnal desires (the vulture-like) men of the world partake of its one fruit (viz., misery, even 
heavenly enjoyment being ultimately productive of sorrow); while (the swan-like) men of 
wisdom dwelling in the woods (cut off from the world) eat the other (viz., the bliss of 
immortality). He (alone) knows (the true import of) the Vedas, who comes to realize through 
(his) preceptors (worthy of respect) the one God (Myself) appearing in multitudinous forms 
by dint of His Maya (in the shape of His will to become many). (23) Having thus subdued 
yourself and remaining alert (all the while), cut at the root of your astral body (the 
distinguishing appurtenance of a Jiva) with exclusive devotion (to Me) acquired by sitting at 
the feet of a preceptor or by means of the keen-edged axe of wisdom (in the form of Self- 
Realization); and, having (thereby) realized the Self, cast off forthwith (even) the weapon 
(with which you have rent the veil of ignorance in the form of your Jivahood). (24)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious

Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

LIS ary

[S65] B.M. Part II—47

BIN WAaNSeATA:

Discourse XIlIl 
The teaching imparted by the Lord in the form of the Divine Swan to the

sage Sanaka and his three brothers |

STAT Tara |

|

Ga GA st WN Gad Wer: | Gea ea aa ae aa fF et |

Gale Mal Ade Gall GA Aaakpsa: | akantarat Ua adt ad: seadd 1 2 1 :

qat Wea ed aeahataan: ama asafa ayer geri sua adi 3 i |

SIRTAISG: US Sat: Hl: HA A WAT A A Tals eH ald Weda: | x |

ad, Ukdeaast ae ae qal: Taad i Freha ama ade Wes aaufaa & | |

Aikdarad dad GAM Adlaqediad ated wa aad Biawleig: | |

ayagist afaceat arate deli wa queria ee: areata afcna: | © | | 
The glorious Lord began again : Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—these are the modes of 
Buddhi (Prakrti) and not of the Self. By (developing) the quality of Sattva (therefore) one 
should control (the operation of) the other two (viz., Rajas and Tamas) and (then) Sattva itself 
(in the shape of Sattvika virtues like truthfulness and compassion) by Sattva (in the form of 
quietism). (1) As a result of Sattva grown predominant appears in man the virtue bearing the

label of Devotion to Me. Sattva develops through the use of Sattvika things and thence 
proceeds righteousness (in the form of Devotion). (2) Righteousness (in the form of | 
i

Devotion), which contributes to the predominance of Sattva and which is (therefore) the 
superlative virtue, curbs (the element of) Rajas and Tamas; and, when both these are 
subdued, unrighteousness, which has its root in these latter, soon disappears as a matter 
of course. (3) Scripture, water, the people (environment), place (surroundings), time, 
occupation and birth, (the object of) contemplation, Mantra (spell) and purificatory rites— 
these ten are contributory to the growth of a particular Guna. (4) Of these (latter) whatever 
men of mature judgment speak approvingly of is unquestionably Sattvika; that which they 
condemn is Tamasika and that which is looked upon by them with indifference is Rajasika. (5) 
For the predominance of Sattva a man should make use of Sattvika things alone. Thence will 
proceed righteousness (in the form of Devotion) and thence (again) will follow (the light of) 
wisdom culminating in Self-Realization and the extinction of darkness (in the form of the two. 
bodies and their ultimate cause, (viz., the three Gunas). (6) The fire produced by the attrition 
of bamboo stalks subsides after consuming that thicket (by its flames); so the body born of 
eee of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and behaving like the (said) fire, ceaSes 
O be. (7).

SET SAT 
Taehat Fett: stor fara vena aan ys Her aa Het wea ¢ | 
Uddhava submitted : Men generally know the pleasures of sense to be the source of

calamities; how is it (then) that, like the dog, the donkey and the goat, they still (doggedly 
pursue-and) enjoy them, O Krsna ? (8)

pis. 13 ] BOOK ELEVEN 571

HARALSON 
‘

eA: TA an Weiser wt att adt daft aa: 1 @ 1 
Wigra ATA: Ugseu: afaceun: | aa: art TUAM S:0e: Uikes GHA: 12o! 
ailla Tea: enivatatsarsa: | ¢:a@lecitor Wa Wtrertfanifed: 1221 
wren Felt faa fateh: oa: 1 safe wt gem await aa 122i 
arrMsTasa = AT eardesesd: | arfrffoult aenenres farcarent faraa: 1231 
Waar ar stfest aks: creeks: | addt wa steer TeRgIssAsay Ba 12x 
The glorious Lord replied : The perverted notion of "I" (with reference to the body etc.) 
duly springs up in the heart of the deluded soul; due to such notion Rajas, which is the root 
of sorrow, pervades the mind, even though the latter is born of Sattva. (9) In the mind, 
coloured with Rajas, ofa man of perverted judgment springs up (first of all) the notion about 
an object being worth enjoying and (then) as to how it can be enjoyed. Next arises in him, 
as a result of his dwelling on the excellent aspects of that object, a passion for it which is 
indeed difficult to arrest. (10) Having no control over his senses and overpowered by desire, 
the man embarks upon actions attended with sorrow) though clearly perceiving them to be 
such, deluded as he is by the impetuosity of Rajas. (11) The man of discrimination, though 
his mind (too) is (sometimes) distracted (and even infatuated) by Rajas and Tamas, collects 
his mind again with effort, alive as he is to the evil inherent in the pleasures of sense, and 
does not get attached to them. (12) Having controlled the breath and secured steadiness of 
posture, and remaining alert and not feeling bored (in the event of success not coming within 
sight soon) one should slowly compose _the-mind, concentrating it on Me at the appointed 
time (thrice a day). (13) Withdrawing the mind from everything (else), it should be duly and 
directly established in Me; this much comprises the Yoga taught (by Me) to Brahma 
accompanied by My disciples, the sages Sanaka and others. (14)

SEA SAA 
al wa wales at wa seal aemnfesarae watery diez ie

Uddhava submitted : | wish to know about that form in which and when you taught 
the Yoga to Sanaka and his three brothers, O Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Lord

Siva)! (15) 
MATA TAA 
Gat fester Ie: «Genre: | Use: frat Gant arretentiectene Tey 1 Ne | 
The glorious Lord replied : Sanaka and his brothers mind-born sons of Brahma (the 
Creator), questioned their father (once) about the unfailing and highest consummation of 
09a, so difficult to understand. (16) 
GIAIGA HY: 
Wiyfara dat wnsda a gat | Harada «=8=8©—- quaittfafedat: 12091 
Sanaka and others submitted : The mind clings to the sense-objects (by virtue of its

Natural affinity to them) and the latter get imprinted on the mind (in the form of latencies), O 
Ord | How can it be possible for the seeker of Liberation, whois keen to reach the other shore,

0 part them one from the other ? (17) es

STAN TATA

ud ast Hele: Sayqydves: | AAA: welt aqua Heel: ec 
a amferaae fa: seunfadiiari ae eat ARMA aaT1ee 
Seal At A SUA Hea aaa! AMMO: Heal UT: Al Varhtiet 1 201 
Sag OHM: «eerafarafteiacaang «gga «ale F128 
aq MeAAaaeA: sa gaa: | wet aed at fam agal 4 aw se: 1221 
Use WAT BANG A aaa: | Hl Nala a: wat area Wade: 1231 
Ta aaa GaN yedsaifsa: seta aA aMisefaft qeteqgar 121 
Wryfaaa adi Wnsda a wet: isaa se svat WoNAd Aare: 1241 
Te «86 Alaafadasiet «= uaa oss fava AgT SMa ATI RE| 
SE GA: PI A Wid sfequa: | aati fase sia: afar farsa: 1291 
aie agitaisamtet Worafaa: 1 afer qe fer Ha aes OTT, 1201 
sleshard anienistiaqaay | fag fda aantarat da Rerctearstez, 128 | 
aaa: Gat a ada akefe: i area aura: GX ANU Bet 301 
FAAIASAA Wal achat Feri ada Adasre ya Heat Brie

a arn afeqaueftioisaty yeh anerHmlete aaeer |

Mi UH sade a ws: wWeraaiaquefietfaaa: 1321

Wa fagea Wort araeaaen ware ala qe sta Pafsrareqt: |

Ged MedAMdekMaeaa Ast Alhaderaeny 133 1

The glorious Lord continued : Thus interrogated, Brahma (the great god), the self-born 
creator of beings, could not get, in spite of his deep thought, at the root of the question 
(ignorance about the Self), his mind being taken up with his duty (of creation). (18) The said 
god fixed his mind on Me with intent to get to the other side (the hidden meaning) of the 
question. Then | sought his presence in the form of a swan (in order to hint at His capacity 
to alienate the sense-objects from the mind just as the swan is credited with the virtue of 
Separating water from milk when mixed together). (19) Beholding Me and placing Brahma 
at their head, they (Sanaka and others) came up to Me and, bowing at My feet, asked Me 
as to who | was. (20) In these words was | interrogated on the said occasion by the sages: 
keen as they were to know the Truth. (Now) hear from Me, O Uddhava, what! spoke to them 
(in reply). (21) If there is unity of the substance known as the Self (and If your question relates 
to the Self in Me), how can such a question on your part (as you have asked Me, calling upon 
Me to specify Myself out of many) be relevant, O Brahmana sages ! Or (even) if | (proceed 
to) speak (in reply), what (distinctive quality) can be My basis (for an answer) ? (22) (If, on 
the other hand, it relates to My body, even then) your question as to who | am is indeed a 
(mere) drill in words and (hence) meaningless, the bodies of living creatures being identical 
(in substance), constituted (as they are) of the five elements, and (also) from the point of view 
of ultimate reality. (23) Whatever is grasped by the mind, expressed through speech an 
perceived through the faculty of vision, nay, even with the other senses is but Myself, there 
is nothing other than Me; know this as a result of enquiry into the truth. (24) (True,) the mind 
cleaves to the sense-objects and the latter get imprinted on the mind, O My sons! The sense-

|

wwe

pis. 13] e | BOOK ELEV 
objects and the mind both (however) constitute th 
essence) Of the Jiva, which is essentially the same 
between the Jiva, on the one hand, and the sense-o

can therefore be easily transcended by the Jiva by contemplating on its divine essence, its 
identity with Brahma. (25) Becoming one with Me (and thus realizing its own true nature), the 
Jiva should (therefore) give up both—viz., the mind clinging to the sense-objects as a result | 
of repeatedly enjoying them and the sense-objects that get imprinted on it (in the form of 
latencies). (26) Wakeiulness, the dream state and deep slumber are the (three) states of the 
mind (and not of the Jiva), following from (the preponderance of) the (three) Gunas, (Sattva, 
Rajas and Tamas respectively). The Jiva, however, is conclusively known to be distinct from 
them as being their witness. (27) Since this identification of the soul with Buddhi (which is 
responsible for its transmigration) attributes to it the functions of the (three) Gunas, therefore, 
getting established in Me, the transcendent Brahma (which lies beyond the three states of 
wakefulness etc.), the Jiva should shake off this identification. Thereafter follows the 
(mutual) divorce of the sense-objects and the mind. (28) Realizing the bondage of the soul— 
occasioned by self-identification with one's psycho-physical organism—to be the source of 
evil (in the shape of obscuring one's blissful nature), and feeling disgusted with it, one should 
get established in the fourth (transcendent) principle and give up identification with the body 
etc., (which is responsible for the transmigration of the soul) and the resultant thought of 
gratifying the self. (29) So long as the sense of reality of diverse objects does not disappear 
from the mind of man through arguments, the fool continues to sleep even though he is 
awake, just like the man whois wakingin a dream. (30) (Objective entities like the body) other 
than the Self having no existence, the differences (of Varna, ASrama and so on) occasioned 
by them, the (various) destinies (such as the enjoyments of heaven, to be attained by men 
after death and described in the Vedas) and their causes (in the shape of good and evil 
actions of various kinds) are (all) unreal with the Self as things seen by a dreaming man. (31) 
He who while waking perceives outside himself through all his senses objects having 
properties changing every moment, (nay,) who experiences within his heartin a dream things 
(shaped by his Vasanas or cravings and) similar to those perceived in the waking state and 
who in deep slumber withdraws them (all) is one and the same, connected as he is with all 
the states by memory as their witness and as the controller of the senses. (32) Pondering 
thus and arriving at the following conclusion about the nature of the Self that the three states 
of the mind (referred to heretofore and) traceable to the (three) Gunas (or modes of Prakrti) 
are superimposed on Me (appearing as the Jiva) by My deluding potency (veiling My true 
Nature), cut at the root of egotism, the basis of all doubts (as to whether the soul is different 
rom the body etc., or one with it, whether it is one or there Isa plurality of souls and so on) 
with the sword of wisdom whetted by reasoning, the precepts of saints and the Sruti texts, 
and betake yourselves to Me seated in your (very) heart. (33)

daa favatte aaa ford @B farpatioimneitacns | 
faraaqeda faerie we afer Toleeiget ferened: 13x 
afi aa: sfitradt frqnqurqei wafargergyal fete: | 
Squad ww alaNeTGAM Ae HATA A AA RTT TAT 1a 
ae aq aaafeaahed at feat a weatt aetserTad BATT | 
Serataga faerenght ara gat aR IRTP: 135 
Sash dacert: we at aad aR MreataT TA ATT: | 
4 asagahirecamam: a gr wid sitqere: 1301

e body (i.e., an adjunct and not the 
e as | (so that there is no real affinity 
bjects and the mind, on the other, which

Taide at fam qe ad areata: isla Assad a AST gHfaaarar 13¢1 
we aT Wea aed Asta: | oRTant fester: fra: alddra a 1321 
i Waa Wo: ad Fri fmaenige Haat wararagieaisqm: xo

One should look upon this (objective) world as an illusion in that itis a creation of the mind 
open to perception and evanescent as a dream and most unsteady like a revolving firebrand. 
Consciousness, though one, appears as many (through a freak of imagination) and this 
threefold division (in the shape of the body, the Indriyas and the mind), wrought by the 
projection of the (three) Gunas (or modes of Prakrti) is a (mere) illusory appearance. (34) 
(Therefore,) diverting one's eye (mind) from the body etc., (which are all superimposed on 
the Self), one should remain absorbedin the realization of one’s own blissful nature. His thirst 
for enjoyment having ceased (once for all), he should keep quiet and effortless. Even if this 
body etc., is perceived (as a distinct reality) at times (while taking one’s meals, answering 
the calls of nature and so on), what has been dismissed as unreal (other than the Self) can 
no longer delude us, although its impression on the mind may continue till death. (35) Nay, 
a man established in the Self no longer cognizes (even) his perishable body, by means of 
which he realized his self, as risen (from his seat), or settled (again), gone out (to some other 
place) or come (back) by chance, any more than a man blinded by intoxication caused by 
wine cognizes the garment worn by him as (still) on his person or fallen therefrom. (36) The 
body too, including the Indriyas and the vital principle, functioning as it does under the control 
of Providence, undoubtedly and invariably survives till the Karma (the stock of merit and sin) 
which broughtit into existence stands (has not been reaped). He (however) who has climbed 
up to the highest ladder of Yoga (concentration of mind) known by the name of Samadhi 
(absorption of mind into the Universal Spirit) and realized the truth does not recapture (as 
his own self or its own) the body alongwith the world (directly connected with it in the shape 
of one's wife, children, house and other material possessions) any more than the man who 
has awoke from sleep does his dream-body. (37) This is the secret of Sankhya (the branch 
of knowledge which distinguishes Matter from Spirit) and Yoga (the system of philosophy 
founded by the sage Patanijali), which has been expounded by Me, to you, O Brahmana 
sages ! Know Me to be Yajfia (Lord Visnu Himself) arrived (here) with intent to expound

(unfold) to you (the secret of) Dharmas (the righteous courses leading to Liberation). (38) |

am the supreme goal of Yoga and Sankhya, virtue both in its ideal and practical form, glory

and prosperity, celebrity and self-control, O jewels among the twice-born! (39) All virtues like 
~ even-mindedness and non-attachment, which are not products of the three Gunas (and 
therefore eternal) find shelter in Me, transcendent and free from desire as | am, the beloved 
friend, (nay,) the (very) Self (of all). (40)

gt A fears Wa: ales: aus We Naeyod eta: Ise! 
ae Ufsid: Wa Add: aii: isda we aa usa: afb: 1X2! 
a AASrrad ARM URS MSdareaHa AAMSeAT: 1231

Having (duly) worshipped Me with supreme devotion, the sages Sanaka and his (three) 
brothers—who had their doubts (as to the way in which the mind could be weaned from the 
objects of sense) thus resolved by Me (in the form of the divine Swan)—celebrated Me 
through songs of praise. (41) Honoured with due ceremony and glorified at length by the 
aforesaid great sages, | flew back to My (divine) realm, Brahma (the highest functionary C

the universe) looking on. (42)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book-Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BAZ Ade astra:

Discourse XIV

Glory of the Path of Devotion and the Process of Meditation described 
S&T SATA 
aera pot safe aa serene: 1 aet facut WHAT | 2 1 
vadieled: ee winarisadfard: | fea ada: ag a4 wants: 1 2 | 
Uddhava submitted : Exponents of Veda speak of many a course of discipline leading 
to final beatitude, O Krsna ! Does their improtance vary according to the choice of the striver 
or does prominence attach to (only) one (of them)? (1) The discipline of Devotion—by

recourse to which the mind, having shaken off attachmentfor all (others), gets fixed on You— 
has been declared by You as independent of other disciplines, my Master ! (2)

| ATTA GAT

Het ABI Wea alia aadiear i warssel aal Sel Aat Ae alah: | 2 |

a Sit @ ura waa yasta Gidd wWarewdsyeq aA semeda: ix

aq: faqererae eaemaq@en: 1 aqen: faereat: afaenercanom: | & 1

fear: femet AMT ta: feerqestea: | aqaeet Sedat Wiaradaiya: | & |

aman feed wade Adee! aaspia ade faa ame: adta fei 9 |

Wa upfrateere fret vaat ori oreeor barf, « oSAaisut | ¢ |

wararareairr: 9 «Geet: «= ee al aqeterd aad aatefa | ¢ |

Mah age wat at Gt WA! sea acha Ss aT lad AMAIA ko!

fae aaqadlerst adh faa, FAM! Medea weet clean: arfattan: | 
Sq Gienieatrel: erred: Beat: 128

The glorious Lord replied : In course of time this word (of Mine), bearing the name of 
Veda, in which stands described the course of conduct helping one to fix one's mind on Me, 
ISappeared during Pralaya (the period of final dissolution). At the beginning of (the next) 
“Teation (however) it was delivered by Me to Brahma. (3) By Brahma, again, it was taught 
l0 his eldest son, (Swayambhuva) Manu; and the seven great seers associated with the 
Creation of the universe, Bhrgu and others, received it from (Swayambhuva) Manu. (4) From 
Em, the fathers (of creation), their progeny, the gods, the Danavas and the Guhyakas

aksas), human beings, Siddhas and Gandharvas, including Vidyadharas and Caranas as 
"ellas men* of the other Dwipas (divisions of the terrestrial globe other than Jambudwipa),

inth “Being Proof against fatigue.sweat and foul smell, they are so akin to the gods that when seeiihiey give rise to acount. 3 ae jose 
© mind of the looker-on whether they are gods or earthly beings. Hence they are referred to in the above verse as feea a eS

Kinnaras* Nagas,Raksasas, Kirnpurusast and others received it. Diverse are the Natural 
tendencies of the aforementionéd, born as they are of (varied proportions of) Rajas, Sattva 
and Tamas, due to which created beings and their thoughts (too) differ; and in conformity with 
their nature indeed diverse interpretations of the Vedas flow from (the mouths of) them 
all. (5—7) In this way what with diversity of disposition and what with the oral teaching 
imparted from father to son the minds of some men get perverted, while others embrace 
heretic views.(8) With their judgment clouded by My deluding potency, O jewel among men, 
people speak of different ways to attain blessedness according to their own past Karma and 
taste. (9) Some (viz., the advocates of Karma-Mimamsa) declare it to be Dharma (religious 
merit); others (the poets) call it renown; (still) others (such as Vatsyayana) name it as sexual 
enjoyment; some (the advocates of Yoga) designate it as truthfulness, control of the senses 
and mind-control. Others (such as politicians) speak of wealth and power as their well- 
known end (and the policies of conciliation etc., as the means to that end). Advocates of 
renunciation declare it as renunciation, while hedonists call it sensuous enjoyment. (10) 
Some call it Yajna (worship of gods); while others speak of it as austerity, liberality, sacred 
vows, observances and the five forms of self-abnegation. The rewards of these are indeed 
such as have a beginning and an end, fruits as they are of (human) endeavour. They bring 
sorrow in their train, culminate in ignorance, afford trivial delight and are attended with grief 
(even while they are being enjoyed). (11)

Headrest: ara famed adda: | Wasser GS add Ha: Sle fAGATAATA | 22 | 
Siesta date Vite WAAda: 1A Uasata: wal: qanat fasr:1231

a uRasY a vested a adatae a varfeue 
a a@afadeordad a venitiesteia 9 8 afsarediex! 
qa am a aan sneahedt age: 1a a agdun a sittaren a ae Wary 141 
mat aft amet fet aneatmisaamed fet qaawafirofi: 126 
Afeat waqerada: Ard Agrdishaentlaacen: | 
Meee Ward ad dadet a fae: qa aA Ie01 
How could that happiness fall to the lot of those who have set their mind on sense- 
delights—the happiness which is enjoyed with Me as his self, O noble one, by him who has 
fixed his mind on Me and expects no gratification from any (other) source ? (12) All the (four) 
quarters are full of joy to him who has nothing to call his own, has (fully) subdued his senses 
and mind, (nay,) whose mind is equipoised (free from likes and dislikes) and fully gratified 
with Me. (13) He who has bestowed his mind on Me no more aspires for the position of 
Brahma (the highest functionary in the administration of the universe), much less for the 
realm of the great Indra (the ruler of paradise), still less for sovereignty over the entire globe: 
rulers hip of the subterranean worlds or mystic powers acquired through the practice of 
Yoga, nor does he seek (even) final beatitude (lit., cessation of rebirth for all time to come) 
divorced from Me.(14) Neither Brahma (My own son) nor Lord Siva (who is My own Self) nor 
again Lord Balarama (My own elder brother) nor Goddess Sri (My better half) nor My own 
(divine) personality is so very dear to Me as (a devotee like) you. (15) | ever dog the footsteps 
of him who is free from (all) expectation, is given to contemplation (on Me), composed, free 
from animosity and sees unity everywhere, in order that | may be cleansed (absolved from 
a a a Ee Oe

*The Kinnaras (feta <4) are so-called because they partially resemble human beings in their form or facial structure: 
+ The Kirhpurusas (faq, Year ¥4) are another class of semi-human beings partly resembling human beings and partly

| 
|

al

res a We Be MOM HEME HEE HEE HE HE WE ME EME We Me We We He He we He He We We He 
“>

the stigma of not being able to repay My debt to him) by the dust of his feet (that is sure to 
fall on My person in that case). (16) Others cannot realize My all-blissful character which is 
apprehended by those exalted souls who have nothing to call their own, whose mind is 
devoted to Me, who have subdued their passions and are fond of all living beings and whose

understanding is unclouded by desires; (for) this character of Mine can be known only by 
those who are free from wants. (17)

eareaaraistt == Aaxnt feeenfefsa: ira: sewer wae fawdaiiryaa 12ct 
aaa: Gere: ates sera an afew afrecdaife HAA: 1281 
a meat at art a are et sea a eres gen akadathiar 1201 
VAMEAHA Ae: TEatsseT Hea: AML WAH: GAT AAT AATEATART ASAT 122 I 
qd: Uaeaad fae ar THAT | AROMA A Wey WA fe 1221 
wet faa Wet sad sae fear fase yee wae ferssera: 1231

arm, Weel sad ae fad weasitent zaft afec

faest Oo Sqafa Jed Cima «Se Ufa 11

amt @ as weld ad wa: @ aM a wal

smeatt. sas eTaas faga heart rae A124

at asset «= feadsat «=| aequarmensteurfsrens:

a daa waft aq «get | |6jaadteremeamamd 26!

Though attracted by objects of senses, My devotee, who has not (yet) been able to 
conquer his senses, is not generally overpowered by (such) objects, thanks to his powerful 
devotion (to Me). (18) (Even) as fire which has fully burst into flames reduces a pile of 
firewood to ashes, so does devotion directed towards Me (whatever its origin) burns one's 
sins in toto, O Uddhava ! (19) Neither Yoga nor Sankhya nor righteousness nor study of the 
Vedas (or Japa of the Divine Name), austerity or renunciation captivates Me (so thoroughly) 
as does intense Devotion. (20) I, the beloved Self of the righteous, can be captured (only) 
through exclusive Devotion coupled with reverence. Devotion concentrated on Me absolves 
even the pariahs (who cook and eat the flesh of dogs) from the stigma attaching to their 
birth.(21) Piety accompanied by veracity and compassion or (even) learning coupled with 
askesis indeed does not thoroughly and once for all cleanse a mind destitute of Devotion. (22) 
How can Devotion be known except through the hair standing on end or through one's heart 
Melting or through tears of joy (trickling down one's cheeks) and how can one's mind be 
Purified except through Devotion ? (23) A man full of devotion to Me—who speaks in a voice 
choked with emotion, whose heart melts (through affection), who weeps incessantly (at the 
thought of his separation from Me) andsometimes laughs (when reminded of the inwardness 
Of My Pastimes), (nay,) who sings unabashed atthe top of his voice and dances (out of joy)— 
PUrifies the (whole) world. (24) (Even).as gold sheds its dross and regains Its purity (only) 
When heated with fire. so does'the soul shake off the seeds of Karma through the discipline

eVotion and forthwith attains oneness with Me. (25) The more one's mind gets purified

y listening to and recounting My auspicious stories the better able Is the Jiva to discern the 
Subtle reality (of the Self), even as the eye is better able to perceive a minute object (the 
Clearer it becomes) when treated with a (medicated) pigment. (26)

arab faay oat ae Aaa Mfacitad 12191

: Pt 5 
~ ay —

. Pa SG ie 
~ > 2 ne ; 
. *» as - _ .

l Zi ie? Sy = ;

ay * y - 
3 a * hae 
a . 
~ -_.. 
. aa 
+

Sint Gaga Vs Aaa Ett star! AA fataw ae TARE: 128 | 
qa ame wad sal aMITE_a: | athragqa aM Yat ger acakyFAga: 1301

The mind of a man dwelling on the objects of sense gets attached to them. (Even so) the 
mind of one (engaged in) contemplating on Me gets absorbed in Me alone. (27) (Therefore), 
giving up the thought of the unreal and worthless objects (of the world) as things seen in a 
dream orfancied, concentrate your mind-purified through devotion to Me—on Me (alone).(28) 
Abandoning from a distance the company of women as well as of men delighting in the 
company of women, and having conquered one's mind, one should sit down in a secure and 
lonely place and unweariedly think of Me. (29) In the case of such a man no such affliction 
and no such bondage results from attachmentto others as does from the company of women 
as well as of men delighting in the company of women. (30)

SET SATA 
aM aad Aes Al Aaliyah a A apres 138! 
Uddhava submitted : (Now) be pleased to tell Me, O Lord with lotus-like eyes, the

process of meditation indicated in the foregoing verses—as to how, in what form and as what 
a seeker of Liberation should contemplate on You. (31)

MATA 
Ga AGA SdH: WAH aga! Fela BMA MAAAHAA: 132! 
WoT, NAAT «= RH tele: | faueaunia WAVARasarsa: 133 | 
@iasarmisn were feawiadi sumed ara wa: daw Saisx! 
W Weta wa aaa cnahasay Arata fafa: 1341 
CSCIC DER oe Broa rca § lenaeqegieasat aioe ize 
alter aad qaearstaa! anes ota SW Aide AMAger13V1 
a wid aq dedareaqusmi qaeqecia ganas wzhafeai3cl 
PAU aaa TA HUSH, l\eareat wear = silacasitrehaaz 13° |

Vega Mea TAC Ta TAT, lyatdeoaae alu ar ixol 
uientleheahnlegaqaraea, ladigaet gal 8 seeqaaavT | 
APARNA Aas y AA Sa 1S |

The glorious Lord replied : Seated on a seat of moderate height (neither very high nor 
very low) with his body erect in a comfortable posture placing both his hands (with palm 
upwards) on his lap and steadying his gaze on the tip of his nose, and having fully controlled 
his senses, one should cleanse the passages of the life-breath by (the three processes © 
breath-control (viz., Puraka (slow inhalation) Kumbhaka (retention of breath) and Recaka 
(slow exhalation) and should slowly practise this course in the reverse order (i. e., by doing 
Recaka first, Kumbhaka next and Paraka last of all) too. (82-33) Manifesting in mind through 
the instrumentality of the life-breath the sound of Pranava (the sacred syllable OM), as 
extending uninterruptedly, fine as a fibre of the lotus stalk, (from the Muladhara located neal 
the anus up to the crown of the head) one should then follow it with a sharp nasal sount 
continuous as the ringing of a bell. (34) In this way he should exercise his breath, joining It 
with Pranava, thrice a day ten times each; within a month he will have attained control over 
his breath.(35) Visualizing the heart—existing within the body in the shape of a lotus bu

___<a[#

turned upside down with its stalk upwards (like the flower of a plantain)—(in an inverted

position) with eight open petals and pericarp turned upwards, he should picture to his mind 
in succession the sun, the moon and fire as existing (in the form of circles) on the pericarp; 
in the centre of fire he should mentally behold My form as depicted hereafter, (so) happy to 
contemplate upon. (36-37) He should conceive It as symmetrical, gracious, having a 
charming countenance, with four long beautiful arms, a most shapely and graceful neck, 
lovely cheeks and bright smiles; with brilliant alligator-shaped ear-rings adorning well- 
matched ears, clad in golden raiment, dark-brown as a cloud, bearing (on the right and left 
side respectively of the chest) the marks of Srivatsa (a white curl of hair) and Sri (a golden 
streak); decked with a conch, discus, mace and lotus and a wreath of sylvan flowers, feet 
shining with anklets, (nay,) distinguished by the effulgence of the Kaustubha gem, graced 
all over with a glorious diadem, wristlets, girdle and armlets: charming of every limb, pleasing 
to the heart, with a countenance and eyes enlivened with grace and very soft to the touch. 
And he should concentrate the mind on each limb (individually as well). (88—41)

Srsaronisearehat = ATMISSHhel AM: | Gea afer ex: sora ada: 1x2

ad, Adena fermigeter ema! aren fade We: Wed Maa ISS |

wa oem faaape ate aad de Uae Henle a fHiseta faded Iv

wi Sarfedataarearmanar | frase aft Pater Sata GPa Se |

Aaa Wasnt gadt art wa: i daraeam fratet seria: iva 
sft SASMTAd ARM UA Sfedaalaarhal AqeaSeaa: 12¥1

Withdrawing the senses from their objects with the help of the mind, and weaning the said

“ mind (too) from all (other) objects with the help of the intellect, the driver (of the chariot of the

body), a wise man should focus it on Me. (42) Gathering that mind which takes in the entire 
Personality (of the Lord), he should (learn to) concentrate it on one member (alone). He 
should no more think of other limbs and should fix his thought (exclusively) on the (Lord's) 
face wearing a winsome smile. (43) Diverting the mind once it has gained Its firm hold on My 
countenance, he should fix it on My all-pervading Self, (the substratum of all and unattached 
to all like the sky); and, transcending that too, and becoming one with Me (the Absolute), 
Should cease to think of anything else (not even of the distinction between the subject and 
the object). (44) With his intellect thus established (in Me) he sees Me in himself and himself 
actually merged in Me, the Universal Soul, like (an individual) lightin (the element of) fire.(45) 
The misconception regarding Matter (in the form of the body etc., being his own self), 
knowledge (in the form of ascribing knowership to the Self) and action (in the form of 
altributing activity to the Self) will soon disappear from the mind of the striver who 
Concentrates his mind through most intense meditation as aforesaid. (46)

Thus ends the fourteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

IIE

SID UBeR Seales:

Discourse XV | | 
Names and Characteristics of the various Siddhis |

(mystic powers) acquired through Yoga

MP TATA 
fii ame fame afr:inf araasa satisra fea: 1 2 1

The glorious Lord began again : Siddhis (mystic powers of various kinds) wait upon : 
the Yogi of steady mind who has subdued his senses and controlled his breath (according 
to the procedure detailed in verses 32 to 35 of the foregoing discourse) and concentrates his 
mind on Me. (1)

| SEA SAA 
: SM AO chika Heifead faker | cafes ar fag ate ath fafeget Tar | 2 | | 
Uddhava submitted : Kindly say through what mode of concentration which and what

Kind of Siddhi can be acquired and how many Siddhis (in all) are there, since You are the 
Bestower of (such) Siddhis on the Yogis, O immortal Lord ! (2)

ATTA TATA 
faegaissret SAT «| ARUN: | ara «ete «eat WUT: | 2 I 
stern afer «ade osifaifsa: i sree «= qaeby | _atfeneureiifarat | x | 
Wyeast 8 ae | eH teaelfa | Unt A face: Gel Stelaleahaenl Aa: | & | 
sted esq 8 oawauesiai aise: «oe | ORISA € | 
wesayaeat Temlstexan | AaTaSeTa fafa aaa The: lot 
Prenleaeaners Uae | saraenbhafaatatat WieBesisasta: | ¢ | 
Unset: Sieel |«—|_ SATenurferga: | AE SAU aT SM AAT aT TATA |e 
Wea A aa aka: | sifurmmaaaslia aaaaTaat AA 1201 
Tear Ut aM Al cua Aiea Wa a Gee GeIeH Ike! 
waa feat Yat Af eel aregemnedat ari wfearmaargan. 122! 
aa, Wage At aeniienshaen | attsaronearerea sift wrstfa waar: 123! 
Wea 4: ga anerafa Aman! era unas A farcdseamsraa: 1e% 
fat seis fat aaa aefetia girananif aadagelers eu! 
ane «86 qiiareal «| Utaeseagtfead | Hat Aenea arnt wagal afsrarfirara 126 | 
Frit sett fa amaq frag wa: i amrrcamift «aa | Hraisacitaa 1201 
maga fat we aint afi emasdaat aft weltivfedt Ax: 12¢! 
Teer Sl AA aleMSeLI dae yt sal ara: poirerat 1ke!

age waka wap; : :

att nfl air 3 aie | i a aTeT sare faa URafet GanEH 120 |

i lates nis TAR QUANT | ig weaned Hei TATA: 1221

Sern tae tft eg A Tea! fos fearesta sont argue: weeheaL 123 |

L Ys SU equ aveyey | amie sett we dhe 12e 1

faeter, Ciais wei wet faut fareheta wag: ef: 1241

aa BECIaS GEM ACT A ART: War aft aa vat FBIM Ad. AAT 12E |

a a waa geht: wa! gala feta a aR TMT wT IR!

Tere USA Aft annie: ima Ferfeat akasierqeafear zc!

seafeitt Fat Maina ay: ine area aa ie!

Tait «= sflacanafayfaa: i eamaarenn: a waeuahta: 1301 
The glorious Lord replied : Eighteen (in all) are the Siddhis as well as the modes of 
concentration (leading to them) taught by those that have attained perfection in Yoga (the 
minor ones, such as insightinto the past, present and future, being easily attainable by others 
too). Of the former, eight abide chiefly in Me (and in a lesser degree in those that have 
attained similarity of form with Me), (the other) ten being attainable through (mere development 
of) Sattvaguna. (3) 1-Anima (reducing one's body to the size of an atom), 2-Mahima 
(magnifying it to a gigantic size) and 3-Laghima (extreme lightness of body)—these three 
pertain to the body; 4-Prapti consists in establishing contact with the senses of the entire 
creation in form of the deities presiding over those senses. 5-Prakamya means the capacity 
to enjoy pleasures heard of (through the scriptures as enjoyable in the other world alone) and 
capable of being seen (though enjoyed only in the subterranean regions); while 6-Isita 
consists in the capacity toimpel Mayaand other subordinate potencies to function (according 
to one's will). (4) 7-Vasita means absence of attachmentto the pleasures of sense; while the 
eighth Siddhi is Kamavasayita (according to which one is able to enjoy in the highest 
measure whatever pleasure one seeks to enjoy). These eight Siddhis, O gentle one, are 
considered as natural to Me (and unsurpassed). (5) The other ten Siddhis are:—1-absence 
of hunger and thirst, old age etc., in this (very) body; 2 & 3-the capacity to see and hear from 
an unusual distance: 4-locomotion ata speed which can be increased according to one's will; 
S-taking any form at will; 6-(leaving one's own body and) entering any other (untenanted) 
body: 7-giving up the ghost at will; 8-participation in the pastimes of gods (with the Apsaras 
°r celestial nymphs); 9-attainment of one’s desired ends; and 10-exercising authority 
Unobstructed everywhere. (6-7) The minor Siddhis (hinted atin verse 3 above) are:—to know 
ings relating to the past, present and future; to remain unaffected by pairs of opposites (like 
fat and cold, joy and sorrow, likes and dislikes, etc.); to read others’ mind etc; to neutralize 
© power of fire, the sun, water and poison etc., and to suffer no defeat (at the hands of 
anyone whatsoeve r). (8) These are the Siddhis following from Yogic concentration, typically 
Mentioned by Me. (Now) hear from Me what Siddhi can be acquired through which mode of 
“Oncentration and how. (9) He who focusses his mind, identified with the subtle elements, 
N Me as ensouling the subtle elements and worships (Me in) that form alone acquires My

POWer of a tomic size (and thereby attaining the capacity to enter even a slab 
Of Stone). (10) (Even ue concentrating his mind, identified with Mahat-tattva (the principle

“I Cosmic intelligence), on Me, the Suprem

e ensouling the (said) Mahat-tattva, he acquires oe

the capacity to assume any magnitude (sought for by him); and, focussing his mind on Me 
as ensouling any of the (five gross) elements individually, he attains the magnitude (alj- 
pervasive character) of that particular element. (11 ) (Similarly) concentrating his mind on Me 
as ensouling the atoms of the (four) elements (other than ether), a Yogi attains (extreme) 
lightness (of body), viz., the capacity to become as subtle as the subtlest division of time. (1 2) 
(Likewise) focussing his entire mind on Me as ensouling the (cosmic) Ego, born of 
Sattvaguna, the Yogi who has given his mind to Me attains the (Siddhi of) Praptiin the shape 
of control over the senses of all. (13) He who concentrates his mind on Me as ensouling the 
(Sutra, the active aspect of) Mahat-tattva attains (the Siddhi known as) Prakamya (easy 
access to all sorts of enjoyments of one's seeking), the highest Siddhi possessed by Me as 
presiding over the Sutra, which is born of the Unmanifest. (14) He who focusses his mind on 
(Me as) the all-pervading Witness, the Ruler of Maya (consisting of the three Gunas), attains 
(the Siddhi known as) Isitva, viz., control over all bodies and conscious selves. (15) The Yogi 
who concentrates his mind on Me as Lord Narayana, spoken of as the fourth or transcendent 
principle* (existing beyond the three states of 1. Virat or the Cosmic Person, presiding over 
the physical plane, 2. Hiranyagarbha, presiding over the astral plane, and 3. the Causal 
Principle, presiding over the causal plane) and called by the name of Bhagavan (embodying 
in Himself the six divine properties of universal dominion, righteousness, glory, prosperity, 
wisdom and dispassion each in its entirety) acquires My virtues and attains (the Siddhi or) 
Vasita (non-attachment to all material objects). (16) Focussing his pure mind (cleansed 
through Pranayama etc.), on Me as the transcendent Brahma, one attains supreme bliss 
(which is only another name for the Siddhi called Kamavasayita), in which all desire ceases 
(for good).(17) Concentrating his mind on Me as Lord Aniruddha (the Lord of Swetadwipa), 
who is (absolutely) pure (untainted by the three Gunas) and the embodiment of ( or Propeller 
of) virtue, man attains (absolute) purity (in the form of no longer being subject to the three 
Gunas or modes of Prakrti) and is rid of the six waves or changes (viz., hunger and thirst, 
old age and death, grief and infatuation). (18) Mentally perceiving the (unexpressed) sound 
in Me as conceived in the form of the cosmic breath, taintless and all pervading like the sky, 
the said Jiva is able to hear (from a distance) the (diverse) sounds of living beings manifested 
therein.(19) Uniting the eye with the sun and the sun too with the eye, and contemplating on 
Me in the aforesaid (mutual) union (of the two), man is gifted with a penetrating vision and 
is (consequently) able to perceive the (whole) universe. (20) By virtue of the concentration 
(of mind) practised after uniting with Me the mind and thereafter the body (too) alongwith the 
breath (accompanying the body), (one attains the Siddhi called Manojava, as a result of 
which) the body surely finds itself wherever the mind goes. (21) The Yogi gets converted into 
the very form, sought for by his mind, that he would assume making the mind his material 
(for that form), the force of concentration of the mind on Me (whose potency is inconceivable 
and who appear in numerous forms) being the ground of all Siddhis. (22) Seeking to enter 
another (soulless) body, the Yogi who has controlled his breath as well as his Indriyas and 
mind should conceive himself as present in that body. (As a result of such contemplation) 
his vital air (the chief constituent of his astral body, which makes for his Jivahood) leaves his 
(own) body and becoming one with the cosmic air, enters (alongwith it) the other (througn 
its nostrils) as a black bee passes from one flower to another. (23) Having blocked his rectum

with his heel and pushed up the vital air (successfully to his heart, chest, throat and crown .

of head, and (mentally) forcing it upwards through the (aperture known as) Brahmarandhra

* The scripture defines the Turlya or fourth principle as below :—

fewans ari Mea: 1 Serer afar qi ase fag: 11

Dis. 15 ] BOOK ELEVEN 583

to Brahma (or any other destination sought to be reached by him), the Yogi should shed the 
body (whenever he likes). (24) Seeking to sport in the sport ground of the gods (in heaven), 
one should contemplate on Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas and) constituting My 
personality. (As a sequel to this contemplation) Apsaras (celestial damsels), representing 
(so many) rays of Sattva, wait on him with aerial cars (ready to take him bodily to heaven).(25) 
Devoted to Me and focussing his mind on Me, true of resolve as | am, man duly attains that 
(very) object which he seeks with his intellect whenever and in whatever way he wants it. (26) 
The command of a man who has acquired My disposition is not flouted anywhere any more 
than Mine, the Ruler of all and (absolutely) self-dependent as | am. (27) (Direct) knowledge 
of the past, present and future, coupled with (that of) birth and death (etc., as well as of 
others' mind etc.), comes to that Yogi whose mind has been purified through devotion to 
Me and who knows how to concentrate his mind (on Me, the Knower of the past, present 
and future). (28) Seasoned by Yoga (in the form of concentration on My Personality, which 
is incapable of being damaged even slightly by fire etc.) the body of a sage whose mind 
has found its repose in concentration on Me cannot (likewise be damaged by fire and other 
elements, which cannot harm him any more than water can prove harmful to aquatic 
creatures. (29) Contemplating on My glorious manifestations (Avataras) graced with (the 
marks of) Srivatsa (etc.), and decked with My weapons (viz., conch etc.), and distinguished 
by an ensign, umbrella and chowrie (etc.); the aforesaid sage turns out to be invincible.(30)

saa waa are wt: ifaga: ydenisar safapeled: 1321

Rife crete eee: | gO ema: cet aT fas: Wasa 1321

sare feraarratadthte faga: | aparsifa a: dat arteafrafa asia 13%

ata fadat aq: ofa sy: 1 a are area ete saarferr 134!

VEAAISSM «- ANSAtad: Aaeleai ae waa wae aferd: Wa aa i3El 
sft Sarasa FE URASe GfecaMeaahel TaeRMS EAT: 1241

The aforesaid Siddhis in their entirety wait upon the sage who worships Me through Yogic 
concentration as detailed in the foregoing verses. (31) What is that (there is no) Siddhi which 
iS very difficult to attain for the sage who, having conquered his senses, tamed his mind, and 
controlled his breath and body, practises concentration on Me ? (32) The wise (however) 
Speak of these as obstacles in the path of the man whois practising the highest (form of) Yoga 
(Such as JAanayoga or Bhaktiyoga) in that they cause delay in his getting united with Me (his 
true goal). (33) One attains here through concentration (as aforesaid on Me) all those Siddhis 
that follow from birth, (the use of) drugs, austerity and (the utterance of) spells.* One cannot 
(however) obtain the supreme reward (in the shape of residence in the divine realm of the 
Lord etc.), of Yoga (concentration on Me) by recourse to other means. (34) lam the Source 
(Bestower), | am the Custodian and Controller of all Siddhis, as well as of Yoga (union with 
God in the’ shape of final beatitude), Sankhya (Knowledge leading to such union), Dharma 
(piety as taught by the exponents of Veda), nay, of the teachers of Veda (themselves). (35) 
lam the Self of all embodied souls, being their Innér Controller as well as enclosing them

(from without) though unenclosed Myself, (even) as the (gross) elements both permeate and 
eee eee

* Cf. the following aphorism from the Yoga-Sitras of Patanjali:—

: Taga: |

enclose the bodies of living beings. (36)

Thus ends the fifteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

3IN Wreaseara:

Discourse XVI

Glorious manifestations of the Lord enumerated 
S&F SAA 
a sa Wa WMeteteranaani ade wari swufeerearsa: | eg | 
salaay, WAG seaAehaafa: | Saraa AT Ta ATTA LAT STITT: 1 2 
aq ay A WAG Nae al ada: | sad: Soerd Afahe dq aq Al 3 | 
Fema WAN WAR WMA: 1A Al UVaha YM UR Aled a x I 
qa: ama wat fffa a wart fayat fea varfay 
a adarendqaamed anh a dieucretrai & | 
Uddhava submitted : You are actually the supreme Brahma, having no beginning or 
end, and unobscured (by Maya). You are responsible for the protection, subsistence, 
destruction and birth of all existences. (1) The knowers of the (real) import of the Vedas 
(alone) worship You, O Lord, in Your reality as abiding in (all) created beings, high and (low 
as their Cause), though You cannot be easily known (perceived) by those that have not been 
able to purify their mind. (2) (Therefore, pray,) point out to me those particular entities (by) 
contemplating on You through which with devotion men of supreme wisdom (are able to)

attain highest perfection (in the form of true devotion or saving wisdom). (3) The Inner 
Controller of beings, You remain hidden from their view. O Life-giver of (all) created beings !

Deluded by You, living beings are unable to perceive You, even though You behold them .

(all). (4) Mention to me all those powerful manifestations of Yours, invested by You with Your 
own divine glory, that may be existing on earth, in the quarters, in heaven or in the 
subterranean region, O Lord of infinite prowess! | bow to Your lotus-feet, which are the abode

of (all) sanctuaries. (5) 
MATATATA | 
Uatdee 4899S: sa safaet aidan fat asawia a1 l 
Went Midas Wels Weatde iad faat ede galsatata clan: | 0 | 
Wo dal Gesenst qaar 4 sidalfed: isrnaueda uaa am a wryeiai ¢ | 
Teiearta At edit: 1 ae aalfor yeh Aut feramarera: | < | 
Se Wri aie: AeA! WMA ares aN Yorateaferay YT: 10! 
Wort «GA Hedi A AeMei genunaae silat astarmag Aa: 122! 
fewer adit Aa swrakaaqd sans delhrascaraet 122 
galse Ades agama gerate! snfeename fawy var Atoorfed: 1231

pis. 16 ] BOOK ELEVEN 585

We Ve WE EME HE WE HE WE Me WE We Me Wee Me we we ew, Yr ere, ot i tl Pt el acl id 
we We Me WOE EE OEE Se Cw (9 ‘we Be Re We We Me He ee 
ee hell fue CRE We We We We We Re Re Mee He Re We Be He He He He He 
. Be ST Be We Kee We We We We He We Me He He Hr Be We Hr He Ve

ve Tera TA SS TY aAUat gaat wt wget a quate ies

AAA STN =8§= Mamie OTA aA: Waa ae Bulonafer araien: 1c! 
aT ATOTTTASE Tire: eer sis «gt auiat yenitsts 121 
diatat eidat St ang: WA Sa ae «GE SAE 120 |

The glorious Lord replied : Ina like manner | was put this very question by Arjuna while 
just going to fight with his enemies at (the battle-field of) Kuruksetra, O chief of those 
possessing insight into the meaning of questions | (6) Feeling like the common man that 
"lam the slayer and the other one is slain (by me)", and believing that slaying one's kinsfolk 
for the sake of kingdom is reproachful and unrighteous, he ceased from that act (at the 
beginning). (7) Disillusioned by My reasoning, that tiger among men then interrogated Me 
at the van of fight in the same way as you have done. (8) | am the Self, the Befriender and 
the Ruler of all these created beings, O Uddhava ! (in fact,) | am all the beings as well as 
responsible for their birth, life and death. (9) |am the motion of the mobile and Kala (the Time- 
Spirit) among those that bring others under their control. | am the state of equilibrium (in the 
shape of Prakrti) of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and the property natural to a thing 
with attributes. (10) | am the Sutra (the active aspect of Mahat-tattva, the very first evolute 
of Prakrti) among the products constituted of the three Gunas; (nay,) | am Mahat-tattva (the 
principle of cosmic intelligence) among big things. Of subtle principles | am the Jiva (the 
embodied soul); and of those that are difficult to conquer | am the mind. (11) Of the Vedas 
| am their teacher, Brahma (who taught them for the first time to his mind-born sons); of 
Mantras (sacred texts) | am Pranava (the sacred syllable OM), consisting of three members 
(A,U,M). Of the letter-sounds | am the sound represented by the letter‘a1’ (A); of metres | am 
the metre Gayatri (consisting of three feet). (12) Of all the gods | am Indra (their chief); of the 
(eight) Vasus (a particular class of gods) | am the god of fire (who carries oblations to the 
gods). Of the (twelve) sons of Aditi! am Visnu (known by the name of Upendra, the youngest, 
who appeared in the court of the demon king Bali as a dwarf and robbed him of his dominion 
extending over the three worlds); of the (eleven) Rudras, | am Nila-Lohita (Lord Siva). (13) 
Of the nine Brahmana sages (born of Brahma's mind) | am Bhrgu (the foremost of them); of 
the royal sages | am (Swayambhuva) Manu. Of the celestial sages | am Narada; of cows | 
am Kamadhenu (lit., the storehouse of milk and its products used as oblations for the gods). ( 14) 
Of the lords of Siddhas | am Lord Kapila; of birds | am Garuda (the king of birds, the carrier 
of Lord Visnu). Of Prajapatis (the gods presiding over creation) | am Daksa (the foremost of 
fem sattnenancaien Aryama (their head). (1 5) Of Daityas (the sons of Diti) know Me to 
be Prahrada, the ruler of the demons. Of the stars and annual plants know Me to be (their 
ruler,) the moon-god; of Yaksas and Raksasas know Me to be (their chief) Kubera (the lord 
Of treasu res), O Uddhava! (16) Of the lords of elephants know Me to be Airavata (the carrier 
Of Indra); of aquatic creatures know Me to be their lord, Varuna (the god presiding over the 
Waters). Of those emitting heat and light know Me to be the sun; and know Me to be the king 
~&4Mong men. (17) | am Uccaihsrava among horses; of metals | am gold. Of those that

Punish, | am Yama (the god of retribution), and of serpents | am Vasuki (the chief of 
Serpents). (18) Of the rulers of snakes | am Lord Ananta (the serpent-god); of all animals

CKKLLEKKLLLKLCCKEK Ke NK SKK Kee Se ht ht ies el Be es Pe cl el ts el el etl Ll el al i ad We Be We We Ve We We Me We He He He We He Wee He We we He we tian 
= c

having horns or large teeth | am the lion (the king of beasts). Of the (four) stages of life | am 
Samnyasa (the fourth and the last); of the (four) grades of society | am the (very) first (viz, 
the Brahmana class), O sinless Uddhava ! (19) Of (all) holy steams | am the (holy) Ganga: 
(while) of (all) stationary waters | am the ocean. Of weapons | am the bow; of the wielders 
of bow | am Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the three cities). (20)

famaamede elerat feqiea: ;atadamye seem aa: 1221 
gia afasise sfasmi qeafa: | ease TeAIAAVaL WTA: 1221 
ait sd@aaiss 4 sammMfafear aeaaatgarien Baas Bra: 1231 
armarmraa aaiska faferitear i sidifarat aterm fae: wnfrarieary 12x | 
aint ¢ wasn dat Sea wa: aaot Bai aw aed werner eu | 
gala dara: saonafeda: i qeMmat wd aM fags ire | 
Sa Sea Maral AMAIA | ATA Arieiteise Agtaront Aeneas, 1 Vo | 
Me GIA A ha GIO cawishsa: | Geisha Sal Halal Heal AAA 1 I 
aed Wad @ dq AMadgedi feyeson equ fas eats: 1291 
TM UENRUSRA Usienigt: Waser! Hash etondiat Tema ga-ga 1301 
Sadiease Set: fadamt see: | fata face Aa Areadase 1321 
Bist: Gel Goad wae fale Grads erat 489 AagaraTegiwsy «= TT 1:32 1

fanraq: Udfakriararame! yeas «Re TAME «Ya: 1331 
amt was uses fanag: 1am Gdean secisé aa: GW: 13%! 
waar fete «= TOT@asA: | Yar = feerfaeeaies A Oftraema: 134!

TIRANA STATO, lsreaesaanmé «= Wasa eeTL 31 
"iad aie Sa Siete Wer fae: Geaisearh Ti: Gad aA: FWA 1301 
Tessa AWA adlatsa:i naam saa WM aforn faa 
Aalare aaa 4 arat faa Ha 1 3c! 
Ten Wane aera fad aati aam a faudei gaatsuera aries: 139! 
qa: Ai: aie Sa: tai a: 1 ata fafaen faa aa aa a tsar: 1¥o! 
Ue aif: wai: aga fayqa:i aden wad aa arenfieitad 1<e! 
ae Fe UA TS WOM ASO a AAAI Tes A Wa: HeTASEAT 12! 
a a dee aera fa aa: ica ad aal ae aaumeerqad 1x3! 
Tareas, _- eT: | dei asa ad: ufanrerd ivy 
Zid SEPA AA Wea Afearascarssl GSTS eA: 125!

1 am Mount Meru (the abode of Brahma) among (all) abodes; of (all) spots difficult of 
access | am the Himalaya. Of trees | am the Aswattha (the holy fig-tree); of annual plants | 
am barley. (21) Of family priests | am the sage Vasistha (the priest of the ancient solar 
dynasty of kings); of those devoted to the spirit of the Vedas | am the sage Brhaspati (the 
preceptor of the gods). Of (all) leaders of armies lam Skanda (the generalissimo of the gods):

of those that lead men on the right path | am the glorious Brahma (the birthless one). (22) 
Of (all) sacrificial performances | am Brahmayajfia (the daily recitation of the Vedas); of (all)

pis. 16 ]

grt Be HARARE

We Be Wee We Ke We Be Ke Be WE We BRE Be We Re He We He Ree He Wee He

sacred vows lam (the vow of) harmlessness. Of 
agency (par excellence) in th 
Brahmana who Is the only ma

purifying agencies, again, | am the purifying 
€ shape of the air, fire, the sun, water and the word (of a

N qualified to judge and pronounce the puri 
ae purity or otherwise of 
a substance or living being).(23) Of all the limbs of Yoga (self-discipline) | am Samadhi (total

absorption of the mind into the Spirit); | am political wisdom in those that seek victory. Of (all) 
scientific courses of correct understanding | am the science by which the distinction between 
Matter and Spirit is known; | am the (unending) doubt of those debating on the theory of 
Perception. (24) Of the fair Sex | am Satarupa (the wife of Swayambhuva Manu and the first 
female offspring of Brahma); of menlam Swayambhuva Manu (the first human male creation 
of Brahma). Of ascetics | am the sage Narayana; and of celibates, Sanatkumara. (25) Of (all) 
virtues | am the vow of causing no fear to anyone; of all factors conducive to fearlessness 
lam thought withdrawn from without (and directed towards one's own self). Of (all) means 
of maintaining secrecy | am kind speech and silence (both of which help a man to conceal 
what exists in his mind); of pairs, again, | am Brahma (the birthless one, who assumed two 
forms, the first part becoming a man and the other a woman).* (26) Of those that (ever) keep 
awake (without even winking) | am the (ever-revolving wheel of) time (represented by a 
twelvemonth); of the (six) seasons (constituting a year) | am (the two months of) Caitra and 
Vaisakha (constituting the vernal season). Of the (twelve) months (of a year) |am (the month 
of) Margasirsa; and of the (twenty-seven) lunar mansions | am Abhijit.t(27) Of the (four) 
Yugas or aeons) | am the Krta (Satyayuga) and of the self-controlled | am the sages Asita 
and Devala. Of the compillers and arrangers of the Vedas | am the sage (Krsna) Dwaipayana; 
of more of wisdom | am the self-possessed Sukracarya (the preceptor of the demon 
kings).(28) Of divine personages#l am Lord Vasudeva (the first and foremost of the four 
Vythas or manifestations of the Godhead, the Deity presiding over the intellect or Citta); and 
of the votaries of the Lord | am you (Uddhava). Of Kimpurusas (a species of semi-divine 
beings resembling a monkey in shape) | am Hanuman (the monkey-god); of Vidyadharas 
(heavenly artistes) | am SudarSanas .(29) Of precious stones | am the ruby; of lovely objects 
lam a lotus bud. Of the (many) varieties of Darbha grass (such as Kusa and Durva) |am (the 
variety known by the name of) Kusa; of offerings thrown into the sacred fire |am cow's ghee. (30) 
Of those engaged in any business (and seeking to amass wealth) | am the wealth; in those 
engaged in practising trickery | am gambling. | am the endurance in those practising

_€ndurance; | am the courage of the courageous. (31) | am the organic strength as well as

the strength of mind of the strong; (and) know that! am the action (done by way of an offering 
to Me) of the devotees of the Lord. Of the nine forms | (viz., Vasudeva, Sankarsna, 
Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Narayana, Hayagriva, Varaha, Nrsimha, and Vamana) worshipped 
by the Satvatas (followers of the Pancaratra Agama) | am the first and the highest (of them, 
viz., Vasudeva). (32) |am Viswavasu of the Gandharvas (celestial songsters) and Purvacitti

eee ee

aut @ al Wa Ale AcIena |

Ld Vj +e P ; _— - 
ide Ill xii, 52-53. The Sruti says ha and one-fifteenth of the constellation Sravana. Says the

* Abhijit represents the last quarter of the asterism Uttarasad

ruti:— . 
safafsara aaa area AT:

+ A Bhagavan or divine personage is defined as below:—

saufa werd aa afte freraferat aa arent erent

"He (alone) should be recognized as a divine being, who possesses knowledge relating to the creation and destruction 
U

Of life, the life and death of individual beings and of knowledge ane ae teen 
# A reference to this Sudarsana has already been made in X. XxxIv.

Oe We Re Re Re HE ER SB t cl Bcd Shed od Med Mad Rad Mok ick Piet Rk Mh Bok Read Med Mek Med ed Pcl Med Med Mal Ried Med Med Mic Mic Mid Ped Mick ed Med Mel ed Bel cl el Rel Rel ed ll RR RO RR RR ee eRe eae hah We We wy, 
LL a a a |

of the Apsaras (celestial nymphs). | am the firmness of mountains (and) the (pure) odour 
(characteristic) of the earth. (33) | am the sweet taste (characteristic) of water; of the most 
glorious | am (the god of) fire. | am the brilliant light in the sun, the moon and the stars; | am 
sound, the distinguishing property of ether. (34) | am Bali among those devoted to the 
Brahmanas; of the valiant, | am Arjuna. | am the genesis, existence and final dissolution of 
created beings. (35) | am (the functions of) locomotion, speech, defecation, grasping and 
enjoyment (of the organs of action) and touching, seeing, tasting, hearing and smelling (of 
the senses of perception), as well as the faculty (of perceiving the sense-objects) inhering 
in all the senses of perception. (36) | am (the seven categories which are both of the nature . 
of cause and effect, viz., the subtle elements of) earth, the air, ether, water, fire; the (cosmic) 
Ego and Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence); (sixteen categories which are) 
modifications (alone, viz., the five gross elements and the eleven Indriyas), the soul (which 
is neither a cause nor an effect), the Unmanifest (primordial Matter”, which is a cause alone), 
(the three modes of Prakrti, viz.,) Rajas, Sattva and Tamas as well as Brahma (the Absolute). 
(37) (Nay,) | am the numbering of these categories, their (distinguishing) knowledge (by 
means of their characteristics) and the (resultant) Realization of Truth. Nothing exists 
anywhere apart from Me, who am God as well as Jiva (the individual soul), the (three) Gunas 
(modes of Prakrti) as well as the categories made up of the (three) Gunas (viz., the Mahat- 
tattva and so on), (nay,) who am the Inner Controller of all as well as all. (88) The reckoning 
of atoms can be done by Me incourse of time, but not so of My glorious manifestations (which 
are endless) as | evoive universes in tens of millions. (89) Wherever there is glory, affluence, 
renown, authority, modesty, liberality, elegance, good luck, valour, endurance and knowl- 
edge of Truth, that is (indeed) My part manifestation. (40) These are all My glorious 
manifestations made known to you in brief. They are (however) mere caprices of the mind 
(and not real); they are like something merely expressed in words. (41) (Therefore,) restrain 
(your) speech, curb (your) mind, control (your) breath, tame (your) senses and conquer your ~ 
intellect with your (Sattvika) intellect and you will no longer be liable to return to the path of <’ 
transmigration. (42) The sacred vows, austerities and liberality of the Yogi who does not duly 
subdue his speech and mind with his reason leak out (unnoticed) as water from an unbaked 
Jar. (43) Therefore, keeping his eyes fixed on Me as his goal, a man should control his mind, 
speech and breath by means of his intellect full of devotion to Me; thereby he will have 
reached the end of his journey. (44)

Thus ends the sixteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahmsa-Samhita.

“Cf. Sankhya-Karika of ISwara Krsna, which says:—

wplifapda: Aa | UrswHey front a vafafania: yeu: I

we We 
ec eet We we We Me We We we We we wy We WOW We We We We Hy

SIA AAR sea:

Discourse XVII

The duties pertaining to the four Varnas and four ASramas

a geet =6qaed rota | ort alee aeietes seTqafaa: 1X 
oret cecil arat ertarega a yal auraraf aficat aa afte: aren: 1 4 
eal See A Wat Hegel ah adie 2a faas aw: vaeahri «| 
ta 4: Bde enfeaahhoan: 1 ae ae faetaa am aula A ust |

Uddhava submitted : The righteous course expressive of and engendering devotion to 
You and open to those observing the rules of conduct laid down for the (four) Varnas (grades 
of society) and Asramas, nay, to all human beings was taught by You in the foregoing Kalpa 
(cycle). (1) (Now) be pleased to tell me in detail, O lotus-eyed One, how Devotion is 
engendered (in man) through one's own (allotted) duty being (duly) followed. (2) The 
supreme and blissful course of conduct, O Lord of mighty arms, which You taught, it is said, 
to Brahma in the former days in the form of the divine Swan mentioned before (in Discourse 
XIII), O Lord of Laksmi ! has now disappeared after a very long time, O Chastiser of foes ! 
and will not ordinarily survive on this mortal plane, even though it was taught (by You) long 
ago. (3-4) Other than You, O immortal Lord, there is none to teach, institute or defend this 
righteous course on earth, (nay) not evenin Brahma’s court, where (all) sciences (in the form 
of the Vedas etc.) are in attendance in a personal form. (5) When the terrestrial soil Is 
deserted, O Slayer of the demon Madhu ! by You—who institute, maintain and teach this 
righteous course—O Lord ! who will expound this extinct Dharma ? (6) Therefore, O Knower 
of (the secret of) all righteous courses, (pray,) tell me, O Lord, how and on whom among us 
the Dharma engendering Devotion to You has been enjoined. (7)

Aye SATA 
sat eye ys: aw aM ee Ma: aaa Feat ae AMA | < |

Sti Suka continued : Thus interrogated by Uddhava (the foremost of His servants), the 
Celebrated Lord Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) felt (much) delighted and taught (as follows) for the 
Welfare of mortals the courses of conduct which are binding for all times. (8)

APTA TATA 
a wa aa sat Sataeat POH! auismTaad asa fax 21e1 
a saat quit qt ea Sl A: | HAHA: HST SST THT Tg fag: 1 Fo 
aa: wor ward anisé qaeayR | Saad AST EA AT Arhlcnicars: 12 e | 
TTA ones «MOM eee I fore SIQRERTET ateara «= fAqrra: 1221 
fasertrafaesat HAART: | ATA, FONTSNAT A STATE ATUT: 183 |

Tent weadl were et FA FATA AY ATA ATA: AAT AAT: A sae ee Z

We Wy We We Me we Wee ER eee We We We We We Me Me He He Ne ee ee ee We We We we 
= ~ ~ ST sss nnn LE a pe eS

asa «= at Spaqarfuit: | saa, Nepal Fo Ahefeaaret: 1241 
Sal cae: aa Gas: ahaa Aaehos aa aa edaeaan: 12c1 
att ae ofa: ara fataaiteriqesa: | er SAVadIs waANdafeaaw: 1201 
Shae CAS A Hest sedan! saferatraacganpaaieam: 12c1 
agent fasial tat AeAaa i aa Se GAN: YsNdafeaan: 1281 
siaadd «Wa Aedes 0 eHfease: | HA: mHlas AsaMalsaaaeAMy 120 | 
sear (Gas MTT | Wasafeder a oamfsa ardaftie: 121

The glorious Lord began again: This question of yours is full of righteousness in that 
it leads to Devotion (which is conducive to the highest good of men). (Now) hear from Me 
(something) about the righteous course followed by those observing the rules prescribed for 
the (four) Varnas (grades of society) and ASramas (stages in life). (9) In the (very) first Satya 
Yuga (of the present Kalpa) the caste of men was (only one and) known by the name of 
Hamsa. People had their object (of life) accomplished by virtue of their (very) birth; hence 
they understood it by the name of Krtayuga (the aeon of blessedness). (10) In the beginning 
Pranava (the mystic syllable OM) alone formed (the text of) the Veda; while | (alone as 
existing in their thought) constituted their piety appearing in the form of a bull (standing on 
all its four feet). Firm in askesis (in the shape of one-pointedness* of mind and senses) and 
free from sin they contemplated on Me, the immaculate Lord. (11) At the beginning of (the 
next Yuga known by the name of) Treta (after the expiry of Krtayuga), O highly blessed 
‘Uddhava, was revealed from My heart through My respiration the threefold Veda (knowledge 
cosisting of three limbs in the shape of Rk, Sama and Yajus); (and) from the latter appeared 
| as (the institution of) sacrificet with its triple functions (of a Hota, Adhwaryu and 
Udgata).(12) (Again) from Brahma (born of the Cosmic Person) appeared the (four grades 
of society under the names of) Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas, the Vaigyas and the Stdras, 
evolved (respectively) from His mouth, arms, thighs and feet and distinguished by their own 
(respective) conduct. (13) The householder's order appeared from My hips and loins; the 
order of (lifelong) celibates, from My heart; forest-life (the order of anchorites) from My chest 
(below the heart); while the order of recluses (Sarnnyasa) was located in (sprang from the) 
crown of My head. (14) The nature of men belonging to the (different) Varnas and Asramas 
developed according to the character of their place of origin (the limb of the cosmic body from 
which they sprang up)—low in the case of those of a low origin and lofty in the case of those 
sprung of high origin. (15) Control of mind and the senses, meditation, (external as well as 
internal) purity, contentment, forgiveness, straightforwardness, devotion to Me, compassion 
and truthfulness—these are the natural traits of a Brahmana.(16) Majesty, strength, 
fortitude, valour, forbearance, liberality, industry, firmness, devotion to the Brahmanas and 
rulership—these are the (distinguishing) traits of a Ksatriya. (17) Faith (in the scriptures as 
well as in the words of one's preceptor), firm adherence to liberality, sincerity (absence of 
hypocrisy) service to the Brahmanas and remaining dissatisfied with hoards of money— 
these are the inborn characteristics of a Vaigya. (18) Sincere (guileless) service to the 
Brahmana, the cow and the gods too and contentment with whatever is obtained through 
such service—these are the inborn characteristics of a Sudra. (19) Impurity, mendacity, thieving: 
oo

* TAA A WPA We AG: | 
+ The Sruti says 4a 4 faoq: 1’

a

Pe ae til Mick Mid Mic Mick Mick cd Md Mic cd acl a ae + wv,

We Xe He We We We We We We We We We We We Wee ee ee EE ee

want of faith, stig © without cause, Concupiscence, anger and Cupidity are the inborn 
iL aes of the Casteless. (20) Non-violence, truthfulness abstaining from theft 
freedom from ust, anger and greed and doing what is pleasing and good to living beings— 
this constitutes the sacred duty of all the Varnas (grades of society). (21)

aL idee arat-welarette Ate | AAT feta HalsHics: 1221 
wagai Teepe | aaq ditfaatsia: 1 faen ware ara fave aamaftiedy 1301

Having undergone in due course (viz., after the purificatory rites relating to birth etc., have 
been gone through) a second birth in the shape of investiture with the sacred thread, and 
dwelling in the house of a preceptor with his senses (duly) controlled, the twice-born (male 
child) should (learn to) recite the Vedas (with due intonation) and reflect on their meaning 
(with the help of the guru) when called upon (to do so). (22) A Brahmacari (religious student) 
should wear a girdle (of Munja grass) and deerskin (round his loins), a string of Rudraksa 
beads (about his neck) and the sacred thread (baldric-wise across his left shoulder), should 
carry a staff (of the Palasa tree) and a water-pot (made of the shell of a wild cocoanut or 
gourd) and a bunch of KuSa grass (in the palm of his hand) and grow matted locks (for want 
of proper care). He should never scrub his teeth (with a brush etc.) nor apply soap etc., to 
his clothes and should never use a coloured seat. (23) He should remain silent while bathing, 
taking his meals, pouring oblations into the sacred fire, doing Japa (muttering a prayer) and 
answering the calls of nature. He should never pare his nails nor remove the hair even in his 
arm-pits and on his private parts. (24) Observing a (strict) vow of celibacy,) he should never 
voluntarily allow his seed to escape; and if It (ever) escapes anyhow (in spite of himself in 
a dream etc.), he should (proceed to) take a plunge bath and, going through a course of 
Pranayama (inhaling the air through his right nostril, holding it as long as one can and 
exhaling it through the left), should repeat the Gayatri-Mantra (at least 108 times on his 
fosary).(25) Pure of body and calm of mind he should (both morning and evening) worship 
the fire (by pouring oblations into it), the sun-god (by offering Arghya or oblations of water 
tohim), the Acarya (who has invested him with the sacred thread and taught him the Gayatri), 
the cow (by offering handfuls of grass to her), the Brahmanas, the preceptor (who has merely 
Instructed him in the Sastras), the elders and the gods and should wait upon both the 
wilights, silently muttering the Gayatri-Mantra.(26) He should know the Acarya to be (no 
Other than) Myself (the Supreme Lord) and should never disregard him nor should he pry into 
his faults taking him to be a mortal; for the preceptor represents all the gods (in his

d evening, he should offer

Person) .(27) Bringing alms (from other houses) (both) morning an 
it to hoe aaa Pea Bvet else he mighthave recived and make use of only what 
Is Permitted (by the preceptor) keeping himself fully under control.(28) Doing service to the 
ey nee ‘ wait upon him with joined palms like a menial by

Precepto should always Nil Al, 
allowing him Students he goes), lying down (full of vigilance when he is asleep), sitting

‘When he is taking rest after being relieved ©

f his fatigue by kneading his feet etc.) and z Ss

standing (when he is comfortably seated) not far from him.(29) Conducting himself as 
aforesaid and maintaining his vow (of celibacy uninterrupted till his course of learning is 
completed, he should (continue to) live in the preceptor's house, completely weaned from 
all luxuries. (30) 
TI Sea BIHANled Helfasai ma fade te est geana: 1321 
aH Waa aA adyay At aiswmencteaedta seleaeleeHs: 1321 
<atuti fruiauraademedeatans! Mtr fePtyarryeeisaaed 133 | 
Sea «CAC (Gs RTA dieiaar « Walseqea Maar yrerasi 1 BX | 
Gaisraisa «60: «0 ete a: «SAY A TaTeRTeTSaT: 1341 
Wd geal smeuiseha saeqinemeiadre aerenaigratsnc: 1361 
lf the student seeks to ascend (after death) to (the highest heaven, viz.,) Satyaloka (the 
realm of Brahma),* the home of the Vedas (living in a personal form), he should completely 
dedicate his body (life) to the preceptor for (further) study of the Vedas (as well as to repay 
his debt to the preceptor), observing the vow of lifelong celibacy. (31) Full of splendour born 
of a study of the Vedas and devoid of (all) sin, the Brahmacari should have no sense of 
diversity (left in him) and should worship Me, the Supreme, (alone) in (the sacred) fire, the 
preceptor, his own self and in all created beings. (82) He who is not a householder (a 
Brahmacani, an anchorite or a recluse) should give up the sight and touch of womankind, 
conversation and joking etc., with them and should (even) avoid coming face to face with 
living beings sexually united. (33) Purity (of body and mind), rinsing one's mouth with water 
(after answering the calls of nature and taking one’s meals or refreshment and sipping water 
before commencing a sacred rite or devotions or taking one's meals etc.), bathing (after 
passing stool and shaving oneself and on ceremonial occasions as well as on touching an 
untouchable person or object, and on the expiry of a period of impurity caused by birth or 
death in one’s family and so on), saying the Sandhya prayers (both morning and evening as 
well as at midday), straightforwardness, resorting to holy places and sacred waters, 
muttering sacred texts (such as the Gayatri) and keeping aloof from untouchable persons 
and objects, prohibited food (and drink) and people who are not worth speaking to, looking 
upon all created beings as (no other than) Myself and control of mind, speech and body— 
this constitutes the Dharma (sacred duty) prescribed for all the ASramas (stages of life 
pertaining to the first three Varnas), O Uddhava (the delight of your race )! (34-35) Having 
mastered the Vedas and with the seeds of his Karma burnt by intense Tapas (askesis), the 
Brahmacari observing the vow of perpetual celibacy and resplendent like fire becomes My 
devotee (and attains to Me) if he is devoid of impurity (in the shape of interested motives).(36)

Saree | ae Safa: 1a fart aa Mee Wdaatfed: 1301 
We aq arated Sasig at festa: | onemmaemd wearer vast 13! 
eat «86a «=| aigeeataarti ada q@ agar at Waulaqman 13°! 
Saeaedtea Aaet a fermi wfaseiseaad a sued Asta 1 So | 
siete Teese | Sanaa silea reat eraaay dal: 1X2 | 
sera fe cgist aeara Aelia ae de saraGa a 1x2! 
fiersqen uftgseet mi wert fat yam: 
wade ye wa farsa: andr anfaixst

* Vide verse 5 above.

ee

Dis. 17 ] BOOK ELEVEN 593

wqatt 8 fest diet wero ageftea afremedt stfialar vx 
wal: Uaate ten fide ore Set: | ane eh aor TTS ISG | 
walaeit Ruictaarchatar | freer gqeaisor we wet 16 
tied, fast afirgen uta aie | WIM AssueAra A AGA HAS ix! 
aeaye T wet Sieaprassafe | eRe at fat A wae aS vc 
Qed Wie aga: UR: Frenchie | regret 3 velo ght feta aio ise | 
ACT EAT RATA STAC TAT NTA leafttiqunt aguwrag aid 14ol 
qeepaatat Warrarstaa oT | SAAMSe, YI, ATTEN. FHL 142

He who, having duly investigated the purport of the Vedas, forthwith seeks to enter the 
next ASrama (stage of life, viz., the life of a householder) should after offering Daksina (a 
parting present by way of gratitude) to the preceptor perform the ceremony known as the 
Samavartana-Samskara (marking the completion of his studies and coming back home from 
the preceptor's house) with the approval of the preceptor. (37) A Brahmacari may enter the 
life of a householder (if he has the sexual urge) or the life of an anchorite (if he is keen on 
self-purification) or (if he is pure-minded already and), if he is a Brahmana (the foremost of 
the twice-born classes), he may (even) renounce the world and go about as a mendicant 
recluse. (Or) he should (in the regular course) pass from one stage to another. He who is 
devoted to Me* should in no case act otherwise (i.e.,remain without embracing any Asrama 
or return from a higher Asrama to a lower one). (38) A Brahmacari desiring to enter the life 
of a householder should take a wife belonging to his own Varna (grade of society); 
Unblemished (in point of pedigree and bodily and other characteristics), and younger (than 
himself) in age. If, however, he takes a wife belonging to a Varna different from his own, he 
should marry her after he has espoused a girl belonging to the same Varna as his won and 
that too in the proper order. (39) Performance of sacrifices, study of the Vedas and bestowal 
of gifts are the duties of all the twice-born; whereas to accept gifts, to teach the Vedas and 
to officiate as a priestin sacrifices constitute the vocation of a Brahmana alone. (40) Looking 
upon acceptance of gifts as (something) detracting from his austerity, (Brahmanical) glory 
and renown, a Brahmana should live by the other two (vocations) alone or, perceiving the 
drawbacks of those vocations (too), should live by (gleaning) the food-grains left by the 
owner of a field after reaping the crop. (41) This body of a Brahmana is surely not intended 
for trivial enjoyment but for (undergoing) hardship and investigation of truth in this life and 
for (attaining) everlasting happiness (in the shape of final beatitude) after death. (42) With 
his mind fully satisfied by living on the food-grains gleaned (partly) from the fields and (partly) 
from the grain market (when the stock has been removed or sold at the end of a day), and 
with his soul dedicated to Me, nay, following his noble duty (of a householder in the shape 
of €ntertaning a newcomer and so on) ina disinterested spirit and continuing to live at home, 
though never deeply attached (to its inmates or things), a Brahmana duly attains (abiding) 
Peace. (43) (Even) as a vessel rescues a drowning man from the sea, | deliver without delay 
irom straits those who duly redeem a Brahmana or (for that matter) anyone (solely) depending 
n Me and suffering hardship. (44) (Just) as a father would save his progeny from woes (of

—

" According to another interpretation the words are aeat: should be split up as St~Tal SAcax:, taking the intervening 3

4S dropped according to the rules of Sandhi. That would mean thatthe interdiction is binding only on these who are nolgevolees ee

“€votees being exempted from this rule.

every kind) or (just) as aking elephant would lift up (fellow) elephants as well as himself (from 
a pit into which they have fallen), a sagacious king should deliver all (classes of) people from 
calamities (of every description) and save himself (too) by himself (his own efforts). (45) 
Shaking off all sin (that he might have incurred in his past lives) in this (very) life, such a 
(benevolent) king ascends to heaven (after death) in an aerial car, brilliant like the sun, and 
revels in the company of Indra (the lord of paradise). (46) A Brahmana in distress may (try 
to) get over it by taking to the calling of a merchant, dealing in such goods only as are worth 
selling (and not in prohibited articles such as spirituous liquor, salt etc.) or (as a third 
. alternative), when overwhelmed with adversity, he may live even by the sword’, but under 
no circumstance by service to a man of lower grade. (47) AKsatriya too may live by the trade 
of a VaiSya or (even) by hunting in (times of) adversity or he may live by teaching etc., (the 
pursuit of a Brahmana), but in no case by menial service. (48) (Even so) a Vaisya (in 
adversity) may adopt the calling of a Sidra and the latter, the craft of an artisan t, such as 
making mats and so on. When rid of adversity (of course) a man belonging to a higher caste 
should no longer seek his living by a reproachful pursuit (prescribed for men of a lower 
grade). (49) A householder (belonging to the twice-born classes) should according to his 
means daily worship the gods, the Rsis, the manes and (other) living beings (including men) 
as My (own) manifestations, through oblations into the secred fire, recitation of the sacred 
texts (technically known by the name of Brahmayajna), Sraddha and Tarpana, Bali or 
Bhutayajna (offering before the daily meals morsels of cooked food to birds and animals, nay, 
all other creatures including lifeless objects) and offering food and water etc., to newcomers 
respectively. (50) With the wealth got without effort or earned (by pursuing one’s own 
avocation) and (therefore) free from blemish he should perform sacrifices with due ceremony 
alone without putting his dependents to hardship. (51)

Peay A asid A Weld Hetoaui facia agdecsafa awadi42!. 
Wey asa: Uw: | stqee fata wast Psat ae i43! 
sa oUt «= Jegfhisae 4 aeia = odemeeda = fait Peg: 14x 
etyeniane Ada wvfpari fase ad alates Seam a UAT IGG | 
aera atate Yared: |aol: paureffel nnrefafa sea 14e | 
Het A oat geal Wai SeTeSsSASM: | BATE APAa set: Het silafa |E:faa: 1491 
Wa 486s Werrenferqecat «= eee Stqueaaearea, Walsel fas aa: 4c! 
et AASad Ae URASA Aledaaeakha AHSAMSANA: 12191 
A sane householder too should not get attached to the members of his family nor should 
he be unmindful of his goal (i.e., Myself). (Nay,) he should realize even the invisible (worlds) 
to be (as) perishable as the visible. (52) Association with one's sons, wife, friends and

relations is no better than the coming together of travellers (in a rest-house). With every 
change of body they vanish like a dream seen during sleep. (53) Pondering thus and living

* Although the law-giver Gautama enjoins a Brahmana in straitened circumstances to take to the military profession !n 
preference to trade, the Lord permits him to do so only as a third alternative and gives preference to trade obviously becauSeé 
it is a peaceful pursuit and does not involve destruction of life.

+ Lord Manu classifies Karus or artisans under the following five heads:-

da AF Aqsa A WHIM | GaRsdeRa ra: fafesat Aa: 11 
"The five varieties of Karus are—carpenters, weavers, barbers, washermen and shoemakers or tanners of leather.”

unattached) in his house like a stranger and having no sense of "I" and "mine" (with regard 
to the body and those connected with it), he does not get bound by his household but remains - 
free (from all bondage). (54) Worshipping Me alone through his household duties, a devotee 
may stay In his house (continue to bea householder) or retire into the forest (enter the order 
of an anchorite) or renounce the world and go about as a mendicant recluse if he has a male 
issue. (55) The fool whose mind is attached to the house and who is afflicted with the 
hankering for progeny and wealth, (nay,) who is domineered over by his wife and whose 
intellect is (ever) bewildered by the notion of "I" and "mine" gets bound. (56) He remains 
engrossed in thought as follows:—"Alas |! my aged parents, my wife, whose children are (yet) 
very young, and my children (too) (—all these) will be left without a protector and will feel 
(very) miserable and afflicted without me. How will they survive ?" (57) With his mind wholly 
distracted thus through excessive attachment to his household and his judgment clouded, 
(nay,) unsated with the pleasures of sense and thinking of them all the time, this fellow, when 
dead, descends into (the) blinding darkness (of hell). (58)

Thus ends the seventeenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

Discourse XVIII 
The Duties of anchorites and recluses 
MTA TAA 
ai fafaa: we wat ae Wed ATi ad Wa aaasrdeqda UTAH: |g | 
raged areie td yencrad | adit dene aaRquauisaia a1 2 | 
aaniaaresayaena fayae ada amaag asta frente wiitecrera: 1 3 | 
TY aaa usnia asharane wei stenveda: Rie Wages | ¥ | 
sifmads anata cieumAa al seers A aia Ul aI & | 
aa daa ada gnu aaenleaeni — AlecheIAaIssectL | & | 
aa seuStat aaa, SISAL A T Mat WAT At ast sash wo | 
aie ui aig wines wade a waa a ATH 1 ct 
wa oo otta ager | ameinfera: at aarranes aalterenghiet ATL <I 
Tac. Feet ant fad Fed! SHIATATUTTA SRA SHAT: HISALETA: 120 | 
Ter frase ATT AAATY: | travel Ta Aherett shat afer 12 8 | 
Gel caffaureay = oleh Fraverd | Re See AAS AAT: Nts: 122 
SBI aelueet Al al aden hast | arate waar arraee farrier: Uftststel 183 |

Frm & daradt Bar arofeeftmr: | ampere Tens ST et = 
fayarahrata: aiiinrsted UA eieh A aus, feefgemame gyi

sud aa we aaqd frase weet aaa art Ay PATA Re | 
danse der argadaria da vel wag agit wae ait: 101 
fuat aqi atty fanaa, aviiatad! WarRMagAaerstt =| AAT 121 
aston wat duet araa: ifaw ulead eet agitaretrareds 1281 
was =| ag: GaAarsa: | SIAHIS BNA SIAM, Aaa: 1201 
fafernataarunt TSlaanora: | arent «faerdeeasetd Fat AP: 1221 
sade ai Mat a Wasa aa sisafaaat Ale Wi A FAA: 122! 
A «Nee Aaslad aia: | fac: aeonMeal ceeassaht GA Ae 1231 
Teas, aa frend sfagiat| qacsaitsoansmadt HEP 1261 
SMARTS eat HeaqArAe | Maes: Weare: RerewTAr 1241

The glorious Lord began again : Committing his wife to the care of his sons, the 
householder who is keen to retire into the woods (enter the life of an anchorite) should spend 
the third part of his life in the forest alone or even with his wife with his senses fully 
controlled.(1) He should subsist on wild bulbs, roots and fruits which are fit for being offered 
into the sacrificial fire and should wear as his apparel the bark of trees or matting etc., made 
of grass or leaves or deerskin. (2) He should allow the hair of his head as well as on his body, 
nails, moustaches and beard as well as the dirt on his body to grow and should not (even) 
scrub his teeth (with a brush etc.), should take a plunge bath (after the manner of a pestle 
without rubbing his body) three times (daily, viz., in the morning and evening as well as at 
midday) and should sleep on the ground (covered with grass etc.). (3) In summer he should 
allow himself to be heated by five fires (one placed in each quarter about himself and the fifth 
in the form of the sun blazing overhead); during the rains he should expose* himself to 
showers while in the closing months (Magha and Phalguna) of winter (comprising what is

known as the Sisira Rtu and roughly corresponding to January and February of the English 
calender) he should remain immersed up to the neck in water.tHe should practise 
austerities, following this mode of life. (4) He is permitted to eat (only) what is roasted in fire 
or gets ripened by (process of) time. He can thrash (wild corn) in a mortar (with a pestle) and 
pound hard substances with a stone or may use the teeth alone for a mortar (and pestle).(5) 
Fully aware of the place and time where and when a certain thing could be had as well as 
of his own (digestive) power he should personally get together (all) the means of his 
subsistence and should never use what was got at another time + (and laid by for future 
use).(6) An ascetic should perform rites (such as the Agrayana) enjoined at particular periods 
of time with oblations prepared out of wild products; but he should on no account propitiate 
Me through (the sacrifice of) an animal as enjoined by the Vedas. (7) Agnihotra (offering to 
the sacred fire an oblation consisting chiefly of milk, oil and sour gruel), Darga (half-monthly 
Sacrifice performed on every Amavasya or the new moon) Pirnamasa (the half-monthly 
Sacrifice performed on every full moon) and the (three) sacrifices performed at the beginning 
of the three seasons of four months each (under the names of VaiSwadeva, Varunapraghasa

" This is technically known by the name of AbhravakaSa-Vrata.

+t This has been mentioned in the Smrti-texts under the name of Udaka-vasa-Vrata.

+ Cf. Vil. xii. 19, where an anchorite has been called upon to reject the old stock each time a fresh (natural) supply of cereals 
and other eatables is obtained.

i

pis. 18 ] BOOK ELEVEN 597

and Sakamedha) have been enjoined on an anchorite as in the case ofa householder by the 
exponents of the Vedas. (8) Having propitiated Me, the embodiment of wisdom, through 
austerities undergone by him thus, a hermit reduced toa (mere) skeleton (lit., spread all over 
with protruding veins for want of flesh) comes to Me (through successive stages) from 
Maharloka* (the realm of the Rsis, to which he ascends inthe ordinary course after death).(9) 
Who could be more stupid than him who would divert such great Tapas, performed with 
(great) hardship and calculated to secure the highest good, to the fulfilment of a paltry desire 
(viz., the desire for any material or ethereal fruit up to the attainment of Brahmaloka) ? (10) 
When the ascetic, shaking with old age, is incapable of observing any longer the sacred vow 
(to which he has pledged himself), he may withdraw the (three) sacred fires (known by the 
names of Ahavaniya, Garhapatya and Daksina, thathe hasbeen maintaining and worshipping) 
into himself and, with his mind fixed on Me, enter + the fire (burn himself to death). (11) When 
(however) he develops a thorough distaste for the higher worlds (upto the realm of Brahma, 
the creator) as a reward of pious acts (done from an interested motive), though (as a matter 
of fact) no better than hell (abounding as they do in sorrows), he may, on the sacred fires 
having been withdrawn (into himself), renounce the world and go about as a mendicant 
recluse from the very Asrama in which he may be stationed. + (12) Having propitiated Me 
according to precept (through the Prajapatya sacrifice after performing the eight types of 
Sraddha incumbent on him whois going to renounce the world), if he is free from (all) desires, 
and given everything to the officiating priest and having withdrawn the sacred fire into his own 
breath, the hermit may enter the order of recluses. (13) In the way of a Brahmana who is 
actually going to renounce the world the gods in the garb (through the agency) of his wife and 
so on place obstacles, for fear lest he should outstrip them and attain to the Supreme. (One 
who is bent on attaining final beatitude should not, however, be deterred by such obstacles). 
(14) If at all a recluse would have a covering (for his body), he should wear a piece of-cloth 
barely enough to cover the strip of cloth used by him to hide his private parts with. Nor should 
he retain (in his possession) anything renounced by him (at the time of entering the order of 
Samnyasa) other than a staff (used as a token of Samnyasa) and a Kamandalu (a water-pot 
made of the shell of a wild cocoanut) otherwise than in a critical plight. (15) He should take 
(every) step (only) after the ground he is going to tread has been scanned with his eyes (lest 
he should unwittingly trample any creature); he should drink water strained with (a piece of) 
cloth, utter words tested on the touchstone of truth and do that which has been found correct 
by reference to his conscience. (16) Silence is the cudgel to control one's speech; abstinence 
from interested action, the one to control one's body; and Pranayama (breath-control) is the 
cudgel to curb one's mind. He who does not wield these (cudgels) cannot be (held to be) a 
recluse by (mere) bamboo-staves carried on his person. (17) Arecluse should resort for alms 
to the four types of Brahmanas alone (those living by gifts received, teaching, officiating at 
Sacrifices and gleaning food-grains from fields and grain-markets), avoiding those of 
reproachful conduct and visit only seven houses not specified before, and should remain

" AS regards the devotee whose mind has been thoroughly purified through the disinterested practice of devotion, he gets

liberated even before death. :

t An ascetic who prosecutes his austerities till the end of his life is sure to attain Moksa; while he who Obseies ihe rules 
laid down for an anchorite till the end of the third stage of his life earns the title to enter the ore: of carnyase even if he has 
Not developed full Vairagya. The course recommended in this verse is only intended for him who is unable to carry on his 
2Usterities till the end of the third stage on account of a weak constitution and has not the requisite Vairagya to qualify him for 
eon Vaira in him, in whatever ©

rue Vai a appears in him, i , 
+ The Sruti lays down that a Brahmana may turn ou to be a recluse whenever t gya app

Slage of life he may be— :

kim

contented with the food got from those houses (alone). (18) Going to a reservoir of Water 
(such as a pond or tank) outside the town or village, he should rinse his mouth there and

allotting a (due) share to those deserving it (viz., Lord Visnu, Brahma, the sun-god and all 
created beings) once it has been consecrated (by sprinkling with water and so on), he should 
silently consume all the rest that was brought (by him—neither bringing more than was 
required nor laying by anything for another time). (19) With his senses fully controlled he 
should perambulate this earth (all) alone and free from attachment, finding recreation and 
delight in the Self, self-possessed and viewing all alike. (20) Dwelling in a lonely yet secure 
abode and keeping his mind pure through devotion to Me, the sage should contemplate 
on the Self as one and undistinguishable from Me. (21) By inquiring into the truth (of things) 
he should investigate the true nature of bondage and liberation of the Self. Bondage 
consists in the distraction of the senses and Liberation in their full control. (22) Therefore, 
keeping in check the six senses (the five external senses and the mind, the internal sense) 
and averse to the trifling pleasures of sense, and finding abundant Joy in the Self, the 
recluse should go about the world contemplating on Me. (23) He should perambulate the 
earth full of holy tracts, rivers, mountains, woodlands and hermitages, entering towns 
and villages, cowherd stations and caravanserais (only) for the sake of alms. (24) He 
should often beg alms from the hermitages of anchorites; for, his mind being purified by 
the (hemit's) food obtained by gleaning grains from the fields, he is rid of infatuation and

attains the goal of his life soon. (25) ,

dae aeqaa wade axed faasafa i sracfert fartigeraa = feentisfere 126 | 
aederar SRTPAATATMOTS SAA | Aa ATAla Aehol RAAT FT AT AT | 2G 
aaes! feat at aaml antern: | afegmoemieaa «aralafemter: 1261 
SN aed Bled GAel AeaMtL! acganad fags AWeat Ast 122! 
Acard A Ba arauel 3A eden: | Wehalelaare A His ual AAA 130! 
diestd Sale at sa alestta qiatdaciiiafaaa aAaqta wa | 
Sea exd UNAS At Hala Had 13% 
Wh Wa UW Mie Bdge: i adeecusy 9 weet A I3z!

He should not regard this visible world as real because it is perishable. (Therefore,) with 
his mind unattached to this world as well as to the next he should cease from every activity 
intended (to secure the objects of senses). (26) Realizing by force of reasoning (on the 
analogy of a dream) that all that exists (apart from the Self) viz., this (objective) universe 
(regarded as “mine") as well as the body (and referred to as I") conjoined with the mind, 
speech and the vital air (alongwith the delights of sense) as a (mere) mental illusion 
Superimposed on the Self, and (therefore) turning his back on it, he should think no more of 
if and remain established in the Self. (27) No longer governed by the scriptural ordinance, 
he who is established in Self-Knowledge, though (outwardly) appearing as a seeker Of 
Liberation (averse to the pleasures of sense) or a devotee of Mine, seeking nothing (not even 
Liberation), may do as he likes, renouncing (attachment to the duties of) the four ASramas 
(stages of life) alongwith their distinguishing marks (such as the triple staff in the case of 4 
recluse). (28) Though sound of judgment, he should sport like a child (bereft of the sense of 
honour and ignominy); though clever, he should behave like a dullard. Though learned he 
should rave like a madman (inasmuch) as he has none to please by his speech); though 
devoted to the intention of the Vedas, he should behave like an animal (observing "° 
consistency in his behaviour). (29) He should not take delight in expounding the section ©

pis. 18 ] BOOK ELEVEN 599

ae We We We We We Be we We He We Be He Be BRR BRE BE Ke HOME He HE He Hy

the Vedas treating of ritual acts, nor should he observe any rules of conduct opposed to the 
injunctions of the Vedas and the Smrti texts, nor should he be devoted to (empty) 
ratiocination, nor again should he take any side in a fruitless discussion. (30) He should not 
be annoyed with anyone nor should he annoy anyone with his mind (fully) controlled he 
should put up with abuses and should never show disrespect to anyone; nor should he for 
the sake of his body make enemies with anyone like a brute. (31) For, (just) as the same moon

ets reflected in (a number of) vessels holding water, the same transcendent Self is present 
in (all) created beings as well as in one's own body (so that there is no ground for enmity 
whatsoever from the point of view of the Spirit) and the bodies (too) are essentially one

constituted as they are of the same gross elements (so that enmity with any being 
whatsoever Is enmity with one's own Self). (32)

sToem 4 fetiied ches aos fa! wea A eae aad Saar 133 | 
Tenia Tet GA Ad MTOM ae feed aa ae fama faqed iax! 
AERA ATA TESST TAL 1AM ATTA BAT AT ST SAA: 1341 
wera A A XT aera aaiaraig frm wet are seas: 1361 
a fe qe faearen a a Aglare ect | sneer eHfer Shea: AEA AAT 1319 1

Full of fortitude a Samnyasi should not get dejected on not getting food in time on any 
occasion nor should he feel rejoiced to get it; (for) both (his getting and not getting it) lie in 
the hands of Providence. (33) (This should not lead one to think that a Sarnnyasi need not 
even go out to beg food.) He must exert himself to procure food; for an attempt on his part 
to sustain life would be (quite) justified; (for) by sustaining life truth is investigated by him and 
realizing the truth thereby he will get liberated for all time to come. (34) A recluse should eat 
the food, whether excellent or of the worst type, obtained by the will of Providence and (also) 
accept whatever clothing and bed is got (by him). (85) A man of wisdom should cultivate the 
habits of cleanliness, rinsing the mouth (after answering the calls of nature, taking food or 
even light refreshment such as milk and fruits and sipping water before meals etc.), and 
bathing (thrice everyday) and observe other rules of conduct (mentioned heretofore) by way 
of sport, as |, the almighty Lord, do, but not in compliance with scriptural ordinance (which 
Is no longer binding on him). (36) For there is no longer any perception of difference in him; 
Whatever there was has been uprooted by My realization (as the Self of all). What does 
appear (in him) at times (e.g., at the time of begging alms and taking meals etc., even now 
as a recurrence of what has already been set aside) will continue (by force of Prarabdha) till 
death. Thereafter he will get (indissolubly) united with Me. (37)

e@ey amy omahde area afferent ye yPquTesa 3c! 
Wad utene wm: seglardqeen: | alae ste fasritarama Wealed: 1391 
aEadadagant: yausheranta: | AAarafedkaavenastattet 1¥o | 
Gears Fed a a emfar | steaaennerniseneq=ra feet xe 
firattehd: anise aa gen adlene: i yfeot yaar fasterrereitaty 1s 
weet qa: sit aa yaateans Fewrergd wy: Aeat AQUA I¥R I 
sft ut a: wafer ser PremerraTe | aay Aaa ahh ferat gery ee 
Tea eararaa qa | Aaa Ha HOT Atari a: Sal 
sh oo wqenififitmest — fraferafa: 1 arafegrercet afer agai APIS | 
Wisma wt we seed! a Takradt fasta: Ut: sel

We We We We We We He We Meee eee We We We We We Me We Mee EE ee eee We WE We a *

Udasfed Wet Var Got aa A | aa Wedel Veal At Aaa we 
sfa Sasa Tad ASR URSA SS asHeaRH SCTE: 1221

A man of self-control who has got disgusted with the pleasures of sense, which are 
(invariably) attended with sorrow, but who has not (yet) been instructed in the duties that 
enable one to realize Me should betake himself to a teacher given to contemplation. (38) Fy) 
of reverence and devotion and free from censoriousness he should do service to the 
preceptor in a respectful mood, knowing him really to be Myself, till he realizes Brahma. (39 
He, however, who has not (yet) been able to control his six senses (including the mind, the 
internal sense); whose intellect, the controller of his senses, (too) Is intensely fond of the 
pleasures of sense; who is destitute of wisdom and dispassion and (simply) makes his living 
by the triple staff (the emblem of a recluse); the impurities of whose heart have not yet been 
fully burnt and who has (thus) violated the duties of a Samnyasi and is deceiving the gods 
(by his ceasing to propitiate them through sacrificial performances which he would have 
otherwise done), his own self (by depriving himself of luxuries which he would have freely 
enjoyed as a householder) as well as Myself, dwelling in his heart, (by failing to realize Me) 
is deprived of this world as well as of the next. (40-41) (To sum up.) control of the mind and

the senses and harmlessness (mainly) constitute the righteous course of a mendicant 
(recluse): enduring hardships prescribed by the Sastras and inquiry into the truth, of an 
anchorite (dewelling in the woods): protection of living beings and performance of (the five 
great) sacrifices. of ahouseholder; and rendering service to the preceptor, that of the celibate

(who has gone through a second birth by being invested with the sacred thread and taught 
the Gayatri). (42) Observing chastity (during the nights other than those in which he is

permitied to copulate with his wedded wife), enduring hardships involved in the discharge 
of his rightful! duties, purity (of body and mind), contentment and kindness to (all) created 
beings (—these) constitute ine sacred duty even of a householder who seeks the bed of his 
wife (only) during the period following the courses favourable for conception (sixteen nights 
aiter their appearance); (whereas) My worship is the pious duty common to all. (43) He who 
constanily worships Me through the performance of his duty as aforesaid, seeking no other 
reward (beyond My pleasure) begins to look upon all created beings as Myself and attains 
firm devotion to Me. (44) Through unceasing Devotion, O Uddhava, he attains to Me, the 
supreme Ruler of all the worlds, responsible for the creation and destruction of all, the Source 
of the Vedas. (45) He whose mind has thus been purified through the performance of his own 
duty and who has fully realized My divine character is equipped with (both) indirect and direct 
knowledge concerning Me and (eventually) attains to Me before long. (46) This is the 
righteous course of those affiliated to a particular Varna (grade of society) and ASrama (stage 
in life), consisting of certain (definite) rules of conduct. The same Dharma, when characterized 
by devotion to Me (i.e., pursued as an offering to Me) proves to be of supreme value as 4 
means to final beatitude. (47) (Thus) | have told you, O good one, how a man wedded to his 
righteous course turns out to be a devotee and duly attains to Me, the Supreme. And this !s 
what you asked Me (in particular). (48)

Thus ends the eighteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahanisa-Samhita.

nC -ae-2t 2.2," > 
CIPS ERENT

is. 19 ] 
reanane lll Michi Bil Bid Bl id ck cl el a RRR RR BOOK ELEVEN 601

ee 40% Wear ey a

ST Sta: 
Discourse XIX 
A Dissertation on Devotion, Spiritual Enlightenment and Yogic disciplines 
in the form of the five Yamas, the (five) Niyamas and so on 
MPA TAA

at Tenge Sea ATU: | wraraafre areata a af Ga eI 
wraerss: erat east dna: | eigarenigy areitsef wet fir: 1 2 
arias: Ue sts feet weit fraaniisdt & wear faaht arc 3 | 
quest Sat eH cfemroicatit a are peta at fake at geno aT |X I 
Tara ed Weal Merger | waa wa ul akeufaa: 1 & | 
sfasras TIMgissmMaar | adagatt at a afakg waatsT! & |

aagasmaid akafaent faert ararmissada aremertatec |

THES Ged da ta fh Wuerdddeadisha deat we 1 © |

The glorious Lord began again: He who is equipped with learning culminating in 
intuition, (nay,) who has realized the Self and does not take his stand on (mere) logical 
reasoning should know this world of differences (as well as the means of sublating it) to be 
a mere phantom appearing in Me and (eventually) relinquish this knowledge too. (This is 
what is technically known by the name of Vidwat-Samnyasa.) (1) To a man of wisdom | am 
the only beloved; | am_ recognized to be his purpose (goal) as well as the means of 
accomplishing it; | am his heaven (highest joy) and Moksa (release) too; no object other than 
Me is dear to him. (2) (Only) those whose mind has been thoroughly purified through 
knowledge and realization (of the Self) are able to know My supreme state (glory). The man 
of wisdom bears Me up with his knowledge, hence he is most beloved of Me. (3) Askesis, 
resorting to sacred places or holy waters, the muttering of prayers, charity and other purifying 
agencies do not consummately bring about that perfection which is wrought by a ray of 
Knowledge. (4) Therefore, knowing your own self up to the stage of realization, O Uddhava, 
and equipped with (such) knowledge and realization and tull of Devotion worship Me (alone, 
rejecting everything else). (5) Having worshipped Me, their Inner Controller and Bestower 
of the fruit of all sacrifices, in their own self (heart), sages have attained to Me alone in the 
form of highest perfection (final beatitude). (6) This threefold modification (of Prakriti, in the 
form of the body, the senses and the mind) that crops up in you, O Uddhava, is (only) an 
illusion (and not real) in that it appears in the middle (like the serpent In a rope), and does 
Not exist in the beginning or at the end. (Hence) when these (six) states—in the shape of birth 
Clc.,(viz., birth, existence, growth, transformation, decay and death)— befall (by turns) this 
PSychophysical organism, nothing happens (no chang comes) to you, the substratum

eyond and unaffected by these states). (Reverting to the illustration of the serpent and the 
'Pe) what (the rope) persists before (the appearance of) and after (the disappearance of) 
4 Phantom (viz., the serpent) also exists In the middle. (Just as the states through which a 
pent passes do notaffectits substratum, viz., the rope, the states of the body do not affect 
Ou, 
the substratum of the body). (7) — 
sd fag faa aararratanrat ory | 
arene fader feaqt safwatt a Neleya! ¢ | 
S65] B.M. Part ll—48

$A8r Sr tree: eoketot eee eek eo er tee ete Woke Me Meee Re Re eR Re Se Ree Re OE eee He Be Be We We Me Ve Bee We Be We Me We ee We eee We Ree Wee Kew *

Uddhava submitted : (Pray,) expound in a thorough (conclusive) way, O Lord of the 
universe, which is Your own form! this purifying and most ancient (because embodied in the 
dateless Vedas) wisdom, coupled with dispassion and intuition, as well as the path of 
Devotion, sought after (even) by the great (Brahma and others). (8) For a man tormented on 
all sides with the threefold agony (viz., 1—that brought about by divine agencies in the form 
of natural calamities, 2— that inflicted by other living beings and 3—that arising out of bodily 
distemper or mental disturbance) and undergoing intense suffering in the fearful path of 
metempsychosis, O Lord, | find no shelter other than the umbrella of Your feet, which (not 
only affords protection against the scorching sunshine but also) rains nectar on all sides.(9) 
Kindly lift up once for all this creature fallen deep into this abyss (of transmigration) and bitten 
by the snake of Death, (yet) seized by the great thirst for trifling delights (of sense), and 
soothe me with (nectar-like) words showing the way to Liberation, O Lord possessed of

immense glory ! (10) 
ATTA TAT 
Sed UN Us Het entyal aM senda: UIE Gat AlsqqVaT 1221 
fat wud ge wdelaenfage: | eat wai aed UsTMaeMiagesd 1221 
ame astern «faa! Aaa «RB 
qdniesl Us AM War way aq aisaadnaag aaa aq fsa ex! 
Uiea f€ fag A added 4 acl fewer asad samt Bros! 2! 
Alaa A AA A Gea Ged Aehaae | Utada ahold dea Ural 
aft: 8osaeaieaqa 89 aqeatL saIgaaerare fancamd a fawad 1291 
HoT uhuntentatakenengen | fang «2 UReaapafa = Ba 121

The glorious Lord replied : Thus did King Yudhisthira (who bore no enmity to any 
creature whatsoever) ask this (very) question in the former days of Bhisma, the foremost of 
those devoted to the righteous course (pleasing to the Lord), while all of us listened. (11) 
_Having heard the exposition of many righteous courses—when the (internecine) war 
between the Bharatas had come to an end—Yudhisthira, distressed over the death of his 
Kinsmen, subsequently asked Bhisma about the courses of conduct conducive to 
emancipation. (12) | shall reproduce to you the exposition of those righteous courses which 
was heard (by Me) from the lips of Bhisma (of heavenly vows), and which is full of precepts 
on spiritual enlightenment, dispassion, intuition, faith and Devotion. (13) Jfana (spiritual 
enlightenment) has been concluded by Me to be that by which one is enabled to perceive 
the nine (viz., Prakrti or primordial Matter, Purusa or the Spirit, Mahat-tattva or the principle 
of cosmicintelligence, Ahankaraorthe cosmic Ego andthe five Tanmatras or subtle elements), 
the eleven (viz., the five senses of perception, the five organs of action and the mind), the five 
(viz., the gross elements), and the three categories (namely, the three Gunas or modes © 
Prakrti, viz., Sativa or the principle of harmony, Rajas or the principle of activity and Tamas

7

We ee we

We We He 
We We We WE We HE He He ROWE Me We ME We WE Me He Mee Me HE He Me ee We He He Re ee He HEE EE He He HEE

or the principle of ignorance and Inertia) as permeating (all) created beings (from Brahma,

the earliest and foremost of all, down to the merest blade of grass) and further perceives 
the one (intelligent principle, viz., the Supreme Spirit) running through them. (14) When 
(however) a man no longer perceives as he did before the many (phenomena) as 
permeated by the one (reality, viz., Brahma) but sees that one reality only, that alone is 
Vijfiana to be sure. (In order to perceive this one reality (alone), he should ponder the 
coming into existence, continuance and dissolution (i.e., the transitoriness and hence 
unreality) of (the many) existences constituted of the three Gunas. (15) That alone should 
be concluded to be real, which abides at the beginning as well as at the end (of creation) 
and follows from one evolute to another in the middle, and again which remains (as the 
residue) in the process of their involution (return to original state). (16) Of the (many) 
Pramanas (means of cognition) Sruti texts (negating plurality), direct perception (of an 
effect being Invariably produced by a cause), tradition and inference—these four are the 
most authoritative. Plurality of substances not finding support in the light of these; a 
discerning man (realizes the spiritual substance permeating all phenomena to be the only 
reality and) recoils from diversity (in the form of this world of matter). (17) Since (all) ritual 
acts (which are rewarded with heaven) are transient, a wise man should look upon even 
the invisible world, including the realm of Brahma (the creator), as full of misery and 
perishable like the visible. (18)

arma: Utah: staan asi yas mafsent aah: HUT aT IRe1 
sgn A wateqeidai aks: a gsrat wary: mad Aq 1201 
ame: 86 Uneaatat «= walgefeare aepueafet «aa fa: 1221 
vetgeas! «6A ae Fa aed a waa: adenmfaasiad 1221 
netstat wrt A FaM Alss ad wt WA val aq ad aU: 1231 
wa HHO Saas | Al Pata HikH: SAMSASATATETA 12% |

The path of Devotion has already been delineated by Me. | shall, however, tell you once 
more the royal road to Devotion, since you have developed a liking for it, O sinless one ! (19) 
Keenness to hear My nectar-like stories, repeated exposition of My stories when they have 
been (duly) heard, intense devotion to (My) worship, and glorifying Me with songs of praise, 
enthusiasm in doing service to Me (in the form of sweeping My temple and SO on), saluting 
Me with all the eight limbs (viz., the head, breast, hands, knees and feet), offering much more 
devoted worship to My devotees and looking upon all created beings as Myself; directing (all) 
the movements of one's body to pursuits intended to propitiate Me (e.g., plucking basil leaves 
and flowers etc., for My worship), to utter My praises (alone) with one's speech, resigning the 
mind to Me, and giving up all (one's) desires; spurning for My sake (in order to be able to carry 
on My adoration uninterruptedly) wealth as well as the means of enjoyment (luxuries) and 
Self-gratification, (all of which generally interfere with Devotion) and undertaking sacrificial 
Performances, practising charity, offering oblations into the sacred fire, muttering prayers, 
Observing fasts and other sacred vows and (other) austerities (in the form of undergoing

ardships sanctioned by the Sastras) done for My sake—all these are stepping-stones to 
EVotion. (20—23) Devotion (consisting in all-absorbing Love for Me, the reward of 2) 
Spiritual} endeavours) to Me develops, by (following) such righteous courses, in the heart 
Men who dedicate (to My service) their (very) self (in the shape of their psychophysica 
>'ganism as well as all that is connected with it), O Uddhava ! What other objected eee 
°F Such a devotee to be accomplished ? (In other words, all his objects are accomplishe |

as q Matter of course through Devotion alone.) (24)

aassattd fat ard eatudeqied awe wawetad arto iu 
qefda dq famed shat: ukenaiti wre arefas fod fate facta is) 
ni Wek Sel WA Berea ages! arated warfornea: 1201

When the mind, equipped with Sattva and (therefore) tranquil, is devoted to Me, man 
(automatically) acquires piety, wisdom coupled with dispassion and divine powers. (25) 
When (however) the aforesaid mind is set on various objects (tho body, dwelling etc.), it 
wanders alongwith the senses and gets all the more stained with Rajas and addicted to evil 
and then know it (for certain) that a man develops the reverse of piety etc., (viz., 
unrighteousness, ignorance, passion and lack of divinity). (26) That (alone) which engenders 
devotion to Me is extolled (in the scriptures) as Dharma (piety); that (alone) which enables 
one to perceive unity (everywhere) is glorified as wisdom; a distaste for the pleasures of 
sense is spoken highly of as dispassion and mystic powers (such as the capacity to assume 
the size of an atom) are extolled as divine powers. (27)

SEA SAA 
aa: chidfaet: sient frant atftenaia i om: aa: al aa: Hen an fafren ofa: wat 12! 
fe an fe au: ald fe aaqagqend | meat: f a ae al aa: SI aatam 12e 1 
Ga: fafae ae site at ory chara | ar fae St: or ar ot: fH Gay: aAa a 1301 
fH: Ulusd: HA Wa: H: TM SUA GH: | H: Mal Aten: GH: Radel aed fe Wer 132 I 
Sted: Hl alist Al HA: GH: H SA: | Ua WAM AA Ale faataiss aad 1321 
Uddhava submitted : Of how many varieties is Yama (self-control) declared to consist

and of how many types is Niyama (self-discipline) declared to be, O Chastiser of foes ? 
Whatis Sama ? What does Damaconsistin, O Enchanter of beings ? What is (the definition

of) Titiksa (and) what is firmness, O Lord ? (28) What is charity ? What is Tapas ? What

is valour ? What is truthfulness and what is called (by the name of) Rta ? What is (known as) 
Tyaga ? What is the esteemed wealth ? What is Yajfia and what goes by the name of 
Daksina ? (29) What is the strength of men, O glorious One ? What is fortune and what is

the gain, O Ruler (even) of Brahma and Siva ? What is supreme Wisdom ? Whatis Hri ? What.

is adornment? What is happiness and what is misery ? (30) Who is a man of erudition and 
whois a fool ? What is the path (of virtue) and whatis the wrong way ? What is heaven ? What

is hell ? Whois a friend and what is the home ? (31) Who is opulent and who is a destitute ? _

Who is pitiable and who is the master of his self ? (Pray,) answer these questions of mine 
and (also) define the contraries (of what has been asked), O Protector of the virtuous ? (32)

MATA 
aigat «86 aaataaast «= BRS: | anaes Hele BAM BH ararszar 133! 
ara SEM ea: aaissiied Real diated ueetet afberenefdarte 13% 
Wl aa: aha swalgien wm: i qerqafearend aed eefa fe 134! 
aa AfapaT «Geen Sierra: | fafaan e-@daet fr@loerrat gfa: 136! 
MSH: UW CH HMMM: Baqi wala: aad at a anesta 30! 
7a A Ti ant afath: aRetiia i atkaaea: at wet: dara gerd 132! 
af 38 ot FU Ayise Wea: | ceo WAaea: WoNaM: at ae 12S! 
wi A tat Ael oral Aakpedd: | faenssaia frat appear greta Xo!

?

pis. 19 ]

TorRyaaasta: ise | 
sd aitraerTad TSG USUI eae VASE: 122]

The glorious Lord replied : Harmlessness, uttering only that which is wholesome, 
agreeable and true, non-thieving; absence of attachment, modesty, non-accumulation of 
possessions, faith, chastity, silence, firmness (of resolve), forgiveness and fearlessness, 
bodily cleanliness and mental purity, muttering the Gayatri and other sacred texts, austerity, 
pouring oblations into the sacred fire, reverence (for true religion), hospitality and offering 
worship to Me; visiting sacred places, working for the benefit of others, contentment and 
service to the preceptor—these have been declared to be the twelve Yamas and the twelve 
Niyamas divided in two (separate) verses.Carried into practice they positively yield fruit (in 
the shape of final beatitude or worldly prosperity) according to the desire of men, O dear 
one ! (833—-35) Sama is dependence of the intellect on Me; Dama consists in control of the 
senses. Titiksa consists in (calmly) enduring, suffering and firmness in completely controlling 
the palate and the sex. (36) Forswearing enmity towards (the entire) creation is the highest 
form of charity; Tapas has been declared to consist in abandoning luxuries (of all kind). 
Valour consists in curbing one's natural propensities or cravings and truthfulness consists 
in perceiving unity (in the form of Brahma) everywhere. (37) Rta has been declared by the 
wise as consisting in truthful and agreeable speech. Sauca (which is a variety of Tyaga when 
construed in the sense of shaking off impurity) consists in absence of attachment to one's 
actions; while Tyaga is declared as consisting in (renouncing the world and) entering the 
order of Sarnnyasa. (38) Righteousness is the esteemed wealth of men; Myself, the supreme 
Lord, am the Yajnia (which should accordingly be performed as identical with Myself and not 
as a dry ritual). Daksina (or gift made ata sacrifice) consists in service to the preceptor (which 
induces the preceptor to impart wisdom). Pranayama (control of breath) is the supreme 
Strength (inasmuch as it is helpful in curbing the mind, which Is so difficult to curb). (39) My 
divine state (consisting in the six attributes of lordship, piety, glory, affluence, wisdom and 
dispassion, each in its fullest measure) is (real) fortune and Devotion to Me Is the highest 
gain. Wisdom consists in sublating diversity (appearing) in the Selfand Hariis shrinking from - 
Prohibited acts. (40) Adornment consists in virtues like desirelessness; happiness consists 
IN rising above joys and sorrows and misery lies in seeking gratification through enjoyment; 
@ Mani of erudition is he who knows what is bondage and what Is liberation. (41) The fool is

© who looks upon the body as his self and that connected with it as his; that which leads 
0 My realization (the path of renunciation) has been declared to be the path (of virtue) and 
the path of worldly activity (which distracts the mind) is the wrong one; predominance of

attvaguna is heaven. (42) Preponderance of Tamoguna Is hell. The preceptor 5 one's (true) 
friend and he is no other than Me (the teacher of the entire universe), O friend! The human 
Ody is the (true) habitation (place of enjoyment). He alone who abounds in virtues is said 
lObe Opulent. (43) Destitute is he who is discontented; he (alone) is pitiable, who has notbeen 
Able to control his senses. He is the master (of his self), whose mind is not attached to the

We We We Be We Re Gee ee eee eR RR RE ROR eR ERE ERE ME REE Re Re eH ee He We Bee We Hee Mee We Wee He He HE We We We We We We We We Be We We We Be We We We We We Ke we BWM wey 
med Bf

objects of sense; and he whois attached to the pleasures of sense is the opposite of a master 
(i.e., a slave). (44) These questions of yours have all been duly answered. What is to be 
gained by elaborate discussion ? The definition of good and evil (in a nutshell) is as follows. 
To direct one's eyes to the virtues and faults (of others) is evil, while virtues lies in 
developing a disposition entirely free from the habit of seeing the merits and demerits of 
others, O Uddhava ! (45)

Thus ends the nineteenth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31g faanseara:

Discourse XX

Jnanayoga, Karmayoga and Bhaktiyoga analysed

SEI SAA 
fafasr osfastass frrat dare a1 ade qo ae a adorei 2 | 
auistianed 3d sMdeayqeme| xeleaa:amieom wil atHAa al 21 
Turret Hales T aaea | fstad cnet sort Frtefefirsaom1 3 
faqeaaqerani AGIARMTAM | HAKATA ASA aera | 
jester a fe wa:ifmmanmaes fee sf 2 we 4

Uddhava submitted : The command of the almighty Lord, viz., Yourself, (which goes 
by the name of Veda) consists of (both) injunctions and interdictions, and (thus) takes into 
account the good and evil nature of actions (as determined by their good and evil 
consequences), O lotus-eyed One ! (1) The Veda further cognizes the distinction of the 
Vamas and Asramas (based on their virtues and faults); the merits and demerits of those 
born in the irregular course (of the union of a man of a lower order with a woman of a higher 
grade) and those regularly born (of the union of amanofa higher order with a woman of lower 
grade); the substance, place, age and time (suitable or otherwise for a sacrifice) as well as 
(the existence of) heaven and hell (attained as a result of virtuous and sinful actions). (2) How 
can Your word (in the form of the Vedas), consisting as it does of injunctions and interdictions; 
lead to final beatitude without taking into consideration the distinction of good and bad 
(actions)? (3) Your word in the form of Veda is the (one) excellent eye possessed by the 
manes, gods and human beings, enabling them to obtain insight into the unseen purpose (0f 
life, viZ., final beatitude, heavenly bliss and so on) as well as into the end (to be attained in 
this very life) and the means (of attaining it), O almighty Lord! (4) Knowledge of the distinction 
between good and evil is derived from Your command (the Veda), and not by itself. And !t 
is by Your word (alone) that this distinction is negatived. This obviously causes bewilde rment 
(in my mind). (Be pleased to set it at rest). (5)

Fat Siket Yort setfatereren | arent afer arhsealshea Hare | & |

ME df ted Pick Mics cd Mid Mick Md sea M HNN EHR RHE OOK ELEVE N 607

pe ‘x = . FNMA wet A: | aT 34 Wat Aeaeeifatget_iext

a Pts crea: wea ath ont werde: 1841

aero = yaessgiiaday: | amEAE: ui geet frie saeeafe 128

Tee ett aed peer 
aR Aad Ga watet a at A nate 1201

The glorious Lord replied : Three Yogas (disciplines or paths) in the shape of (spiritual) 
enlightenment, (disinterested) action and Devotion have been taught by Me (in the sections 
of the Veda treating of Brahma, ritual acts and worship of gods respectively) with intent to 
ensure theshighest good of men (in the shape of Liberation). No other way is found anywhere 
(in the scriptures). (6) Out of these the path of Jnana Is efficacious for those who have lost 
(all) charm for (the fruit of) ritual acts (considering it to be full of sorrow) and (accordingly) 
abandoned such acts; whereas the path of Action is effectual for those who hanker after their 
fruit and whose mind has not (therefore) recoiled from such acts (as full of sorrow). (7) To 
the man, however, in whom has sprouted by (some) stroke of (good) fortune a zeal for 
(hearing) My stories (and chanting My name) etc., and who is neither disgusted with the 
pleasures of sense nor deeply attached to them, the path of Devotion brings success (in the 
form of God-Realization). (8) A man should (continue to) do his duties (enjoined upon him 
by the Sastras—whether of an obligatory nature or those of an occasional type) so long as 
he does not get disgusted with the pleasures of sense or so long as keenness does not 
appear in him for listening to My stories etc. (9) A man adhering to his course of conduct 
and propitiating Me through sacrificial performances, but never hankering for their fruit, 
O Uddhava, neither ascends to heaven nor goes down to perdition unless he perpetrates a 
Prohibited act. (10) (Nay,) continuing in this body and sticking to his own righteous course, 
abstaining from sin and (thus) purged of (all) impurities (in the shape of attachment etc.), he 
automatically attains pure wisdom (in the form of Self-Realization) or (even) devotion to Me 
(which is superior to Self-Realization) by My grace. (11) In the same way as the denizens of 
ell heavenly beings too covet (an abode in) this world, which is favourable for the attainment 
Of wisdom and Devotion (both), whereas both the aforesaid realms are unhelpful to it. (12) 
Awise man should not long for heaven any more than he should for hell; nor should he long 
€Ven for (being reborn in) this world (as a human being). (For) through ae 
Particular body one (generally) neglects one's (true) interests. (13) Alive to this mu e 
Should diligently strive for Liberation (lit., cessation of transmigration) before deat (over- 
lakes him), knowing this body to be mortal, though helpful to the attainment of his goal. (14) 
A bird Which is inatedned (to its abode) surely attains happiness on abandoning Its abode

In the form of the tree on which it has built its nest, which is being cut down by these agents

‘ve his li i ‘(the passage of) = 
Death -aq with fear to perceive his life being cut short by (the p 09.00) ee 
aYs and ste from attachment, the man who has no desire (likewise }:atalns: eas

ey 
an Yr

ie 
we Se

We We We We We We Mee EM Me Re Me eR ROR RR OR Eee We Me We Be We HE We Me Wee We We He We ME ME Me WEN He We Me He He We ae we 9 ¥ew 
eee OO. —woS a 8085S HEH

(everlasting) peace on realizing the Supreme. (16) That man (undoubtedly) kills his soy 
(brings about his own spiritual degradation), who—having secured the exceptionally fit 
vessel of a human body, the source of all blessings and (therefore) a most rare boon, yet 
easily obtained (without any effort by the grace of God) and piloted by (an expert helmsman 
in the form of) a preceptor and propelled by a favourable wind in the shape of Myself— 
(nevertheless) fails to cross the ocean of mundane existence. (17)

aassesg fafeduut face: dadkea: | seater ait amas Aa: 1261 
qanmt wal ade wreaasatead adtadsquea arforeast Aaaiees 
Tamia a fagsfsasn fdtea: | Gaaaaa Ge AA SIMAaR AML 2o! 
TW a aa at wa: Gee: Wa: i eeMathas] Tawa ge 1221 
ae | aaa «=| Sfdesaeaa: | Mae «aa, attefeat 1221 
fifforrs 9 famer | Geseiafen: | Haast ahead) faaderaferat 1231 
anetaaenrdiaen «a faci aaroreaivat areata aan: 12x!

When (however) a man feels averse to (all) actions (realizing their being attended with 
evils of various kinds) and disgusted (with their fruit as a source of attachment and 
consequently of misery), a Yogi should after fully controlling his senses (try to) concentrate 
his mind so as to make it steady through repeated effort (at turning it towards the Self). (18) 
When, (even) while it is being focussed (on the Self), it soon begins to wander (due to its 
habitual vagrancy) and becomes unsteady (again), one should be on his alert and bring it 
(back) under his control by recourse to the method of conciliation (in the form of granting it 
a little freedom). (19) (Once it has been brought under control again) he should never allow 
its movements to go unnoticed and, having controlled his breath and conquered his senses, 
should reduce his mind to subjection by means of his intellect enriched with Saitva. (20) 
(Just) as he who seeks (to secure) the obedience of a horse that has yet to be broken 
succeeds in taming it (only) by following its will to some extent in the beginning, repeatedly 
winning over the mind (by recourse to the method of conciliation) as aforesaid has been 
declared to be (a ladder to) the highest Yoga. (21) With a clear knowledge of the ultimate 
principles (enumerated by the Sankhya system of philosophy), he should constantly 
contemplate in the order of creation the evolution, and in the reverse order the involution, of 
all categories (from Mahat-tattva down to his own body) till his mind becomes still. (22) The 
mind of a man averse to worldly activity of various kinds disgusted with the pleasures of this 
world as well as of the next and ruminating on what has been taught by his preceptor gives 
up its wickedness (in the form of attachmentto the pleasures of sense) by repeatedly dwelling 
upon what has (already) been ruminated upon (by him viz., the teachings of his preceptor).(23) 
The mind should dwell on the Supreme Spirit (the only object worthy of thought) through 
Yama (self-control) and other Yogic processes, through right knowledge in the form of an 
inquiry into the essential unity of the individual soul and the Supreme Spirit or through

worship of My image or other representation (worthy of adoration), but never by other 
methods. (24)

aie Haid wet anit wd fanfetiartia atest ar mera 124!

@ asian a fet a qo: ukatfda: | ado steggrreaaa fra: aa: | 
POS AMAT AS AIASAaT 12 |

wise! Une fide: adeda | dq e-em arr unesertian: 129!

ad Usd At Mt: maglqeshtsra: | Peas aM HAMS: Glewiss MEAL 1 RCI

Dis. 20 Na Tt ick Ml Sick Bid id Del ek Bl Oe Ol ed BOOK ELEVEN 609

we er ew . 
w WOW, We We, we 
ac oe ELEN iJ we OE WE REE He Re we He we We He wy

Shet Pas wad WPAN: | HT eee Aah wa AA ate fe 12¢ 1 
faad eeauteufsors Retr: | afters rer aatfor afar eBsRaeneaht 1301 
AAPA a Sat oa Wale: 1A AM A aM ara wa: sat wales 1321 
a SHaatta Waray aiara =o ameter | Stat Paftaef 1321 
aa dasha aaa wadsse | mice war mufse ae aweht 1331

a feos area ete ret Cee am | aTorerf Wa ad harqagadar 13% 
wet OTe: Sereeuen | aefeeraret URpMera A va isl

1 Waar Woesear TU: | aes wate ag: uae 131 
wand, Aasseeratsha 3 Ua: | ae farcha ARI ae wa Ue fae: 13001

id AAEM FEM URAee Eieaaetesasal atser: 120 |

Ifa Yogi (ever) commits through error a reproachful act (although ordinarily there is little 
chance of his doing so), he should burn that sin by recourse to Yoga alone (in the form of 
repeated effort at Self-Realization, contemplation on Me or chanting of the Divine Name etc.) 
and should never resort to any other act (such as penance) in such circumstances. (25) That 
(alone) which is known as strict adherence to one's own individual course has been extolled 
as a virtue. By making such demarcation of virtue and fault, restriction has been imposed on 
actions, which are (all) impure by origin (and that too) with the intention of enabling one to 
shake off attachments (to the pleasures of sense). (26) He who has reverence for My stories 
developed (in his heart) and has lost (every) charm for all activities (but not for their rewards) 
and, though recognizing the pleasures of sense to consist of sorrow (alone) is yet unable to 
relinquish them should therefore lovingly worship Me (by means of hearing:and chanting My 
names and stories etc.), full of faith and firm in his conviction (that everything will be 
accomplished through Devotion alone) and enjoying those pleasures while condemning 
them as attended with misery. (27-28) All the cravings embedded in the heart of the sage 
constantly worshipping Me through the discipline of Devotion as (already) taught (in 
verses 20—23 of Discourse XIX above) disappear, | being presentin his heart. (29) The knot 
(in the shape of the ego-sense) in his heart is broken, all his doubts get resolved and the 
(entire) stock of his Karma is exhausted the moment I, the Soul of the universe, am 
realized.(30) Therefore, for the Yogi who is full of devotion to Me and has his mind fixed on 
Me, neither Jana (spiritual enlightenment) nor even Vairagya (dispassion) is generally 
cOnducive to blessedness in this world. (31) By recourse to the discipline of devotion to Me 
My devotee easily attains all that can be had through actions (enjoined by the Vedas), that 
Which is obtained through askesis, nay, that which Is secured by means of spiritual 
enlightenment and dispassion, (practice of) Yoga, piety in the form of liberality as well as by 
fecourse to other means of attaining blesssedness (such as undertaking a pilgrimage to 
Sacred places and observing fasts etc.) heaven, final beatitude or (residence in) My realm 
Ifheso desires on any account. (32-33) As a matter of fact, pious men of wisdom exclusively 
devoted to Me seek nothing, not even final beatitude characterized by freedom from rebirth, 
though conferred by Me. (34) The wise declare desirelessness to be the greatest and most 
eIficacious way to final beatitude. Therefore, devotion to Me falls to his lot (alone) who does 
Not Seek—much less solicit—anything (else). (35) Virtue and sin, resulting one sa

Evil, do not attach to pious souls (free from likes and dislikes) that are even-minded an 
(accordingly) attained to Me, who stand beyond

xclusively d d to Me and have 
reason. (36) Tosentie follow in the aforesaid manner the paths shown by Me as leading to 
© attain to My realm, which is free from fear (of death etc.), and realize that which is Known

as the supreme Brahma. (37) 
Thus ends the twentieth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and

glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31Nchlaatt eT:

Discourse XXI 
The process of determining what is good and what is evil and

the secret underlying it

MTA TAT 
a Ua Aaa feat Uefa! Aa HMIAS: Wed: Gat 71 ek 
@ asian a fs a at: akenlita: | facta ara: Reva fasta: 1 2 1 
Wet faetaa ane aqyi sere fafafnand quest quart 3 
aig aad aorta waraaickidtsd waissant edygedt ai x | 
Ws Ahethia Ade GI Mda: | Visa WAT sietaagat: | & | 
aca aaecricr «So fasriftr «aasfGi equa oera det wef € | 
eilonewaa dada aa aan quer faead facet fe adv © | 
THM eaasevatsafaac| Horanisaal le 
Suva War Het sd: Md Va ali Aat fradd wa a alatsHdee: wa: 1 e | 
TAA Ae A sl Addd WI GeHRUNA Hier Agraleddaeyal lol 
WeARAAMAA Gem Uysal A Ales | Ska Hata fe aa sanaenqana: 1eet

MAela eaiddal Wsiaanone | IBAA: ufeart Aaraqd: 122 
smeaied aq dt we Od aulefai asd volt ael awl arafeed 123! 
GMeMdudisawila teachin: | AQT AIHA: Met Aes: culate fest: 12% |

Waa a Ue adatom ent: amd wefienteg faada: 1¢4! 
wfeate Tonsta ara: Cie qrarsta fete Aor: | ToTerereataraareaieeeaal aad 1261 
waren 8 Uftdat A Ole otha TUT: UST A BAM: Uae: 12V! 
am adt fadd faqelt ade: 1 UE emt ao aa: aennteare: 2c!

_ The glorious Lord began again : Abandoning the aforesaid paths leading to Me, 
consisting of Devotion, spiritual enlightenment and (disinterested) action, they who enjoy the 
trifling pleasures of sense with their fickle senses undergo transmigration. (1) What goes by 
the name of devotion to one's own duty has been proclaimed to be a virtue. The contrary of 
it(viz., devotion to another's duty), however, is a fault. Suchis the conclusion about the nature 
of both (viz., virtue and fault). (2) Purity and impurity (fitness for use or otherwise), virtue and 
fault (goodness or otherwise) and good and evil consequences are determined in regard to 
homogeneous substances in order to regulate one's natural proneness to betake oneself to

_——_/!

the unrighteous; virtue and fault are define

"nourity are determined for the pie test, In ONES mind) about it. (3) (Of these) purity and

nowing the righteous way as distinguished from 
din order to regulate usage (what is intrinsically 
Standing its impurity); and good and evil conse-

one to make one's living (one is permitted to use 
animpure substance In exceptional circumstances only to the extentnecessary for maintain-

ing ones nipeker car oeinlae: one ! Such a course of conduct has been shown by Me (in 
the formo a ei ri en Law-givers) for men bearing the responsibility of upholding 
the cause -) iy He : ( ) Earth, water, fire, the air and etherthese five elements coupled with 
the Self (Spirit) en | Into the constitution of the bodies of all created beings from Brahma (the 
foremost of create beings) down to the immobile creation (the plant or vegetable kingdom, 
the lowest species of life). (That IS tO Say, all created beings are one in point of the material 
stuff of which they are constituted as well as in point of their Jivahood or spiritual essence).(5) 
(Yet) in order to enable these creatures (by regulating their activity) to attain their purpose 
(of life in the form of Dharma or religious merit, Artha or material possessions, Kama or 
gratification of the senses and Moksa or final beatitude) diverse names and forms (viz., 
Brahmana, Ksatriya and so on) are invented by the Vedas with reference to the bodies 
though made up of the same substance, O Uddhava! (6) In order (however) to regulate the 
activities (of created beings) goodness and otherwise are attributed by Me (in the form of the 
Vedas) even to entities like space and time (including the fruit and motive of actions, as well 
as those qualified for various types of actions), nay, to substances, O most noble one! (7) 
Of (all) tracts of land, that which is untrodden by the black deer is unholy, more so that which 
is lacking in devotion to the Brahmanas. Even that which is hallowed by the presence of the 
black deer is unholy if destitute of righteous men. The tract known by the name of Kikata 
(comprising the territories of Anga, Vanga and Kalinga*, roughly corresponding to the 
modern district of Bhagalpur in Bihar and the states of Bengal and Utkala) is unholy if not 
inhabited by good men.{The land mostly inhabited by Mlecchas + and barren land (too) Is 
likewise) unholy. (8) (A period of) time which is fit for the performance of righteous actions 
from the point of view of (adequate supply of) requisite articles or by itself is valuable (from 
that point of view); whereas (a period of) time in which a (sacred) rite (already commenced) 
has to be abandoned (for scarcity of requisite materials or political upheaval) and (even so) 
that which is declared as unifit for any (religious) rite (due to impurity occasioned by the death 
of a blood relation or other near relative or childbirth in one's own house or family) is 
impure.(9) The purity and impurity of a substance are brought about by another substance 
as Well as by the word of mouth (of a Brahmana), by a purificatory process (and otherwise), 
Nay, by (flux of) time§ and by largeness and smallness of area respectively (as in the case

ood is used In exceptional cases notwith 
quences are determined in order to enable

” A Smrti text says:— dag . 
: aTpagatersy SrsrTey 4 t aekaral faa Teal GA: MEERA tt 
"One travelling in the territories of Anga, Vanga and Kalinga, Saurastra and Magadha except on a pilgrimage deserves 
i0 meee go the rite of investiture with the sacred thread once more.” 
Wa Woon a: wed wa faa | 
; : 
* That land indeed is most holy where resides a noble and deserving person 
+ In the Baudhayana-Smrti a Mleccha has been characterized as follows :—

1 a favs aE WTA i gatanfaeiad teres searHeiad 1 
"He is called a Mleccha, who eats the bovine flesh, speaks much that is self-contradictory and is destitute of all good

Conduct. n

§ A Smrti text says:— es oe ai a eR fe | sae Sea Tare: Bfataeiraa

of a tank polluted by the touch of a low-born person), by physical fitness and otherwise or 
by knowledge and the affluent circumstances (or otherwise) of the individual concerneg. 
(Nay,) the sin which the aforementioned agencies (of pollution) bring to a soul (by polluting 
a substance) really do so (only) according to the local conditions and other circumstances 
of the individual concerned. (10-11) The purity of food-grains, (articles of) wood, bones (such 
as ivory) andtextiles, savoury substances (such as milk, ghee and honey), metals (especially 
gold), hides and skins and earthen substances is brought about by (passage of) time, the air, 
fire, earth and water jointly or severally. (12) That by recourse to which an article (such as 
a stool, household utensil or cloth) smeared with an impure substance sheds its (foul) smell 
and (impure) coating and returns to its natural state is intended to be its purifier. (13) The 
purity of a doer prompted by the ego-sense is brought about by bathing, munificence, 
askesis, age (prescribed for a certain act), strength, purificatory rites (Such as investiture with 
the sacred thread) and righteous acts (like the saying of Sandhya prayers) and (above all) 
by remembering Me. A member of the twice-born classes (or even a Sidra for that matter) 
should (proceed to) do his duty (only) when purified (by these). (14) The purity of a Mantra 
(sacred formula) is brought about by learning it (properly from a qualified man) and the purity 
of an act lies in dedicating it to Me. Religious merit is acquired through (the purity of) the 
aforesaid factors (place, time, substance, agent, sacred formula and righteous act enumer- 
ated in the foregoing verses); while the reverse (their impurity) (makes for) 
unrighteousness.(15) In some cases even a virtue turns out to be a fault and vice versa in 
the light of a scriptural ordinance. (In this way) the scriptural ordinance determining the 
goodness or otherwise of a particular object cuts at the root of the distinction (of good and 
bad) itself. (16) In the case of those (already) fallen (in social rank or morals) the perpetration 
of an act similar to that which is sinful for others (not so fallen) is not (further) degrading. 
(Similarly) sexual intercourse (whith one's lawfully wedded wife during the days permitted” 
by the Sastras) when already afreed upon is a virtue (although it is a sin in the case of a 
recluse); (for) a person (already) lying (on the ground) has no chance of a (further) fall. (17) 
A man is rid of attachment for each of those objects and actions from which he desists. This 
righteous course (in the shape of detachment) is salutary for men and dispels their grief, 
infatuation and fear. (18)

fanag Woe Ga: Aged Wad! Agra Wad HM: Hae Hlesrsomry 128 | 
HATE: Mies | AA Te Gastar aafadt sq 120! 
dat farted: Ae aq: Yara Head | adiser wareifasian qfescter Yaar A 1 
faeanaraest ae aq ae! qesitfana saat wea a: AER? 
From (our) misconception regarding the goodness (agreeability) of an object springs up 
attachment to it in man. From attachment follows the desire to possess it and from desire 
alone ensues quarrel among men (as a sequel to such desire being thwarted by some-

one).(19) From quarrel proceeds anger which is difficult to restrain: infatuation follows anger 
and by infatuation is soon obscured man's all-penetrating judgment (distinguishing right

from wrong). (20) Deprived of judgment, O good one, a living being (man) is as good as 
near elit tS Mee

“Rain water collected in a reservoir such as a tank during the rains can be used (for drinking and other purposes). Of course 
it should be avoided for three days (so that the impurities that may have flowed into it from the catchment area may settle down 
in the meantime). At other times one should wait for ten days; then (only) purity is ordained to have been brought about.”

* A Sruti text says :-— 
est rat ear 1”

"One should copulate with one’s wedded wife during the sixteen nights following the period of menstruation."

; rec

‘non-entity. The (very) purpose (of life 
“onsequently defeated. (21) Ser ) of such an (almost) unconscious and dead man is

_~ (0 excessive attachment (and longing) for the pleasures of 
sense he who knows neither himself nor the Supreme lives in vain (as if unconscious) like

a tree and brealhes "2 the bellows (is as good as dead for all practical purposes). (22) 
ee TUT set Tet wT seifeaarn shh ger Ausra 1231 
srt fe aE STO SY a1 sreAEt Wet «= -_atersadedg 1261 
cf ot Si Te qsrreah | ae Goa GAY aren faa ae: 1241 
we crated sefeefear gee: | ea Saat a dam aha fe 12a1 
SUT: FAT VT: THY ogee: | afer ema: wt ath a faba 8 1201 
aa amg sha eae a cg ad: | Seer Waa «aaa AIAA: 1221 
a A aaafaga utel fase: | fara ae ur: Bg Ue Wa A ASAT 1281 
feria eset: wyfe: eater iar tam a: fiquaada Wer: 1301 
Such a promise of reward (in the shape of heaven etc., contained in the Vedas as for 
example‘ tatamt asia’— One aspiring for heaven should perform sacrifices like ASwamedha) 
does not point out the way to blessedness butis put forward only in order to create in the mind 
of men (externally inclined) a taste (for ritual acts) as introductory to an exposition of final 
beatitude, even as before administering a (dose of) bitter medicine (to a stubborn child) a 
sweet promise is made (by parents justin order to prevail upon the child to take the dose). (23) 
Indeed mortals naturally have their mind attached to objects of desire (such as wealth, cattle 
etc.), to their life (including their sense-organs, vitality, virility etc.), as well as to their own 
people (progeny, wife and so on), even though they are (ultimately) sources of misery 
(bondage) to the Self. (24) How could the (all-knowing) Veda direct such men—blind to their 
(real) interests and yet devout (convinced about the infallibility of the Vedas) and wandering 
(as a reward of their sacrificial performances) in the path of enjoyment (the superhuman 
Species of life—the state of gods and other heavenly beings) and (then) entering (as a 
punishment for their cruelty to animals in the course of those sacrificial performances) the 
inanimate forms of life (such as the plant kingdom)—once more to those (very) enjoyments 
(through such texts as ‘ayer asin’, ‘sTakfaaart asin’, “garicsrat asia’ — One desirous of catile, 
one desirous of longevity,sound organs etc., and one desirous of progeny, wife and so on 
should undertake sacrificial performances) ? (25) Not knowing such intention (of the Vedas), 
Some misguided people (the advocates of Karma or ritual acts) interpret the promises 
(contained in the Vedas) of fruit (in the shape of final beatitude) as offering blossoms (alone 
in the shape of heavenly enjoyment). (But) not so the knowers of (the real import of) the 
Vedas (Sages Vyasa and others) indeed. (26) Men seeking pleasures of sense and 
g y istaki i ts of heaven (which are like so 
(therefore ever) miserable, grasping, mistaking the enjoymenis o 
Many flowers) as the (supreme) fruit (of human endeavour) confounded by their een 
attachment to ritual acts (in which the sacred fire plays a prominent part) and finding At at 
of Smoke at the end (of their life) are not able to realize their own self. (27) With ritual acts 
aS the Only theme of their talks and intent on gratifying their flesh, they are unable to know 
€, though present in their heart—Me, who am this universe and from whom this Se ee 
@S Sprun 1} more than those whose eyes are bedimmed by mist are able to 
Bano. NP aby Pr O dear Uddhava! (28) Not knowing My opinion— 
Ognize even that whichis close at hand, O dea site éqdantrinenens 
Which is not qui nt. and which is to the effect that if one has a passion fo t 
| ries Tie oe al performances only, and that there is no scriptural

OF life. j i sacrifici Save 
r aie sneer eee on us—those wicked men indulging in destruction of life as

a pastime and with their mind set on the pleasures of sense worship the gods as well as the 
manes and the rulers of evil spirits through sacrificial performances carried on by means of 
animals slaughtered with the desire of gratifying themselves. (29-30) 
[| wledad saute onfel ae ase aera afore 1321 
AAAI WGMaaae: | Sad SHIM tale, A AMA AMT 1321 
Se faa aaa weree fof aera se Yale AEMeT Aeon: 1331 
Ua fear aren afaaqareat qo ateat aricedterrat agra 3 wed 13x 
Picturing to their mind the other world—which is evanescent like the objects seen in a 
dream and a source of misery, though delightful to the ear—and the blessings sought for 
(in this world), they part with their earnings (expend them on sacrificial performance etc.), 
even as a merchant would stake his (hard-earned) fortune (in the hope of gaining 
more).(31) Rooted in Rajas, Sattva and Tamas, they worship gods etc., Indra being the 
chief of them—who (likewise) take delight in Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—and not so 
(devotedly) Myself (who stand beyond the three Gunas). (32) They indulge in the (fond) 
hope that, having worshipped the gods through sacrifices in their earthly career, they will 
ascend to heaven and revel (there), and at the end of such enjoyment (in heaven) will be 
born (again) in the terrestrial region of a high pedigree and be great householders (living 
in stately mansions). (33) Even the talk bearing on Me does not find favour with the egotistic 
and highly arrogant men who have their mind distracted thus by (seemingly) flowery 
promises (contained in the Vedas). (34)

acl selelasahanveasa «8 sai aie mea: ater aa a Ha isul

Rectal «= dealer stato oafelal Ss Asa 36 |

waded YF AINA yg aeeco faaguia weaad 1301

Sarasa: weemedt wy: | signe aera VAT 138 |

fafeasrentactat Saisdedt: | Saat sedi gwenfaat aa ivol

TRAM A gedt vaknta ai fpamafrad gems fare ise

fe fae fares faq facade eed oleh ARN ae aq HSA 12!

a faeristtert at faceted ser! Uda adadle: alee Sree Al FHNST |

WaMAaaselrd Matsa Tete 13 | 
So APEMad Ae TAS GlecaaenleaHeal Uepferaiseara: 122 | 
These Vedas dealing with the three departments (viz., ritual acts, the worship of gods and

Brahma-Realization) teach (as a matter of fact) the truth that Brahma (alone) constitutes the 
Self of (us) all. The Vedic texts, however, (as well as their seers) convey their meaning (only) 
indirectly (and hence itis not manifest to all at first sight) and (such indirect mode of) teaching 
(alone) is dear to Me as well (inasmuch as the pure-hearted alond can grasp the real spirit, 
the generality of men being liable to misunderstand it and be led astray). (35) (The meaning 
of) the Veda (which is Brahma manifested in the form of word) is most difficult to understand, 
consisting as it does of the vital air (the Para stage of speech), the mind (the Pasyanti stage

residing in the Anahata Cakra, including the Madhyama stage, consisting of Buddhi or the 
intellect and residing in the Manipura Cakra located in the heart) and the organ of speech

pis. 21 |

gc RRS

We We He we 
Be WeWE ME He We We Me Be HE He He He BEG WE Me Me We We BE We He We We We We Me ee He wee He HE He Be HE He HE

the van pre) sk: consisting of the Cosmic Prana) it is endless (in point of time) and 
limitless a p * ); eee (obscure) and difficult to fathom like the ocean. (36) Presided 
over by : tes intinite Brahma, possessed of endless potencies—the said Veda is 
erceive $ y pan In the form of the Anahata sound in (all) created beings as the fibre 
ina pius s 1 i | ve) as a spider sends forth the cobweb from its heart through its 
mouth, ( e ord In e form of Hiranyagarbha working through) the vital air, essentially 
blissful, and appearing in the form of Veda, with the material of Anahata sound evolves from 
the cavity of the heart through the mind, which conceives the (various) sounds represented

by the letters of the alphabet, the Vaikhari form of Speech—flowing in a thousand channels 
and embellished with (the articulate sounds represented by the letters of the alphabet” 
classified (in Indian phonetics) as sibilants, vowels, aspirants and semi-vowels (so-called 
because they stand between the vowels, on the one hand, and consonants on the other), 
manifested out of the (sacred sound) OM (heard in a subtle form within the heart)— 
elaborated by various languages (Vedic as well as secular) and characterized by (a number 
of) metres successively consisting of four more letters than the preceding and having no limit 
or end; and Himself withdraws it. (88—40) Some of these metres are (respectively known 
by the names of) Gayatrit, Usnik, Anustubh, Brhati, Pankti, Tristubh, Jagati, Aticchanda, 
Atyasti, Atijagati and Ativirat. (41) None in the world other than Me knows the heart (hidden 
meaning) of this (Sacred) speech (in the form of Veda)—as to what it lays down (in the section 
dealing with ritual acts), what it reveals (through the various Mantras or sacred texts in the 
section dealing with the worship of gods) and what it puts forward by way of hypothesis and 
(then) calls it in question (in the section dealing with spiritual knowledge). (42) Me (alone in

the form of Yajfia) it enjoins (in the Karmakanda); Me (alone in the form of various deities)

it names (in the Devatakanda); (nay,) whatever (objective existence such as ether) is 
superimposed on Me (first) and (then) negatived (in the Jfianakanda) is also Myself. Taking 
its stand on Me (as the Cause of all causes and the highest Reality) the Veda posits diversity 
as amere illusion and (then), denying it, ultimately becomes quiet. This much is the import

of’all the Vedas. (43)

Thus ends the twenty-first discourse in Book Eleven of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita

mat Pacet Rect P: 
DODD OI

a, wand are collectively known 
"Thet ts.viz., *, @ 1 USLELLASSISEUGDS ¥, 4, 9, ®, a d ; y 
bbidablibte ea tka =. 4,4, andeare called the aspirants; while 4, aand aare

as the sibilants. 3,353,048 oi and ait are known aS vowels;

known as the Antahsthas.

i ; and so on. 
+ Of these the Gayatri consists of 24 letters, Usnik, of 28; Anustubh, of 32

31M gifaanseara:

Discourse XXIl

Categories enumerated; Distinction between Prakrti and Purusa 
SEF SAA 
alfa cat fader denaqes: sali ade ust aver waite wei 2 | 
sofa wefeerice seat uasfereriery wee Aa we ShfererareterraRay 1 2 
fad, Adee We: Wee Adletiudead fe dena afgae 
Maat FTAA ae At aPAEa | yt

Uddhava submitted : How many are the categories or fundamental principles enumerated 
by the seers, O Ruler of the universe ? You (for your part) have referred (in Discourse XIX 
above) to nine, eleven, five and three—twenty-eight categories (in all), O Lord, as we have 
heard. (1) Some (however) speak of twenty-six categories; others, of twenty-five. Some 
(more) declare seven, nine, six and four respectively; while others mention eleven. (2) Some 
(again) declare seventeen; others, sixteen and (still) others, thirteen. With what intention do 
the sages severally declare such a (large) variety of numbers ? Be pleased O eternal Lord,

to tell us this. (3) 
Gh WU did Aaa Md AUN Bai Wat Adclaqaye aadt fH z quem! x | 
‘ed GMIssa a aed af aaatiud faacdt @q amat A aa: 1 4 | 
aa identeeia faaeat aedt vain wrensafa aleamaamafa ¢ | 
Reed mat yeadwidatadded am anfdataai yo | 
Taheata aad sfaseicain 9 ai odfarade ara awa ada: | ¢ | 
Watrdadsiet 8 seein ae fates aeeet west afrersrar | < | 
The glorious Lord replied : Whatever the Brahmanas (well-versed in the Vedas) 
declare is but right; (for) all categories stand included in all (others). What is there hard to 
establish for those who make their assertion accepting the potency of My Maya ? (4) My 
potencies (in the form of the three Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas appearing as so many 
modifications of the mind)—which are (so) difficult to overcome—are at the back of those 
wrangling over the cause (of the universe) in the following strain; "It is not quite as you Say ; 
what | say is correct." (5) Diversity (in the form of this universe), which is the subject of 
controversy among the disputants, follows from the disturbance of equilibrium of these 
potencies. When control of the mind and subjugation of the senses are attained, the diversity 
disappears and the controversy (also) is set at rest as a sequel to it. (6) The categories being 
comprised in one another, O jewel among men, they are enumerated as more or less 
according to the viewpoint of the speakere (by including effects in a cause and vice versa).(7) 
In a single category, whether it is a cause or an effect, are found comprised all other 
categories (viz., effects in a cause and vice versa). (8) Therefore, we accept as conclusive 
whatever is stated according to one's own viewpoint by anyone of those (disputants) seeking

to establish the relation as cause and effect or a definite number of categories, there being 
a cogent reason behind every such assertion. (9)

STEM AHA WRAIaa | Ad A WMMaetetaal Weel Wad 1 Qo!

———S 2 ——rrrcere — =

‘ction, viz., the organ of speech, hands,

Self-Realization in the case of the Jiva (individual Ale: waa: WAAa ANZ 
nce that has no beainn; Soul), (who is) characterized by 
CUMS ie tea ginning, cannot take place by itself (and is possible only through 
instructions imparted by another omniscient being) there mustbe another (bein

; g) who knows 
the truth and is able to impart His Knowledge (to the Jiva). (That is the argument advanced 
in favour of their contention by those who recognize an additional category, viz., God as apart 
from the soul and thus raise the number of categories to twenty-six.) (10) There is not the 
least difference in this body between the individual soul and God (both being of the nature 
of consciousness). (Therefore) the assumption that they are distinct from one another is 
meaningless. And knowledge (or Self-Realization) is (but) a function of Sattvaguna (a 
constituent of Prakrti). (Hence itis not necessary to recognize a twenty-sixth category in the 
shape of God in order to rationalize the possibility of Self-Realization. This is the stand taken 
by those who recognize only twenty-five Principles.) (11) Prakrti (primordial Matter) is (only 
another name for) the (state of) equilibrium of the (three) Gunas. Therefore, Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas—which are (severally) responsible for the continuance, appearance and 
disappearance of the universe—are the adjuncts of Prakrti and not of the Spirit (who is anon- 
doer and hence cannot be accepted as the ground of the three Gunas responsible for the 
continuance etc., of the universe). (12) Knowledge, according to this (latter) classification, 
is spoken of as (but) a modification of Sattva ; action, of Rajas; and ignorance, of Tamas (all 
the three of which are comprised in Prakrti; hence action and ignorance too are included in 
Prakrti). (Again,) Time is (no other than) God (who is responsible for the disturbance of 
equilibrium of the Gunas or modes of Prakrti) and Swabhava (nature) is the Mahat-tattva (the 
principle of cosmic intelligence, which is all-powerful (Hence it is not necessary to multiply 
categories in both these classifications).(13)

Wee: werfdeknagsent aise: 1 safer: fatakit carat 4 Aa 1e¥1 
Sit wreata mrt fait wai: | arecwquemredatrennivasiva AA: 1241 
Sea: wait Tal WRN Ed Baers: i Taeriens «© aHaladiaega: 1261 
anid oo wafteter «0 erdeercoreftroit | aranfefidtiedt «= ease Fare 12191 
erent fapaton eda: Gla | welt: Gras Hed: pasted 1221

(Of the twenty-eight categories mentionedin verse | above, in four groups of nine, eleven, 
five and three respectively, the last, three viz., the three Gunas, which are included by others 
In Prakrti have thus been enumerated. Of the remaining twenty-five) Purusa (the Spirit, 
comprising God as wellas the individual soul, both of which are conscious by nature), Prakrt 
(Primordial Matter), Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmicintelligence), Anankara (the cosmic

90), ether, the air, fire, water and earth (in their gross form)—these are the nine oa 
already) referred to by Me (in verse 1 above). (1 4) ny A peepee oi : pe 
eae ton) iz. thee eae ean nee: generation, the organ of defecation and 
feet, and the mind. the controller of both (the senses of preception ane Be aaene ie actions 
he (five) varieties of sense-objects, Viz. sound, touch, taste, smell and colour—

. Locomotion and speech, 
the other ive categories mentioned in verse supra : 
Urination Aare an a and re adigratt are the (five) functions of the organs of aan (end 
NO Separate cate gories). (15-16) Appearing in the form of (the sixteen) evolutes (viz., the tive

IS

We We We Me We We Re Be eR eR Re Ree SR Re ee We We We We He Vee He Me He He We BE We ee ee We We He We rw; 
,

Mahat-tattva, Ahankara and the five objects of sense) indeed, Prakrti (being the materia} 
cause) undergoes the state of being created etc., through Sattva and the other (two) Gunas 
(or modes of Prakrti) at the time of creation etc., of this (visible) universe; whereas the 
immutable Purusa (being the efficient cause) looks on (as a mere witness). (17) Energized 
by a glance from the Purusa and united with one another, fundamental principles like Mahat- 
tattva (which enter into the constitution of the universe), undergoing transformation, bring 
forth the cosmic egg with the help of Prakrti (their source). (18)

aaa ada sft amet: ast lea: | WAaeseeMEnd Seraaraa: 1221 
Gisaara Wait us ag: UK: Gar! dep STATA: upd AANA, 1 o | 
dade dit ast snmalsaarea: isa ake sd waraafaa: wa ire! 
Qe ANeRI CANA «a1 ast UseHaae SI WAaa: Ba: 1221 
del WSN Bada WA sed Waksafet asa wa sie Aaleat 1231 
Uplate siete weryafsaitt aiawt wqasa yeas Adar ie 
| St Aaoeed mammary: pa ad aed aaa facut fanaa 1241 
| According to the view that the fundamental principles are (only) seven (vide verse 2 
above), the five elements beginning with ether, (the principle of) consciousness (viz., the 
Subject or Jiva) and the (universal) Spirit, the Ground of both (the subject and the- object), 
these are the (Seven) categories (Prakrti etc., the causal principles, being included in their 
evolutes); from the above-named (seven categories) spring up the body, the Indriyas (the 
five senses of perception and the five organs of action) as well as the vital airs (comprising 
the evolutes, all of which are likewise included in their causes). (19) (Similarly) even 
according to the view (also referred to in verse 2 above) that the fundamental principles are 
six (only), they are the five elements, the sixth being the Supreme Person. Having evolved 
this (objective) universe in conjunction with the former (viz., the elements), sprung from 
Himself, He enters it (as its Inner Controller). (According to this view all objective existences 
should be taken as covered by the five elements and the individual soul by the Universal 
Spirit.) (20) Even according to the view (also mentioned in verse 2 above) that the categories 
are four only, they are fire, water and earth (the source of and as such no other than food), 
evolved from the Spirit (the fourth principle). (Prakrti and the other causal principles should 
be recognized here as included in their three evolutes enumerated in this verse and the other 
two elements, viz., ether and the air too likewise included in them or rejected as superfluous.) 
By means of the aforesaid (four) categories indeed has this evolution of the universe (which 
is made up of so many parts) taken place. (21) According to the view (referred to in verse 
3 above) which enumerates seventeen principles, they are the five elements, the five 
Tanmatras (objects of senses) and the five senses of perception alongwith the one mind, and 
the Atma (or the Spirit, which includes the individual soul as well as the Universal Spirit) being 
recognized as the seventeenth. (22) Likewise, according to the view (also mentionedin verse 
3) which enumerates sixteen categories, the Atma itself (in its thinking aspect) is spoken of 
as the mind. (Again, according to the view, finding mention in verse 3 above, which 
recognizes only thirteen categories) the five elements (including the five Tanmatras) and the 
same number of senses (that reveal them), the mind and the twofold Spirit (viz., the individual 
soul and the Universal Spirit) constitute the thirteen principles. (23) According to the view 
(referred to in verse 2) restricting the number of categories to eleven (only), they comprise 
the aforesaid Atma (which includes the individual soul as well as the mind), the (five) gross 
elements and the (five) senses (of perception). (Similarly according to the view, also

gross elements, the ten Indriyas and the mind) and the (seven) causal principles (viz., the 
|

aa

mentioned in verse 2, recognizing nine categories only) the eight causal principles* (viz, the 
five elements, the mind, the intellect and the ego) and Purusa (the Spirit)—these are the nine 
categories (the evolutes being included in the causal principles). (24) Thus the fundamental 
principles have been reckoned in different ways by the seers. All that reckoning is justified 
supported, as it is by reason. What is there unbecoming on the part of the wise ? (25)

S&T SATA 
sepa: qeasisit ATTA RTT | SAAS HEN sea a fet qa: 12Et 
TA Tet Went sets ass iud A yustinra wai dari ze 
SUAea Aaa aAaAag: 129 | 
at wt fe Sam saleeisa had: | aA Mea Aft At A ATT: 1221 
Uddhava submitted : Although both Prakrti (Primordial Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit)

are essentially distinct (one from the other), their diversity is not perceived, O Krsna, because 
of their inter-relation. (26) The Spirit is seen in (and through) the body (a product of Matter) 
alone and Prakrti (body) too is seen in (as identical with) the Self. Be pleased (therefore), O 
lotus-eyed One, to resolve the grave doubt in my mind in this matter by Your clever words 
supported with reason, O omniscient Lord ! (27) Since enlightenment in this world comes to 
the Jivas (embodied souls) through You (alone), and the obscuration of knowledge (too) 
follows from Your energy (in the shape of Avidya or Nescience), therefore You alone know 
the course of Your own Maya, and none else. (28) )

safa: yeasit fanea: yeadstiua aeite: anf queria: 12°! 
ae wet yee fanccagiss § quifdert 
Aenihtenheafarettsezrataen ram fercaa farsa Ae, 1301 
a wah an TH went fait 4: wa: i 
sreamt,sisii TCTs HT: «= MATA MIhaelagiate: | 
Wa wma sane watsiaie araie a fadamal3e! 
Qisct Wetted fae: sMederted: wad: | 
ate fiq~ietacnctedacnita ata UrsAT 1321 
strem.Ssufterana «= faaret «So eitfer «Ss aredtfa «Ss Pereedfae: | 
cagistr Sarata yet wa: Wiadieat weiter 133!

. The glorious Lord replied : Prakrti (the body) and Purusa (the soul)—there Is radical 
difference between the two, O jewel among men! This psycho-physical organism (which Is 
a Product of Prakrti) undergoes numerous changes (in the course of its existence) inasmuch 
8s it Owes its existence to a disturbance in the equilibrium of the three Gunas (while the soul 
IS absolutely changeless). (29) My Maya (enchanting potency), O loved one, consisting as 
does of the three Gunas, creates by means of those (very) Gunas differences as well as

© manifold notions difference. (Though limitless in variety) this changeable universe Is 
fOadly speaking) threefold (in character); one (such) variety is Adhyatma; the next (in

“'der) is Adhidaiva and the other is Adhibhtta. (30) The sense of sight (for example) falls 
under the category of Adhyatma; colour (its object) Is Adhibhtta and the solar element 
ee a

"Cf Bhagavadgita VII. 4:— | 
eee Gpanhsaeh arg. @ A afta a arta wad 8 for wepfoceuT

existing in the organ of sight (which enables it to perceive light) is Adhidaiva. Everyone of 
these (three) depends for its existence on the other two. That which exists in the sky (viz., 
the orb of the sun, however), being self-existent, is independent of these three. (Similarly) 
since the Atma—being the cause of all these (Adhyatma etc.)—is (their witness and 
therefore) different from them, (therefore) by virtue of its own (self-existent) conscious nature 
illumines all illuminating agents (Adhyatma etc.). (Just as the eye has been shown above to 
have three aspects.) the tactile sense, the auditory sense, the palate, the olfactory sense as 
well as the intellect, the mind, the ego and the faculty of reason (also) should be (similarly) 
understood to possess a threefold character. (31) The modification evolved out of the Mahat- 
tattva—which has its root in Prakrti—through the instrumentality of Kala (the Time-Spirit) or 
God, whois responsible for disturbing the equilibrium of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrrti), 
viz., Ahankara (the cosmic ego), and which is of three kinds, viz., Vaikarika (Sattvika), 
Tamasika and Aindriya (Rajasika), lies at the root of the notion of difference brought into 
being by ignorance about the Self. (32) The controversy whether the Self as distinguished 
from the body exists or not is the result of not realizing the Self. Though meaningless 
(inasmuch as it is capable of being set at rest by Self-Realization) it does not cease in the 
case of men whose mind is turned away from Me, their real Self. (33)

SET SAA 
ad: Wada: Gad: wate: aa salaar aM ce Jela fagsa a axl 
aaaette Wire salsa: | a Pac Maan witch fagia: ara afer: 1341

Uddhava submitted : Tell me, O Protector of cows ! how men whose mind is turned 
away from You take and (then) give up corporeal forms, high and low, in conformity with 
actions performed by themselves, O Lord! (in other words) how the omnipresent Self could 
pass from one body to another, how actions could be ascribed to the actionless, and how 
birth and death could be attributed to that which is beyond birth and death. It is a thing which 
cannot be easily conceived by men of poor understanding; for, generally speaking there 
are none in the world who are conversant with this topic, deluded as people are (by Your

Maya). (34-35) 
MATATATA 
7a: etna qunfaise: usta Meech See sten daqada 126 
ere Wlsy fava, eer aaa | see, Med, eda eyferetegq areafet 1301 
ferentaest Ae ad Sd Ga: ismila 8 melfesardecafaera: 13c! 
wa aida Ye: dedaea yal fauandipft sede 9 wynaa: 13¢1 
Sa TARY Ai set A ERetiat ydfwereagd aqasaft ivol 
Srearetgeae Afra oft | aah | afecatienasiaisasrape AMT 1k I 
head ge yh vata + watt aiareameadia Yqeaara saa |¥z 
Tae Gide A HEM aA ated: ada dyna aalsaenea: sea: v3! 
Mise cise den, leat dled Se! Gish Garba ANT BST slefieferazSTA Ise 
WM eet msis sad aise qari frad arm wren aenfseledaa: 14!

The glorious Lord replied : United with the five senses (as well as with the five organs 
of action and the five subtle elements), the mind of the Jivas, consisting as it does of latencies 
of Karma, travels from one body to another; and the soul, though distinct from it, follows It 
(identified as it is with that mind). (86) Being under the sway of Karma (destiny which

ii Bi Bt

determines the nature of future existence), the mind contemplates (at the dying moment) 
objects (actually) seen or heard of (promised in the Vedas and brought to the forefront by the 
said destiny) and, being reborn In the midst of those (contemplated) objects, gets insensible 
to his present surroundings. The memory (too of his present life) ceases thereafter. (37) 
When through deep attachment for (identification with) a new body the mind no longer 
remembers the previous body, this complete forgetfulness of a Jiva (about the body with 
which he was identified till the last moment), brought about by some reason (or other in the 
shape of the Prarabdha which kept him tied down to the previous body having been 
exhausted) constitutes his death (in relation to that body). (38) And the wise declare the birth 
of a Jiva to consist in completely identifying himself with a particular body just as a dream 
and a reverie consist In one's identifying oneself with the body appearing in a dream or a 
reverie, O giver of plenty ! (39) Just as the Jiva identified with the present body no longer 
remembers the preceding one, the dreaming soul or the soul drowned in a reverie no longer 
remembers (the body of) a preceding dream or a preceding reverie; nay, he visualizes his 
self, though old (existing from before) as if it had newly come into existence. (40) Due to the 
coming into existence of a body (the seat of the ten Indriyas) or due to the appearance in 
another setting of the mind (which forms the background of the ten Indriyas) a threefold 
distinction (in the form of the mind, senses and body) appears in the (one) Self (the only 
reality), as a result of which the Self becomes the occasion for internal and external 
differences, just as a Jiva assumes a number of undesirable bodies in the course of a dream 
and appears manifold or just as a man begetting a number of wicked children, though one, 
assumes different relations with reference to the friends and enemies etc., of those children 
and appears diversified. (41) As a matter of fact, O dear Uddhava, (the bodies of) created 
beings come into existence and perish every moment by action of Time, whose velocity is 
too. subtle to be perceived; and it is due to this subtlety that their appearance and 
disappearance in quick succession every momentare not seen. (42) Asin the case of flames 
of lamps, the currents of streams and the fruits of a tree, so in the case of all created beings 
their age, condition etc., are determined (by Time). (43) (Just) as the notion (entertained) and 
assertion (made) about (a series of) flames (arising and disappearing in place of one 
another) that this is the same flame, or about the particles of water following one after another 
ina stream that this is the same water are false, so itis the unwise alone (whose life is spent 
in vain) that entertain the notion and make the assertion about bodies arising and 
disappearing in place of one another at the same spot that this is the same body. (44) Even 
such (an ignorant) Jiva is neither born nor dies as a result of its Karma continuing in the form 
Ofaseed. Yet through illusion (in the form of false identification with the body etc.), it appears 
lo be born (though really unborn) and also dies as it were (though immortal), (just) as fire 
(though abiding in the form of an element till the end of the Kalpa) appears to come into 
©Xistence and die through illusion (as a result of contact with fire-wood and the cessation of

“Uch contact respectively). (45) 
Faerie aecataa caret a yahearerenira 14k | 
uM TARAS: | Tagged wad aise A so 
ae: faqqamamgadt «ware a | Marea «= ACAI: Isc 
Wiiisforeat at faaerrdasti caffe ser Ua SBI A: FIR Ise 
Seater feereaage: aR war eafeS: HEE AHITETT 140 | 
WaaEes ar. HATHA! THAT Getereieret wie arfer Heth: 14 t

TaN Wea: aq alaalia aA! qed wwaadielseqenradd 1421 2 
’ ca - 3 j = . wee iF oy4) ¥ 
° : i+? oats Ate “4 Sp

CS lle

~~

AMS Saod das aet sala Wea aad wadla yy: 1431 
am wane fasaual Yeti MNERIN dele AM WAN sie: 14x! 
ae ganas dat addi eared fasane aasaaiTal ae 14h 
qaeea wm yeea fasamafetad: | anemseniasid wa aire wT 14R 
fanisatiadisaies: Smettsgfadiseaar i afsa: afatsegt at Gen at uftarfta: 1401 
fafsat afadt amdeda senfiad: | SARA: HARTA STAISSHIAGSN 14S |

Entry into the womb (in the form of seed), gestation and birth, infancy (extending up to 
the age of five), boyhood (extending up to the age of sixteen), youth (extending up to the age 
of forty-five), middle age (extending up to the age of sixty), old age and death—these are the 
nine states of the body. (46) These states, high and low—brought about by one's own desire 
of course—of a body (which is other than the Self) a certain individual soul accepts as one's 
own through false identification with Matter; while another with great difficulty. disowns them 
(by grace of God). (47) One's own birth (including the preceding two states, which cannot be 
directly known by oneself) can be inferred from the birth of one's son and death from that of

one's father. The knower of things subject to birth and death can never be subject to birth and 
\ death (himself). (48) He who comes to know the birth (sprouting) of an annual plant from its 
seed andits end from its being shrivelled up after yielding its fruit (in the shape of food-grains), 
such a seer is distinct from the plant. Even so the seer of a body (viz., the soul) is distinct from 
the body. (Therefore, he who knows these states of the body is not affected by them though 
dwelling in the body.) (49) Failing to distinguish the Spirit from Matter in the aforesaid manner 
and getting deeply attached to the pleasures of sense as the only reality, the ignorant Jiva 
undergoes transmigration. (50) Made to revolve (in the whirligig of metempsychosis) by his 
actions, a man attains to the regions of gods and Rsis through application to virtues (born 
of Sattvaguna), like control of the mind and the senses to the realm of demons (the: 
subterranean regions) and human beings (the terrestrial plane) through devotion to lust etc., 
(born of Rajoguna) and descends to the realm of spirits and to the scale of sub-human 
creatures (and even immobile creation) through close application to grief and infatuation etc., 
(born of Tamoguna). (51) Justas aman whosees others dancing and singing (naturally) tries 
to imitate them, so the soul, though actionless, is made to follow the movements of the body 
etc., prompted by the intellect, when it sees them (and takes theni to be its own). (52) (Just) 
as by the side of moving water the trees also appear as though moving, the activity etc., of 
the body are reflected in the Self. And (just) as when the eye is made to revolve (alongwith 
our body) the earth (around us too) is seen as though revolving (alongwith us), the 
excellences attributed to the objects of senses by the perceiving mind appear to exist in them, 
though not actually existing. (53) (Again) just like the experiences of a reverie or those of a 
dream our sense-experiences as well as our identification with the body etc., are false, O 
scion of Dasarha ! (54) Even though pleasurable and painful experiences do not belong to 
the soul, (suffering entailed by) metempsychosis does not cease for him who dwells on the 
pleasures of sense (as something enjoyed by the Self), any more than calamities (which are 
anything but real) cease to befall a dreaming man (till he is fully awake). (55) Therefore, 
Uddhava, do not enjoy (any more) the pleasures of sense with your vile senses (which are 
SO difficult to gratify and are sure to lead you to perdition if indulged without restraint). Look 
upon the varied experiences (both of the pleasurable and painful type) as illusory and as 
reflected in the soul (only) because of our ignorance about its true nature (as the ground of 
all experiences). (56) Whether reproached or insulted, ridiculed or belittled, beaten or tightly 
bound (with ropes) etc., or deprived of one's means of livelihood, literally spat or urinated

y ways from one's fixity in the Self by the ignorant, 
er of blessedness should (try to) redeem oneself

SET SATA 
adargget aq tami Riga wy aterraehtena 1491 
fagerata feral spite acted at mathe, ate aTOTEAFL G0 | 
aid ASIA FEM eset Ue! seShseMA: 1221

Uddhava submitted : (Pray,) tell us (all seekers of blessedness), O Jewel among 
speakers, how | should get enlightened thus (so as tobe able to put up with all such outrages). 
| regard such outrage to oneself by the wicked as most difficult to bear even for the knowing, 
except (of course) those who are engaged in duties pleasing to You (such as chanting and 
hearing Your names and glories) and have found shelter in Your feet and whose passions 
have (accordingly) been stilled; for nature (in the form of tendency to revolt against 
ill-treatment) is (indeed) very powerful (and therefore hard to conquer), O Soul of the 
universe ! (59-60)

Thus ends the twenty-second discourse in Book Eleven of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

31g sarfaanseara:

Discourse XXIll

The Episode of a forbearing Brahmana

aMeaoeara 
a wana weed ATace aRNETer: | 
ae ae TTT atUTTreited: 1 kt

Sti Suka (the son of Vedavyasa) began again : Thus prayed to by Uddhava, the 
Oremost of the Lord's devotees, and welcoming the words of His servant (Uddhava), Lord 
Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) the Jewel of the Dasarhas, the story of whose exploits

'S Worth listening to, addressed him (as follows). (1)

wma aa aa argh gett: | geebftrarars a: Bilin. LEM! 
Tae aa fae: ga ant: Gehl: wer ged wee awa Welw: | 2 | 
mera nequafitreratreres | wre auifeenft Frater Guetta: | | 
amfaa fram att aftaea a: vera sft fear frtendon & |

The glorious Lord said : Indeed, there is scarcely any pious soul in this world, O pupil E - a

A HH

of the sage Brhaspati, who is really able to compose his mind agitated by the abusive words 
uttered by a wicked fellow. (2) A man is not so (Severely) pained when pierced by shafts that 
have deeply entered his vital parts as indeed by the shaft-like pungent words of the wicked, 
that wrankle in his heart and torment him. (3) In this connection the wise narrate, O Uddhava, 
a most sacred story (of his despondency) told by some mendicant, who was subjected to 
indignity by wicked people and (yet) remained full of composure, recongnizing it to be the 
consequence of his own (evil) deeds. | shall (presently) relate it to you; please hear it with 
a fully concentrated mind. (4-5)

staphag fest: aigericterdn: frat i ardight: meade arit Getsttenraa: | & | 
Wasa alenonfa atfetat: | yeaa stent ares cae: 1 © | 
gio wed ga YSIetat: | at gent yor fasvon ara faq! ¢ | 
qd agian wBdeivaelnd: | ademiagtea apy: GaAs: 1 ¢ 
ACA ATA AAU hee Ye | Saisenres haters AQMTAARAA: 120 | 
qieat styg: fenfsra faite qua Sea ( cad: ren: fhe caer farisars 128 
@ Wa sat as eaemiadhia: isdiaas eerie ear eR 
i wad aad ai apuaahes: | faad arermuse fide: query 123

in the principality of Avanti (Malwa) there lived a certain Brahmana richly endowed with 
wealth, though parsimonious’, lascivious, greedy and most irascible, and pursued the 
vocation of agriculture and trade. (6) Neither relatives nor guests were (ever) honoured by 
him even with bare words. (Nay,) living in a house devoid of piety and ritual acts, even his 
own person was never gratified with pleasures when there was time for it. (7) The relations 
and servants, (nay, even) the wife and sons as well as the daughters of that ill-behaved and 
stingy fellow felt disgusted (with him) and not only did not do what was liked by him but 
(actually) bore ill-will to him. (8) The five claimants (viz., the gods, the manes, the subhuman 
species, human beings, i.e., newcomers and the Brahmana seers, to whom offerings are 
made during the five great sacrifices) got angry at that Brahmana, who (simply) guarded his 
wealth like a Yaksa (a species of demigods) as aforesaid, was destitute of piety and 
enjoyment (both) and (as such) had fallen from this world as well as from the next. (9) Even 
the wealth—that had cost him so much (fruitless) exertion through pursuits (like agriculture) 
which entailed untold hardships—of that Brahmana, whose (residual) stock of merit had run 
out through his neglect of the said (five) claimants, O liberal-minded Uddhava, met with 
destruction. (10) The relations seized a portion of the wealth of that unworthy Brahmana, 
robbers laid their hands on another, O Uddhava; while the rest was lost through the agency 
of Providence (in the shape offire etc., time, the king and other human beings. (11) His wealth 
having been lost in the aforesaid manner, the Brahmana, who was destitute of (all) piety and 
enjoyment and was neglected by his own people, gave way to anxiety that was hard to 
overcome. (12) A very great despondency overtook the Brahmana, who, having lost his 
Wealth, had been reduced to a pitiable condition and had thus long been brooding over his 
lot and sorrowing with his throat choked with tears. (13)

* A Kadarya (miser) has been defined in a Smrti text as follows:— 
Aan Hp 4 yaenia tea | taahaiaycaia a ped sfa Sa: Il 
"He Is spoken of as a miser, who allows his own self (body), sons and wife, deities guests and servants and (even) his 
sacred duties to suffer (on account of his stinginess)."

23 ee ee: BOOK ELEVEN 625

a weal HE Quis Ase: 13 aata + marae aenetarr gee: 1g 
sro: rem TU weet ge aaa «Wael AMET A124 
ae TARA YR VOTE frat YOM: | vite: wets ales fast wafrafeaa 126 | 
sitet Te fag See Yar SS | ATR STATE AT SAY FUL 1 29 | 
wa feat Gt: TA: sla: Brat we: 1 AA axafeara: deat eee a 12c! 
w wserat weet wat yo cenereinater detseif Rae, 1 VE 1 
fiqerd aret ent: faa: WeSeTaT | Wenrkearen: aarfenfort ae: AANA: Hal: 1201 
sae «Od | ART SATE: | SPAR] Bat Heat Aad GSS 122 | 
wee STATA AS ae FETA Tee A eel Aha AAI TAL 122! 
erica sma orefitt gum sia alsqasta naisadter amahr 123 
cafafagaaist Whi akg wai: 1 sda ced safe: uaa: 12v1 
adaten fad Sate at seni Haren aa faeaha as: fe a area 12k 
Had, Aierad faer aetateaadl| wafer za otentsd Ulantfed: 1261 
fe eaedacal fe amat amcediqa waarmee adivala sad: 1201

And he said (to himself) as follows:— "Oh, what a pity ! In vain has this body been 
subjected to suffering by me, who took such (great) pains over (the acquisition of) wealth 
neither for religious merit nor for self-gratification ! (14) Generally the riches of misers never 
contribute to their (bodily) comfort (or happiness). In this life, on the other hand, they conduce 
to the agony of their soul; and when a miser is no more (in this world) they lead him to hell 
(as a result of neglect of his obligatory and other duties). (15) Just as white leprosy spoils an 
exterior worth coveting, even a little greed mars the immaculate glory of the glorious and the 
laudable qualities that exist in those possessing merit. (16) Bodily exertion, apprehension, 
anxiety and delusion fall to the lot of men engaged in the acquisition of wealth, in augmenting 
and preserving it once it has been acquired, and anxiety (grief alone) is involved in its 
expenditure, loss and enjoyment. (17) (Moreover) since the tendency to misappropriate 
others' property, violence, mendacity, hypocrisy, covetousness and anger, pride, arrogance, 
discord, animosity, distrust, a spirit of rivalry and fondness for women in general, love of 
gambling and addiction to wine—these fifteen evils found in men are believed to have their 
Source in wealth; therefore, a seeker of (final) beatitude should abandon from a distance the 
evil going by the name of wealth (lit., that which is solicited). (18-19) (One's own) brothers, 
Wife, parents and uncles as well as one's near and dear ones, who were (once) full of love, 
Nay, had identity of interest, are all estranged in no time by a single shell and converted into 
enemies. (20) Agitated and incensed over the question of the least wealth, these people cast 
at Once (all) affection to the winds and, full of jealousy, forsake in no time and (even) take 
the life of their rival. (21) They who, having secured a human birth—worthy of being solicited

Ven by immortals—and there too the status of a Brahmana, the foremost of the twice-born, 
“nd yet ignoring it, mar (fail to achieve) their self-interest (in the shape of final beatitude) meet 
Mth an evil destiny (go down to hell as 4 result of their addiction to the evils enumerated in 
Verse 1g above). (22) Having obtained this (human) body, the gateway to heaven as well as 
OTinal beatitude what mortal man would get attached to wealth, the abode of (all) evil ? (23) 
tha 0 Suards his wealth like a Yaksa, neither propitiates (by naa of it) ae Sea ead 
©Manes and (other) living beings kinsmen, relatives and other claimants nor himself ana

8°€s down (to perdition). (24) My fortune,

J = 
“ "

lifetime and strength, through which menof

a

| 
| 
understanding achieve perfection, have (all) been carelessly spent, occupied as | have 
= been with My fruitless endeavours in the cause of (amassing) wealth. What can | possibly 
accomplish now, as | have grown old ? (25) Wherefore does a man alive to the evil | 
repeatedly allow himself to be troubled so much by his futile endeavours for (the acquisition 
of) wealth ? To be sure this world stands fully enchanted by the deluding potency of some 
(unknown and unseen) agency. (26) What purpose of a man whois (already in the process 
of) being devoured by Death could be served by riches or by those that confer wealth (on 
him) and what is to be gained (by him) through enjoyments sought after by the world or 
those that cater for (such) enjoyments or (for that matter) through actions that are 
conducive to rebirth ? (27)

qi was: adeanal eft: 1aa alt anmdal dese: ya: 121 
Sse cmiorasant 9 safaeissuie: | sorernishaoare ate Cid fag STA 128 | 
wa 8AM 0s ea ate: | Wedd selelch Gealg: Arad 1301

"Surely Lord Sri Hari, who embodies in His person all the gods, by whom | have been 
reduced to this predicament, is pleased with me, and (it is through His pleasure alone that) 
despondency has come over me, which will serve (me) as a bark (to cross the ocean of 
metempsychosis). (28) Complacent of mind and (wide) awake to all my interests, |, who 
have (luckily enough) been reduced to such a (pitiable) plight, shall during what (little) 
time—if any—is left (at my disposal) attenuate my body (through askesis). (29) Let the 
gods who are the rulers of the three worlds (earth, heaven and the intermediate region) 
shower their grace on me in the aforesaid state. (I feel reassured by the thought that) 
Khatwanga (an ancient king) attained in no time Vaikuntha (the realm of Lord Visnu, which 
is a manifestation of Brahma)" (30)

ATTA TATA 
sansa Ata Meet feed: | sqer wea Ud fearrah: 13°21 
a dak veda daaehsae: i frend anamagisefadtsfaad 132! 
qd @ saad feamagqqraem: | apr uve va agit: ufeafafir: 1331 
erate sgt We BASEN uid Acsaga a Het chair der 13x 
wa a OMe «6 ocieicremegda: istat a emer sYES afede 1341 
Wad a Uius: Sawa a uedfti ada areata alata a ak Ad 1361 
wir aia: watsafatt ater: 1 aha weal a clare aeaat aeaatala 1391 
farwesattda wh emieast: so: 1 afulfad sat qhraadl Malet: 132! 
Sel Uw gent gam fiftafsainiea aed amaq aes: 13°! 
gam) fase «= cafaafa «Cad sehen ster fee ixol 
Wa a ft oa tach den a ai aera fs sm waRaeaa ive 
URYt sal Mea «= AeA: | ureter: ere Shere UTA IS | 
The glorious Lord continued : Having thus resolved in his mind, the Brahmana (the 
foremost of the twice-born classes) who belonged to Avanti undid the knots (in the shape of

the ego-sense and the feeling of myness) existing in his heart and turned outto be a peaceful 
ascetic subsisting on alms. (31) With his mind, senses and breath fully controlled he

—<

is, 20 
DIS. 2 U aewasananeusaaneniencaeee BOOK ELEVEN 627

his globe and entered 
traversed €d towns villages (only) for (begging) alms (and that too) 
incognito and unattached. (32) Seeing that aged mendicant untidy (in aoretencoh wicked

! a symbol of complete renunciation); others, his 
(begging) bowl and Kamandalu (vessel made of cocoeriCHeiel for Evin nelen some 
took away his seat and String of Rudraksa beads and still others, his quilt of rags and even 
strips of cloth. (34) Returning them (once) or (simply) showing them (as if offering them back) 
they would snatch them from the ascetic once more; nay, while he partook on the riverside 
of the food got by way of alms, they would snatch away that (too). (85) People who were 
extremely vile (even) Spat and urinated on his head; they forced him to speak while he was 
silent and would thrash him if he did not. (36) Calling him a thief, others threatened him with 
words; while others tied him with a rope, exclaiming "Let him be bound, let him be bound !" (37) 
Some would insultingly taunt him, saying "He is (in the heart of his hearts) a rogue, though 
(outwardly) carrying a (triple) staff as an emblem of piety. Deserted by his own people on his 
wealth having been depleted, he has adopted this course of life (as a means of livelinood 
rather than in a spirit of renunciation)." (38) Others would ridicule him saying "Oh, this most 
robust fellow is firm as a huge mountain.Strong of resolution like a heron he seeks to gain 
his end through (a vow of) silence !" while others broke wind at him. (Nay,) people (even) tied 
and restrained that Brahmana (even) as a bird kept for diversion. (89-40) Whatever 
affliction—caused by any living being, brought about by Providence, or having its source in 
his own body—thus came to him he took each as his own lot to be worked out by him (and 
reconciled himself with it).(41) Ill-treated (as aforesaid) by the basest of men benton bringing 
about his downfall (by forcing him to abandon his course of conduct befitting a recluse), and 
(yet) adhering to his duty and resorting to firmness of a Sattvika type (as depicted in Gita, 
XVIII. 33), the mendicant sang the following song. (42)

fot Sara 
wt oN qagaedd cadisset aentearen: | 
a mma waka Radda 86a iy3l 
TM a gM alae aA facaon 1 
poraa ctenit asa: want: yaat vated ive 
aati aae.C tet Cssdfematt sees fe 
wa: wise uf SI GR fast Wegeisat isu 
at went frat ang at a atin a cepa 
ai udimeseorm: wt fe at aaa: arf: ive 
afd awe wa: wai atte: fe aq qa Faq! 
sad ower ow 6 faanaa amifeasaat «= fenafaz: ive 
wieiisa uM A eat Ae ae, aN AH 
cial fe 2a: wea: wear Gare ae dw fe eae: ve 
at at > an fama aad

TELE

— __

We Re Pe We We Be Ke Bee Me Be We Re Ree RR Re Be RRR Re Ree eee ee eee Hee ee Be ee We Be He Be Be Ke He He BERL SEH Be Be MERE He Be Be Bee He He He He Hey, 
a aa sf

sq fd: «4Wagwaasa fanease = seated 
fei awed dealt welaneatat waa PATI4 1 
quae tad waa fea = faerie 
qenea feat wid pelt we Gee: wes 1421 
sents ale Ss ST. Gale: Ged: feaadea fasraaea: | 
qT Gierisae ae YT Ue Held HAA TH A F143 | 
aa fifa queaalsa fears wae a at 
qigaa adhd Wel Pad Be YARIS: 141 
aad td: geewaaa fememate seniedi 
teeafad, yesist qaui: pela wet a fe adqe ey 
wee «RG: «6 aSeaasa «feet «= detest | 
aafe aa a fea ad Ba HAA HA A WI Faiusl 
| 1 @Afea wt aaa gem: wd: well 
amen: date: wed wae a fadfe yd: 1401 
Tt a sem wwesmenfaat 9 gdatdefefis: | 
ae 4 den aut amt yepoefifdadaiucl

The Brahmana said : Neither these people nor any deity nor the self nor the stars nor 
Karma nor the Time-Spirit is responsible for my joys and sorrows. The Sruti texts declare 
the mind alone to be the cause (of our joys and sorrows)—the (same) mind which sets 
going the course of worldly existence. (43) The powerful mind indeed sets into operation 
the three Gunas (by giving rise to attachment and aversion etc.), and from the latter 
proceed actions of various kinds—immaculate (Sattvika or virtuous), black (Tamasika or 
sinful) and bright (Rajasika or of a mixed type—virtuous as well as sinful); thence crop up 
(the various) states of existence conforming to the colour (character) of those actions. (44) 
Co-existing with the thinking mind (as the Inner Controller), yet unattached to its 
operations, and full of wisdom, God, who is a friend (director) of mine (the Jiva), merely 
looks on with His unclouded vision. Accepting as its own self the mind, which unfolds the 
universe within itself, and enjoying the objects of the senses through attachment with the 
three Gunas, the Jiva (individual soul) gets bound. (45) Liberality (to the poor), devotion 
to one's allotted duty, observance of the five Niyamas (viz., 1-external purity, 2-content- 
ment, 3-austerity, 4-study of the scriptures and chanting of the Divine Name and 5-self- 
Surrender to God) and the five Yamas (viz., 1-non-violence, 2-truthfulness, 3-non- 
thieving, 4-continence and 5-non-acquisition of property), learning, meritorious acts and 
noble vows—all find their culmination in control of the mind; forsubjugation of the mind 
(alone) constitutes the highest Yoga (wisdom). (46) Say whatis there to be accomplished 
through charitable gifts etc., by him whose mind is perfectly calm and collected ? And 
what other object can be achieved through these gifts etc., by him whose mind is 
uncontrolled or inert (through languor etc.) ? (47) Indeed others, i.e., the senses (or even 
the gods presiding over them—viz., Brahma and others) are under the control of the 
mind. But the mind does not readily come under the control of anyone else; for the god 
(of a mind) is redoubtable (being the cause of the manifold worldly sufferings) and more 
powertul than the powerful, so that he who is able to bring it under control is adorable

ales al

— mee eee

evento the gods. "(48) Unable to conquer that enemy (in the guise of the mind), of irresistible 
tempo, which Is (So) difficult to conquer (otherwise than by the Lord's grace), and which 
torments the (very) vitals, some deluded persons thereupon make friends, neutrals and 
enemies of men and wage a wicked warfare in this world. (49) Taking this body (of their 
own)—a creation of their mind (alone)—as their very self and the body of their son, wife etc., 
as theirs, men of clouded judgment, labouring under the misapprehension that this is my own 
self and he is another, revolve in the world of matter (enveloped in the darkness of 
ignorance), the end of which is difficult to reach. (50) If, however, an individual is (held to be) 
responsible for our Joy and sorrow, even in this case what does it matter to the soul (which is 
neither the giver nor the experiencer of joy and sorrow) ? The capacity to give and experience 
joy and sorrow indeed belongs to two earthly bodies (and not to the soul, which is devoid of 
action and as such incapable of giving or experiencing sorrow). If ever a man (unwittingly) 
bites his own tongue with his own teeth, with which of them should he get angry on his 
experiencing pain through such biting ? (51) If any god (presiding over any particular Indriya) 
is held to be responsible for (our) sorrow (or joy), let it be so. Even then what does it matter 
to the soul (which neither inflicts nor suffers pain) ? The capacity to inflict and suffer pain 
belongs to the two gods inflicting and suffering pain (through the organs presided over by 
them and not to the soul, which is devoid of form and beyond all change).When a (particular) 
limb (presided over by one deity) in one's own body is (ever) smitten by another (presided 
over by a differeent god) at which of the two limbs (or gods) should the man get angry ? (52) 
lf the sould is responsible (for our joys and sorrows) (even) then what blame attaches to 
another, one’s own intrinsic nature being responsible for one’s joys and sorrows ? (If, 
however, it is argued that others becomes instrumental in such modification of the soul, my 
reply is that) there is no entity other than the soul (which is all comprehensive—‘ad Gicae 
wa’as the Sruti says); if there is (or appears to be), it is illusory. Hene their is neither joy nor 
sorrow. Wherefore (then) should one feel angry (at all) ? (53) If the stars (are held to be) 
responsible for (one's) joys and sorrows, what responsibility attaches to the soul, which is 
birthless? They exert their influence only on a body which is subject to birth (and death). 
(Moreover) the astrologers declare the evil (or good) influence exerted by the stars as falling 
directly on a (fellow) star (the star which happened to be at the ascendant at the birth of a 
man and only indirectly on the personality born at that particular time because of the deity 
Presiding over that star identifying itself with the said personality). Atwhom (then) should the 
Soul, which is other than the star as well as from the body born under its influence, get angry 
? (54) If Karma (action done in a previous or even the present life) is (held to be) responsible 
for (One's) joys and sorrows, let it be (so). (Even in that case) what responsibility attaches 
to the soul ? For, action is possible only in the event of the being a substance (both) material 
and conscious. (That alone which is material is subject to change and no one who is not 
Conscious can engage in a pursuit conducive to one's own interests.) The body, however, 
'S Material (and is not alive to its own interests); while the soul consists of pure wisdom (and 
IS therefore never liable to change). Hence Karma, which is the root of joy and sorrow, does 
not exist (at all). At whom (then) should one feel angry ? (55) If, however, Kala (the Time- 
Spirit) is (believed to be) responsible for one's joy and sorrow, (even) in that case what 
‘sponsibility attaches to the soul ? (For) the soul (being a fragment of Brahma) is the same 
&S Kala (which is identical with Brahma). No suffering can come to a part from the whole any 
More than the heat of fire could burn an individual flame or the coldness of ice could benumb

Se a a EEE

This is an echo of the following Sruti text :—

TA aa died aya a are A aemaara ten fe <a: Mea: Tela

a particle of it. (Nay, the soul is the same as the Supreme and) there can be no pair of 
contraries (e.g.,joy and sorrow) to the Supreme. (Such being the case,) at whom should one 
be angry ? (56) Through (the agency or instrumentality of) none and at no place or time and 
on no account can there be any connection of the Self—which lies beyond Prakrti (the ultimate 
cause of the universe)—with the pairs of opposites (Such as joy and sorrow) as there is in 
the case of Ahankara (the ego-sense), which reveals the world (even though it does not exist 
in the Self). (Hence) he who has awakened to this truth has no fear from (other) created 
beings. (57) Embracing the aforesaid conclusion regarding the Supreme Spirit, adopted by 
the most ancient and eminent seers, I, such as | am, shall get over this mundane existence 
(having its root in the darkness of ignorance—which is (so) difficult to cross—through 
worship of the feet of Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) alone. (58)

STATA 
fifda apssfaut ude: sard mt wien sem! 
Prtadisareta aemiacn haat sy Ofte MAT 148 | 
Wael Aa: «9gerenefawy: | faterdiahaa: Paes: sa: 101 
qa Pale Aa Fryer vat fear i wena a waar arrese: 1621 
a ust faan wat satest ania: | epgesgvar «= -_ etary 121 
sft Samad Fe Use Pecans TAfaasea: 123 |

The glorious Lord went on: Getting disgusted with the pleasures of sense and leaving 
his home and wandering over the earth, the ascetic—whose depression of spirits was gone 
even though he had lost his fortune, and who did not budge from his righteous course of 
conduct though ill-treated as aforesaid by the wicked—chanted the foregoing song. (59) 
None other brings joy or sorrow to the Jiva (embodied soul). Friends, neutrals and foes, nay, 
the (whole) world is an illusion of the mind, engendered by ignorance (about the Self). (60) 
Endowed with an intelleet focussed on Me, therefore, O dear Uddhava, control the mind by 
all means; such is the highest consummation of Yoga (wisdom). (61) He who hears or 
repeats (to others) or remembers with a concentrated mind this song chanted by the 
(aforesaid) mendicant, bearing as it does on absorption in Brahma, is never overpowered 
by pairs of opposites (such as joy and sorrow). (62)

Thus ends the twenty-third discourse in Book Eleven of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS RNR

pis. 24 |] eo ELEVEN 631

BY Aqeanseaa:

Discourse XXIV

A Dissertation on Sankhya-Yoga

, | MTA 
aa a aIaeais ares Geter | ae farsa ya wen sree Senierss SA a 
aaa del watefanfear aa fadeaqu enet qpagiisat i 2 | 
aqaameei has fide agisitet aa fer aavad ged! 3 | 
daca de: sept: avatar aa asad wa: gee: alsfheltad | x | 
aa wi: Galata seated Wo: 1 Aa yawn: geaquad al & |

a HATE

wa: AANdd YA Ae PAU aya: | at fandat widisesnt at fasted: 1 & 
animes amasead Raqiaqnshsaarat aru fac: 1 
sets «6aefetsaritt «ai dstele tadl saAeHlest A Aa! ¢ 
aa Uaitfeat atet: aad ectenrftor: | sweqeneaATqdAradsayT a, 11 
diate auyanus alecahead 1 aq anaMyd Ua fawn aa aIAy 1201 
Asgeraa al We Aad! oar amen faaen ya: eit Prem 1¢2 
Tae seit eat A Ya: Ger! Haida a yeiten: feesrat Frama ASL LR 
ANSI ARTA weRtnisysid, WY: | Alea ada: Pat: aor HrpoNAA 1 83 | 
ama auasta See Mase: | Aestae: aa Anata Aga: ex! 
Ta clea sor adanie I Tee «asta | astit 1841 
SUS e Ha: WE A a sa: shaeala | Matsuda: Apel Fear AE! 
aq wens 2 a wat a we a feed sraereal ae dsrearisian: 1201 
Tamera «ude |e fata Steed Aal Ser a TerAfteltad 1k¢1 
weitelaarerarem: «YRS: UE: | Acts HRTeaateh: Hie Hel Ahead ASA 1881 
Wl: vada aa. araiaqaur fatal: | Aer Weitere: Reread araatawry 120 1 
IUTEssaI Grenncafaacrs: uses fagera aead yard: ae zz! 
aN wie ude sag stat ae Fat sett yey yetad 1221 
amy yeast mer sas BT Wi tad Sift at satel WA seit 1231 
Si al | a wat stad asa SMR | Sa Boga sfsartr wala 12x 
Uwe dra stad waetati aed amie aictefs sy: 1241 
Total we BY Wry Yaa: | Asam achat ad sles wtaiseag 12G | 
IY wea fa sla gmathr Hel | Ae hae SN fencer: 119 | 
Cameron ad denferat oe wr wR Ra wateratet wect

ee a

The glorious Lord began again:! shall now fully expound before you the truth 
underlying the doctrine of Sankhya as conclusively ascertained by the ancient seers (Kapila 
and others), realizing which a man bids fair to shed at once the delusion (in the shape of 
varied experiences such as joy and sorrow etc.), occasioned by the notion of difference (as 
between oneself and others). (1) During the period of final dissolution (before the Yugas 
began to run their course), in the very first Satya Yuga (at the beginning of creation) and 
whenever there are men shrewd of judgment, (in their eyes too) the subjective consciousness 
(in the shape of the seer) as well as the entire objective existence was one absolutely | 
undifferentiated substance (Brahma) indeed. (2) That absolute undifferentiated reality, 
Brahma (the Infinite), which is beyond the ken of speech and the mind, became dual (as it 
were) in the shape of Maya (objective existence) and that which is reflected in it (viz., the Jiva 
or the seer). (3) Of the said two (halves), one substance indeed is the well-known Prakrti, 
consisting of two aspects (viz., cause and effect); while the other entity is consciousness 
(itself), and that is called Purusa (the Spirit). (4) Out of (this) Prakrti—(even) while its 
equilibrium was being disturbed by Me (in the form of the Time-Spirit) as motivated by the 
Jivas (whose Karma is ultimately responsible for creation)—there appeared the three 
Gunas— Tamas, Rajas and Sattva. (5) Out of the aforesaid (three Gunas) was evolved the 
Sutra (the principle of cosmic activity) as well as Mahat (the principle of cosmic intelligence), 
which is (ever) accompanied by the Sutra (of which it is a counterpart and in conjunction with 
it forms one composite whole). From Mahat, even as it underwent modification, there 
appeared Ahankara (the cosmic ego), which deluded the Jiva (by bringing about its 
identification with the body etc.). (6) (This) Anankara is of three kinds, viz., Sattvika, Rajasika

and Tamasika. Itis the cause of the five Tanmatras (the subtle elements), the eleven Indriyas 
(the five senses of perception and the five organs of action) and the mind (including the 
deities presiding over the Indriyas and the mind) and (though material or non-spiritual in 
substance it is a sort of connecting link between Spirit and Matter inasmuch as it is 
interpenetrated by a reflection of the Spirit and) is (therefore considered to be both) spiritual 
and material. (7) From the Tamasika type of Ahankara, which is the source of the (five) 
Tanmatras, came into being (through the Tanmatras) the (five gross) elements (ether, the 
air, fire, water and earth), from the Rajasika type sprang up the (ten) Indriyas; and from the 
Sattvika type were evolved the eleven deities (presiding over the Indriyas and the mind, viz., 
the deities presiding over the quarters, the wind-god, the sun-god, Varuna, the god of water, 
the Aswinikumaras, the god of fire, Indra, the lord of paradise, Lord Visnu, Mitra and 
Prajapati, the deity presiding over procreation, and the moon-goa), as well as the mind. (8) 
Impelled (energized) by Me, and rendered operative in conjunction with one another, all the 
(aforementioned) categories evolved the cosmic egg, (which served as) My excellent 
sporting-ground (when | entered it as its Inner Controller). (9) Inthat egg as it lay on the waters 
(that constituted a support for the egg and are referred to in the Vaisnava literature by the 
name of Garbhoda) appeared | (in the form of Garbhodasayi Narayana, the second Cosmic 
Person). From My navel sprang up the lotus that (brought forth the universe and as such) 
bore the name of the universe; and on that lotus appeared Brahma (the self-born, another 
manifestation of the Cosmic Person with four faces and invested with a body evolved as 4 
result of past meritorious deeds). (10) Characterized by Rajas (the principle of activity) and 
equipped with askesis, the aforesaid Brahma (the creator of the universe) evolved by My 
grace the three spheres—viz., Bhirloka (the terrestrial globe including the seven subterranean 
regions, viz., Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala, Mahatala, Rasatala and Patala), Bhuvarloka (the 
aerial region) and Swarloka (understood in its wider sense as comprising the five celestial

oS

pis. 24 ]

pct HIRI

We WeWe We We He Xe We Ke Me Ke He

worlds—Swarloka or paradise, Maharloka, Jan 
yardian deities. (11) (Of these three spheres) 
gradise) constituted the home of the gods: Bh 
other living beings (constituting the sub-huma 
and moths etc .); while the (ethereal) region ex

constituted the home of the Siddhas (eminent Brahmana sages like Bhrgu). (12) Brahma (the 
ruler of the universe) created a home for the Asuras (demons) and the Nagas (serpent- 
demons) underground (in the subterranean regions known by the name of Atala and so on). 
Inthe aforesaid three spheres, are worked outall the destinies of those prompted by the three 
Gunas (Sattva etc.). (13) Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka, (Brahmaloka) are 
the (successively higher) goals—free from (all) impurities (in the shape of attachment, greed 
etc.—to be reached through Yoga (as propounded by the sage Patafijali), askesis (as 
practised by those belonging to the third stage of life, viz, Vanaprastha) and Samnyasa 
(renunciation as practised by recluses, thathave renounced their home as wellas family life); 
(whereas) My realm (Vaikuntha) is the objective to be reached through the discipline of 
Devotion. (14) With Me, having Kala (the Time-Spirit) for My energy, as the Dispenser of the 
fruit of actions, this (living) creation, yoked to Karma, rises higher (upto the Brahmaloka) and 
descends (to the level of the plant kingdom in the scale of spiritual evolution according to the 
nature of his actions) in this world (of matter), which is (nothing but) a stream of the three 
Gunas. (15) Minute or large, lean or stout, whatever entity has come into being is pervaded 
by (made up of) Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa (Spirit) both. (16) That which really constitutes 
the beginning as well as the end of a thing represents its middle too and that alone Is real 
(inasmuch as it pervades all its states). Its modifications have only a practical value even as 
the modifications (ornaments etc.), of gold or those of clay (viz., earthenware). (17) That 
alone is real, adopting which as its material an earlier existence (e.g., the Mahat-tattva) 
produces a later existence (e.g., Anankara). That which is intended in a particular instance 
to be mentioned as the beginning and end of some effect is spoken of as real. (18) The well- 
known material cause of this (visible) universe, viz., Prakrti (Primordial Matter), He who 
Presides over this Prakrti, viz., the Supreme Person, and the Time-Spirit, which manifests 
the universe (by disturbing the equilibrium of Prakrti)—all these three are as a matter of fact 
the same as I, the Infinite. (19) The elaborate process of creation ever continues in (due) 
order of succession (from father to son) for the sake of (enjoyment of) the embodied soul (that 
undergoes birth in various species of life made up of the three Gunas) until the life of the 
universe comes to a close, or (in other words) until the Lord (Myself) so wills it. (20) When 
contacted (gazed on) by Me (as the Time-Spirit, the Destroyer of created beings), the cosmic 
€gg, in which the creation and dissolution of the worlds alternately take place, becomes fit 
alongwith the (various) worlds (comprised in it) for disintegration into the five (gross) 
Elements. (21) (Consequent on the total failure of crops occasioned by a prolonged drought 
€xtending over a hundred years) the mortal body (of human beings and other living 
“reatures) is withdrawn into the food (on which it subsisted); the food is reduced to seeds 
PErsists in the form of seeds alone); the seeds get merged into the soil (no longer take root); 
While the earth (on being dried by the sun and burnt by the flames emanating from the mouths 
Ord Sankarsana) is reduced to (the subtle state of) odour (the cause of the earth). (22) 
dour gets merged into (its cause, the element of) water and water is reduced to its own 
(€ssentia| Daeeret viz., the quality of) taste. Taste gets merged into (its cause, the element 
ire, and fire is Whar into (its own essential property of) colour. (23) Colour gets 
YEd into (its cause,) the air and the latter is reduced to (its subtle state, viz., the quality, 
©UCh while that too gets merged into (its cause, the element of) ether. Ether (on being

aloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka)—with their 
, Swarloka (construed in the narrow sense of 
uvarloka, of spirits and Bhurloka, of men and 
N species—animals, birds, reptiles, insects 
tending beyond the three (aforesaid) worlds

Mer 
Of) t

. ~ ; 
ip eae 
565] BM p ) ee ae 
« Qt? es” «Tes ele ; 
s & art [| 9 Po. Stas sg 3 <= 
- . a : * ° a = man we ab 
— a = S _ 4 ‘ ' 7

a a

swallowed by Ahankara) is reduced to (its subtle state, viz.,) the quality of sound. (Even SO) 
the Indriyas (the products of Rajasika Ahankara) are merged in their (respective) causes 
(viz., the deities presiding over them and ultimately into the Rajasika Ahankara). (24) The 
causes (viz., the gods), O gentle one, are merged in their controller, the mind, which is a 
product of Sativika Ahankara (and ultimately into the Sattvika Ahankara alongwith the gods). 
(Even) sound returns to (the state of) the Tamasika Ahankara (the cause of the elements) 
and the mighty Tamasika Ahankara (as well as the Sattvika and Rajasika types of Ahankara) 
is merged in Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence). (25) The most powerful 
Mahat-tattva (which is endowed with the potency of Jana or knowledge and the potency of 
Karma or activity) is reduced to its causes, the (three) Gunas. The latter get dissolved into 
the Unmanifest (Primordial Matter) and the Unmanifest is merged in the Time-Spirit, which 
has (now) ceased to operate. (26) The Time-Spirit is merged in the Cosmic Person (the 
Creator of the universe), the Director of Maya; and the latter, in Me, the birthless (eternal) 
Spirit. The Spirit, which is absolute (unconditioned) and is inferred by the (processes of) 
creation and dissolution (of the universe as their background), stands by Itself (and does not 
get merged in any other entity). (27) How could there arise any misconception, engendered 
| by the notion of difference, in the mind of one investigating into the Spirit as aforesaid; and . 
(if it ever arose) how could it persist any more than darkness would on the appearance of the 
| sun in the sky ? (28) This is the process of differentiating the Spirit from Matter, which cuts 
the knot of doubtand which has been set forth by me, the Knower of (the truth relating to both) 
the cause and the effect, from the standpoint of evolution and involution. (29)

Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

3IqQ Usfaansear:

Discourse XXV

The operation of the three Gunas described

MATA TATA 
Waa WM a aM Aad aa qeaasenuanra Brad: 1k 
WN quitter qa: Ae ca afd: | Ceaatisezer steal Sldatle: dia: | 2 | 
IA Sel AGKGON AIM SailiHel GAH Aelcatel AAMifaskeat Akl aAmrers: | 2 | 
IAM CAAISAd (Eel Aro GA: BA: Chie: | Bente ferstardt Frstssat sites: | ¥ | 
aaa wastes: | qa afetasrean: afaaraaal Oy & | 
Aude waeasa a ula: i oar: wgfaad TArarArsargia: | & | 
af ad a am a aca uftaiea: i qo afaeisa sngiefaernae: | 9 | 
aqhicant fst gam, af yeemtiaet aafasa qo afafafé ai ¢ |

The glorious Lord began again: (Now) learn from Me, Ojewelamongmen, as! tell you, 
how and by which of the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), working independently of one 
another, is man affected. (1) Control of the mind and the senses, forbearance, sound

«st

Dis. 25 | BOOK ELEVEN 635

‘udgment, askesis (in the form of strict adherence to one's prescribed course of conduct), 
truthfulness, Compassion, retentive power, contentment, self-abnegation, absence of thirst 
for the pleasures of sense, belief in God, life after death and so on, modesty and shrinking 
from unrighteous acts, liberality etc., and remaining delighted in the self (forming the first

roup); hankering after the pleasures of sense, (self-centred) activity, arrogance, insatiability, 
inflexibility, seeking alter blessings (from gods etc.), differentiation (between one's own self 
and others), self-g ratification, bellicosity through arrogance, love of praise, jocularity, display 
of valour and exertion through might (forming the second group); and intolerance, stinginess, 
mendacity, malevolence, mendicancy, hypocrisy, languor, discord, grief and delusion, 
gloom and wretchedness, drowsiness, expectation, fear and indolence (forming the third 
group);— these are severally the effects of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, enumerated (by Me) 
almost exhaustively, Now hear (from Me) the combined effect (of the three Gunas). (2—5) 
The notion which is expressed in the words "I am (tranquil, passionate or angry)" and "These 
(traits such as tranquillity, lust and anger) belong to me" is as a matter of fact a combined 
effect (of the three Gunas); and whatever is done with the mind, the objects of the senses 
(viz, sound, touch, sight, taste and smell), the senses (themselves) and the vital airs 
(conjointly) is also a combined effect of the three Gunas (since all these instruments are 
themselves a product of the three Gunas and all.action is preceded by the feeling of I-ness 
and my-ness). (6) When a manis keenly devoted to religious merit, material possessions and 
sense-gratification, this (keen devotion of his also) is a combined effect of the three Gunas 
(inasmuch as Dharma etc., are themselves a product of the three Gunas) and conduce to 
reverence, wealth and sense-gratification respectively. (7) When a man is devoted to holy 
rites performed with interested motives and when he sticks to the life of a householder and 
later on adheres to his (obligatory and occasional) duty, such devotion etc., (as well) on his 
part is indeed a combined effect of the three Gunas (inasmuch as devotion to holy rites 
performed with interested motives, attachment to the household and devotion to one’s 
allotted duty are products of Rajas, Tamas and Sattva respectively). (8)

Wea GeadaHayarsaany: | arafesit Wile wleMeleat Fa = | 
qa waa Al wae fda: wedi: 1a aeaenla fend ged feta at igo! 
Sel sufsra stare Al Vad Bway: 1d Wiesel faenkgaraarea aay 122 1 
aa wee sa qo saa Aa Ai fader dq Yat asa aed 1221 
Tem wad aa wet fad fami aa ger qed etarmiefs: Far 1k21 
Wal WANA: Ua Ww: ag fel ae! aa ga Gad Haden aera Bra ex! 
Ta Wag WW: Ua AM Ws TS TSAI eat Wenrtercat Meaeessga 181 
Tat fart udida shaarot a Pref: | casual Weise al Orel fag AIGA 1k 
faeea firaa areikhdiis: Aaa! TaRaTed Fat it TT Udita 1 e091 
Weft faciaa Bat wetisami at AB mat ronbtemeguend [ec

From virtues like self-control one should conclude a man to be endowed (predominantly)

With Sattva: from passion etc., one should know him to be (principally) full of Rajas and from

Nger and other characteristics he should infer him to be full of Tamas. (9) When a person 
Worships Me disinterestedly with devotion through (the performance of) his duties one 
Should know that man or woman too to be endowed with a Sattvika disposition.(10) When 
“Man Seeking the pleasures of sense worships Me through his actions, one should know

=m to be of Rajasika disposition; and when he does so expecting injury to others (his 
e

'Saries etc.), one should know him to be Tamasika (by nature). (11) The Gunas(modes mere

. oy lh 
i eee 
mth Be 
- oe ; ; = > 
f a 
a

—

of Prakriti), viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, affect the Jiva (embodied soul) alone and not Me, 
inasmuch as they appear (only) in the mind of the former and because itis the Jiva alone that 
is bound (to this mundane existence) through them, getting attached to the elements (in the 
form of the body, senses, mind and the objects of the senses). (12) When Sattva, which is 
illuminating, transparent and tranquil, prevails over the other two Gunas (viz., Rajas and 
Tamas), a man is characterized by wisdom, piety and happiness etc., respectively. (13) 
When (on the other hand) Rajas—which gives rise to attachment and the notion of diversity 
and spurs one to activity—gets the better of Tamas and Sativa, then one Is sized with a 
craving for glory and fortune and is characterized by unhappiness and activity. (14) When 
(however) Tamas—which perverts one's judgment, clouds one's vision and induces 
dullness—dominates Rajas and Sativa, a man is characterized by grief, infatuation and 
violence (as a result of perverted judgment), (excessive) sleep (through obscurity of the 
mind) and by expectation of help from others (through indolence caused by dullness).(15) 
When the mind is lucid and the senses recoil from their objects, (nay,) when there is 
fearlessness in relation to the body and the mind is free from (all) attachment, know that 
Sattva, which is conducive to My realization, is predominant at that time. (16) When, getting 
agitated through activity a man finds his intellect distracted on all sides, (nay,) his senses 
know no rest, the organs of action are not quite at ease and the mind is confused, conclude 
from these symptoms that Rajas holds sway. (17) When, getting obscured and (therefore) 
in capable of being moulded into the spiritual substance, the faculty of reason ceases to 
function and the mind (too) has its activity suspended, and when ignorance and gloom 
prevail, know that Tamas is in the ascendant. (18)

Wan Wl wa eam ada isu a wih ameea Weare

Garsmme fae wer wasaesk! sam anal sede fy aad iRo!

sagan west Gat SON SAI: | AAaTAISA swe Warder: 1221

Ga Jem: Gdid Nelh Wied: | aie Frat ata ama ror: 1221

Redo fen al Akad fated adits woaged feat ama i23!

Had Akdch AA Til denleach VAL Wed AAs Wa Alas efor waiext

ot ¢ Oia areal wat Wra sedi aaa @daed Afahd gq Pforieui

ikdch: SRcAISdSt WIM Wests: Wa: asa: wafafawst feo wears: 12e1

Mikaaneaicteht Aegl HUsegl q Usa | AAA al sesh Aaa q fier i2v

Gea Ue kh MI se SPS CaaS arfdararfar 1221

Aka Gansta fare ¢ Usa amd «= Arecetet Fefor« WaursTar 1281 
When Sattvaguna is on the increase, the strength of the gods increases; that of the 
Asuras, when Rajas is in the ascendant; and that of the Raksasas* when Tamas IS 
predominant, O Uddhava ! (19) One should trace the waking state of a man from Sattva, 
attribute his dream state to Rajas and déep slumber to Tamas and declare the fourth 
(transcendent) state (which is no other than the Self) as (uniformly) running through (all) the 
three (aforementioned) states (of consciousness). (20) Men following the courses of

conduct prescribed in the Vedas go higher and (still) higher through Sattva by recourse tO 
Tamas they descend lower and (still) lower, embracing even inanimate life; while by recourse

“Itis the indriyas given over to other-worldliness, worldly activity and infatuation respectively that are referred to here by 
the appellation of gods, Asuras (demons) and Raksasas (ogres).

Dis. 25 ] BOOK ELEVEN 637

to Rajas they (continue to) move in the intermediate state (as human beings). (21) Those who 
died when Sattva was in the ascendant ascend to heaven; those whose death occured at 
q time when Rajas was predominant return to the human world; those whose death took

lace at a time when Tamas was in the ascendant go down to hell; while they who have 
transcended the three Gunas attain to Me alone (even when they are still alive). (22) One's 
own (allotted) duty (whether of an obligatory or occasional type) performed with the intention 
of propitiating Me or without seeking any reward, is of a Sattvika character (has the element 
of Sattva predominating in it). That which is performed with the expectation of a reward is 
Rajasika (in character); while that which is performed with intent to harm others and is full 
of violence etc., is Tamasika (in character).(23) Knowledge concerning the absolute Self 
(without reference to the body etc.) is of a Sattvika type; while that which relates to the Self 
notunconnected with the body etc., has (the elementof) Rajas prevailing init. The knowledge 
possessed by the uncultured (e.g., children or the deaf and dumb) or that relating to natural 
acts such as eating and drinking is Tamasika (in character); while that relating to Me (the 
Supreme Divinity) is beyond (the realm of) the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti). (24) The 
forest, aS a matter of fact, is a Sattvika place of abode (inasmuch as it is solitary and 
undefiled); while the countryside is spoken of as Rajasika. The gambling house is a 
Tamasika dwelling, while My temple (which is hallowed by My constant presence in the form 
of an image) is beyond the (three) Gunas.(25) An unattached doer is Sattvika; he who is 
blinded.with passion (i.e., keenly intent on its fruit has been declared to be a Rajasika agent. 
He who-has lost his judgment (the notion of right and wrong) is a Tamasika agent; while a 
doer who (solely) depends on Me is unaffected by the (three) Gunas. (26) Faith in things 
spiritual is Sattvika, while that in ritual acts and other (worldly) duties is Rajasika. Faith in 
unrighteousness (as though it were righteousness, is Tamasika) while that in My worship is 
beyond the realm of the (three) Gunas. (27) Food which is wholesome, pure and obtained 
without taking pains (for it) has been declared to be Sattvika; that which is most agreeable 
to the palate is Rajasika; while that which is unwholesome (conducive to suffering in the form 
of a malady) and impure (that which corrupts the mind) is Tamasika. Again, that which has 
been offered to Me is beyond the three Gunas. (28) The joy springing from (the realization 
of) the Self is Sattvika: while that which proceeds from the objects of sense is Rajasika. 
(Again,) that which proceeds from infatuation (caused by intoxicating drugs and drinks) and 
cajolery (practised towards one's own wife and children) is Tamasika; while that arising from 
thought etc., of Me is beyond the sphere of the (three) Gunas.(29)

wai 3a: Ss HIN BM att He: | AaelawMssalahion Aqva: aa wa fe 1301 
aa quran aren: yemenniiya: 1gs Aart Get aT Tere RR! 
Wt: daaa: det qoredfterern: | at8 fatster: wher gon sites ferret: | 
ara Aet Asta Weld 132!

Tae defini weet wafers! Worg faba At Aery feta: 1331 
fest at ada fered fof: resid Eade GA: 1381 
Wa ufinde ae Syedor are: | TEA Wore sitet sitet farerea AM A4 | 
Stat sftaferreient qelgrarerearta: | Aaa HATT Wot A afeabaate 136 1 
; sf SEETHER TRASH GRATER TATU: 14

(In. this way) substance (food as classified in verse 28 above), place of abode (as 
"entioned in verse 95), fruit (in the shape of joy referred to in verse 29), time (as indicated |

| Verses 13 to 16), knowledge (referred to in verse 24), action (classifiedin verse 23),the = 
| : : aor

' 
H bg Ne tO ee + Oa

<i

ee ee et ek EE Eh Eth REE Eh RRR Ree Rik ihh Rit RRR RPP eee RRR ee Rell We We We We We He We We Be He We We We We We We We We Wee Se We We ee He Be Be He We Hy 
Sa i a a a a oi

agent (as mentioned in verse 26), faith (referred to in verse 27), state of consciousness (as

told in verse 20), form (state of existence as classified in verse 21) and final destiny (as

referred to in verse 22)—everything is as a matter of fact constituted of the three Gunas

alone. (30) (In fact) all entities pervaded by the Spirit and Matter—whatever is seen, heard

of or pondered by the intellect—are constituted of the three Gunas, O jewel among men! (31)

(All) these states of existence of the embodied soul are brought about by the three Gunas

(holding sway over it) and the actions performed by it. That embodied soul (however) by

which these Gunas (modes of Prakrti) appearing in the mind have been thoroughly brought

under control, O gentle one, and which stands firmly established in Me by treading the path

of Devotion gets qualified for becoming one with Me. (32) Therefore, having obtained this

_ (human) body, in which (alone) Knowledge and Realization (of Truth) can be had, and 
completely shaking off (all) attachmentto the (three) Gunas, let the wise worship (take refuge

in) Me. (33) Free from attachment (to the pleasures of sense) and with his senses brought

under control a wise man should carefully worship Me and, given over to contemplation,

should get the better of Rajas and Tamas by duly cultivating Sattva. (34) And, possessed of

3 a tranquil mind and united with Me (through contemplation), he should thoroughly subdue 
Sativa (too) by means of Sattva (itself in the shape of desirelessness). Rid (in this way) of 
the (three) Gunas, the embodied soul disowns the subtle body (constituting its Jivahood) and 
attains to (becomes one with) Me. (35) Completely disunited from its Jivahood (in the shape 
of the subtle body) as well as from the (three) Gunas appearing in the mind, and full of Me 
(consisting of perfect bliss) the Jiva neither goes out (to enjoy the external objects) nor turns 
inward (to enjoy them mentally). (In other words, he gets liberated during his very lifetime.) (36)

Thus ends the twenty-fifth discourse in Book Eleven of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

gq welaanseara:

Discourse XXVI

The Utterance of Purtrava bearing on Aversion for the pleasures of Sense 
MTA TATA 
ACCA aa cetal Teeth stead: | Sire UIA aA ALI eg | 
Teen staan fag A?arwariwMm AaMmy sanegaga: | 
adaristt A Gar, qeadsaedaiol: | 2 
We aA galcaa faeteqa afd cee Udereasraad | 3 | 
te: woafeat mamma geasm: | daira Gea fifoo: steneat |X | 
USS Weed aA AX stdagqu: | fasaaanmena ar fasfa faga: 1 & | 
SMCS, aon ate: 1a aq atittardtedsarpe: | & |

The glorious Lord began again: Having obtained this (human) body, the (sole) medium 
of perceiving My true nature, he who has betaken himself to the course of conduct pleasing

pis. 26 ] BOOK ELEVEN 639

to Me (viz. the path of Devotion) duly attains to Me, his very Self, the embodiment of supreme 
Bliss, dwelling In his own heart. (1) (Once) completely freed, by means of firm devotion to 
the path of Knowledge, from the bondage of Matter (which conditions the embodied soul) the 
Jiva does not get attached to the unreal objects of senses, though living in the midst of such 
objects, which are Mere Creations of Maya (My deluding potency) and are being falsely

erceived (aS ONES Own self or Possession). (2) One should on no account cultivate the 
fellowship of unworthy men given to the gratification of their sexual urge and satisfaction of 
their hunger (alone); (for) the follower of (even) one such sensualist falls into (the) blinding 
darkness (of hell) like a blind man following another blind man. (3) Falling a prey to infatuation 
due to separation from Urvasi (in the first instance) and (eventually) disgusted (with the 
pleasures of sense) on his grief having been overcome as a result of his meeting her once 
more at Kuruksetra and attaining to her realm in heaven by offering oblations to the 
sacred fire entrusted to him by the Gandharvas and thereby propitiating the gods (vide 
IX. xiv. 32—47), Emperor Purdrava (the son of Ila) of extensive fame sang the following 
song (concerning himself, reproduced in verses 7 to 24 below). (4) As she went leaving him 
(alone in the bed), the monarch felt (greatly) perturbed and followed her in a state of nature 
like a madman, Crying: “Tarry (awhile), my cruel wife !" (5) Deprived of his reason by Urvasi, 
he was aware neither of the nights that passed nor of the coming ones for years together 
while repeatedly enjoying the trivial pleasures without satiety. (6)

UG Sara

al A WeaeM: BMAHAeda: | 2AM Welds AGUS! Sh Bal: 1 © | 
ag aafatrie: gat angtaitsgn iach agai ware vara) ¢ | 
aet A streramlel Sara Alsat sa: | wlsrpsHadi aReaferaratar: 1 e | 
aufescarat «= feet GUTH aril Pees AANA AA Saag fa 1201 
Sietaswa: id ast donata al | asares Raat Ardi Grad Uledtisd: 1221 
fe faeren fe ace fe aia aaa atl f& fates aha after sat Et 1221 
areharearfad fire at qe ofteaaa asec smear eitftettaratsrd: 1231 
Sad atom A sda sea Taeey: aret afarefattreter 1ext 
useaaed fi at aah Alfad We: | Sema TAA AST 124 | 
aifrrenta Ren A gma gia: sata Aertel Aeerfstarara: 1261 
feadar asand eal al adada: |waperetiaest «aise «= Safed aa: 101 
Bret Troster: Garey Sree SALAS: | SOT: AAACN ATA Slate oat: 18S | 
fet: fe aa satan: ease: aT: | feats: Teh ene at reas RLY

, faasia | Stal GUS Ga Tiedt A a faa: 1201 
neers faq Tat HATO feHASATL 1 
3a acaad Be aay aiatfad| fara: asater arene Rai 
Veda walt Aa STAAA | AGHA: STO AAT FRAT AT: 123 I 
TRL GEN a wectom: wait Shing Sta: | fargat eerste: Meet: fee ATA, 1 RN

Purtrava - Astounding (indeed) is the magnitude of my infatuation, my judgment 
Naving bean ees ee inasmuch as (all) these years of my life have passed

“NNoticed by me while my neck remaine

d clasped (in embrace) by my celestial wife (7)

eg

We We Re We We Be Be We Bee Bee We Ser We Ree ee eRe eee eee Ree eee We eRe eee eee He Wie We We We Wie Wee Hee He Be We Ke We We we yy 
a a LET LE A a rr cd

Charmed by her alas ! | did not perceive when the sun set or when it rose, nor did | know of 
the days, totalling numbers of years, that rolled by ! (8) How greatis the infatuation of my soul 
by which myself, a universal monarch, the crest-jewel of kings, was made a toy deer of in the 
hands of women ! (9) Crying like a madman, all naked, | followed the woman (even) as she 
went away deserting me, a ruler of men, including my kingdom, like a straw. (10) Whence 
could there be any glory, majesty or lordship in me, who followed a departing woman (even) 
like a donkey kicked by a she-ass ? (11) What will be gained through worship of gods, 
renunciation, askesis, study of scriptures, solitary life or observing silence by him whose 
heart has been stolen by women ? (12) Fie upon me, a (veritable) fool, though fancying 
myself to be alearned man, who, blind as! am to my own (real) interests, have been enslaved 
by women just like a bull or a donkey, even after attaining sovereignty.(13) Although | have 
been enjoying the inebriating nectar of Urvasi's lips for multitudes of years, my hankering, 
mind-born as it is, knows no satiety any more than fire could be quenched by (pouring) 
oblations (into it).(14) Who else than Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception), the ruler 
of those revelling in the Self, can possibly succeed in reclaiming a mind captivated by a lewd 
woman ? (15) Even though | was admonished by that celestial woman in truthful words 
(finding place in a Vedic hymn), the great infatuation lurking in my mind, perverse of intellect 
and uncontrolled of mind as | am, does not depart. (16) Or what offence could have been 
done by her against us any more than by a rope against a man who, being ignorant of its 
reality, (erroneously) conceived it to be a serpent ? For, (in reality) itis |, whose senses are 
(still) uncontrolled, that stand to blame. (17) How incompatible are this dirty body (of a 
woman), full of bad smell etc., and impure, and the excellences (attributed to it) such as 
fragrance, purity and delicacy etc., (which are generally associated with a flower). It was 
through ignorance as a matter of fact that the aforesaid virtues were wrongly attributed (by 
me) to her body. (18) It cannot be definitely ascertained whether the body (of ahuman being) 
is the property of one’s parents, wife (who provides amenities and enjoyment for it), master 
(employer, if one happens to be a servant) , fire (to which it is ultimately and ordinarily 
consigned at the time of cremation), the dog and the vulture (by which it is consumed in the 
event of its being left undisposed of after death), the soul (tenanting it, which reaps the fruit 
of its actiqns) or its near and dear ones (who befriend and render good offices to it). (19) Man 
gets attached to such an impure body, which has a contemptible end (in that it resolves itself 
into worms if interred, into excreta if devoured by animals and into ashes if cremated), and 
lavishes praise on it in the words "Oh, how delightful is the face of this woman with a shapely 
nose and full of charming smiles !" (20) Howlittle difference is there between those who take 
delight in the body of a woman (which is no more than a mass of skin, flesh, blood, nerves, 
fat, marrow and bones), (on the one hand) and the worms wallowing in ordure, urine and pus 
(on the other)? (21) Therefore, he who is alive to his (own) interests should on no account 
associate even through sight with the fair sex nor with slaves of woman; (for) it is through 
contact of the senses with their objects that the mindis agitated, not otherwise. (22) No (such) 
agitation follows from an unseen or unheard of object; (hence) the mind of a man who does 
not direct his senses towards their objects becomes still and (eventually) gets composed.(23) 
Therefore, one should not associate through the senses with the fair sex nor with those 
devoted to woman; (for) the five senses and the mind do not deserve to be trusted even by 
the wise, much less by (indiscreet) men like me. (24)

MATA TAA 
W Wl Facaea: a sdalielnuet fae 
SAMA aay ai a SONMAfagaare: 1241

Ww 
De 6 We Br Me He We Wee Bi WWOWE Be new X,

he AB. Me Ae tn kh

reesarastat ayer} 
mR . TTA | Cit Heese: Sat Asay ASTAL 1321 
aoe oe Tat Bot aA emt fart Jott tat Gratsate faa sxUNL 133 | 
id eat wait ofetdh: wafer: | 3am area: Gad: Gad Seta A 13¥ 1 
AAARTEA SAATTART lea ay: lOmast agama «= BGI 
Set APE TT ARG TOTS SSAA VSPSSSEMTA: 126 | 
The glorious Lord continued : Singing thus at the top of his voice, the celebrated 
Purdrava (the object of veneration of kings and gods alike) left the realm of Urvasiand, having 
realized Me as his very self (dwelling) in his (own) heart and shaken off, by dint of that 
realization, his delusion (in the shape of identification with the body etc.), retired forthwith 
from the world. (25) Therefore, eschewing evil company, a prudent man should associate 
with the righteous; (for) the latter cut asunder the deep attachment of his mind (for the 
pleasures of sense) by their precepts. (26) The righteous are free from craving (for the 
pleasures of sense), have their mind fixed on Me, are perfectly serene (free from passion), 
view everything alike (as an embodiment of Brahma), are free from the senses of mineness 
as well as from the ego-sense (identification from the body etc.), are unaffected by the pairs 
of opposites and own no property.(27) In the midst of those exceedingly fortunate people, 
O highly blessed Uddhava, My stories are always told—stories that are salutary to mankind 
and eradicate the sin of those that take delight in them. (28) They who listen to them, sing 
them and as a matter of fact heartily approve of them and are respectful towards Me, nay, 
exclusively devoted to Me (expecting no other return) and are full of reverence acquire 
devotion to Me. (29) What else remains to be achieved by the pious soul who has attained 
devotion to Me, endowed with endless virtues (potencies),the (ultimate) Cause of all, the - 
embodiment of (Truth,) Consciousness and Bliss? (30) (Even) as cold, dismay and darkness 
disappear in the case of a man who betakes himself to the glorious Agni (the god of fire), SO 
do the rigidity and obtuseness (born of stern devotion to duty), the fear of future births and 
Its root, ignorance, get dissolved in the case of the man who renders loving service to pious 
Souls. (31) Just as a strong bark is the supreme resort to those that are being drowned in 
Water, noble souls who have realized Brahma and have attained (perfect) peace of mind are 
the highest resort to those who having sunk (once) to the lowest depths are coming (once 
More) to the surface in the ocean of mundane existence. (32) (Just as) food is life itself to 
Nose that breathe, (as) | am the only shelter to the afflicted, and (even as) piety is the (only) 
Wealth for men (to depend upon) in the other world (after death), (So) saints are the (only) 
'esort to him who is afraid of being born (again and again) on this (mortal) plane. (33) eee 
aving fully risen, the sun bestows (on us) the external eye (alone), whereas a mencon a 
©n those enjoying their fellowship) inner eyes (in the shape of SOEs re ae tot ° 
8guna and Nirguna aspects of Brahma). Holy men (therefre) are Selb ah es we 
S one's near and dear ones. They are one's (very) soul (nay,) Myself. ( ) Ri 2 Is hie! 
Of longing for Urvaégi's realm (orsight), and free from (all) attachment due to the fellowship

of saints, Pururava (the son of Sudyumna, who had attained a feminine form under the name 
of Ila alongwith his retinue due to the curse of Goddess Parvati) went about this globe 
revelling in the Self: so the tradition goes. (35)

Thus ends the twenty-sixth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BIg AAfaanseara:

Discourse XXVII 
The Yoga of Formal Worship

SEA SATA 
feat ated AaeNIat WA Asal & AMtdha Aad: Aradssy | g | 
Wie adhd WAM YeM:Aaa AVIA! ARel War ara streaisieta: Ya: | 2 | 
Asgd a Warsiste ace warms: | eal yqqwal eet a Ta Ga: | 3 
Wie a daa aA ama saad wl agent a ame x | 
Wid wmaeaa amdadfadraqiwna aden se fadeari & |

Uddhava submitted : (Pray,) explain (to me) the course of discipline consisting of formal 
worship intended to propitiate You, O Lord, (and) also what type of devotees worship You 
in what manner and from what motive, O Protector of devotees ! (1) Sages such as Narada, 
the divine Vyasa and Brhaspati (Angira's son), the preceptor (of the gods) repeatedly declare 
this (course) as conducive to the highest good of men. (2) It emanated (for the first time) from 
Your lotus-like lips; and (receiving it from You) the divine Brahma taught it to his sons, the 
foremost of whomis Bhrgu, and Lord Siva (the Source of the universe) imparteditto his divine 
Spouse (Goddess Parvati). (3) It is higly commendable for all the (higher) grades of society 
and stages of life and | consider it to be the best of all the courses of discipline conducive to 
blessedness even for womenfolk and Sddras, O Bestower of honour! (4) Explain this course, 
untying (as it does) once for all the bonds of Karma, O lotus-eyed Lord, to me, who stand 
devoted and attached to You, O suzerain Lord (even) of the Rulers of the universe (Brahma,

Siva and so on). (5) 
ATTA FAA 
1 distin pias aeaidiad avifaentt aenaaqgear: 1 & | 
atenentaet fast sf a fae wa: i zeomifteadta fafa at anda © | 
Aq Mirtak fered we Gea: | ae aad Al Uae sage afaaia Al ¢ | 
aia Witeosan at ga ang ge fast selol UHaisdd, TS ANTATAAT 1 et 
Ya GM Yedia adedissaadisuata wa aM wadaneunfeat igo 
TeaReMenAeT Aeateeda 1 Gsta: Headey aees: ariaraey 18 | 
Bet eat Get Sal omen a Mend | wae afore sfaarsfae war ie2!

“s 
a 
i ES Eee

Bt Br Bt Ke Ke Be Kr Be Ke Ke Ke He We Re He He Be He Ke Be Be We He Be Be Ge He

lc dee. SERIE Fe: Ferrera 193 | 
i eae THAR Sot | wafer Ufarstar 1 2X 
wee ) Ihe FT gee wer da fe 184!

aha a ; 
sant ae _ crear werd Tat BU: Yara aisarel a fee Ga: 1221

The Sine egan again : Since there is no end to the branch of the Vedas 
dealing with ritual acts, which is unlimited in scope and infinite in volume, O Uddhava! | shall 
(accordingly) discuss this topic (of Kriyayoga) in a nutshell in order of sequence in its true 
perspective. (6) The procedure of My worship is threefold, viz.,Vedic, Tantika and mixed 
(consisting of both elements). Of the three, one should duly worship Me according to that 
procedure alone which is liked by him. (7) Hear from Me the way in which, having (first) 
attained the status of the twice-born (by getting himself invested with the sacred thread) as 
enjoined by (the part of) the Veda prescribing his duties— when the worshipper happens to 
be a member of the twice-born classes—a man should worship Me with devotion and 
reverence. (8) Full of Devotion he should worship Me, his teacher and father, with the 
requisite material (flowers etc.), with sincerity (lit., guilelessness in the shape of entertaining 
no hope for its reward) in (through the medium of) an image, a raised ground (levelled, 
squared and prepared for a sacrifice) or the sacred fire, the sun, water, (the cavity of) the 
heart or a Brahmana . (9) Having cleansed his teeth (with the end of a small green twig 
crushed with the teeth and converted into a brush), he should first (of all) perform his 
ablutions for the purification of his body. The bath should be repeated with (the utterance of) 
both types of Mantras (Vedic as well as Tantric) after (first) daubing the (whole) body with 
clay (as well as with fresh cowdung, sacrificial ashes and so on) and going through other 
preliminaries (such as invoking the presence of the Ganga and other sacred waters, offering 
Arghya to them and seeking their permission for a bath). (10) Undertaking a noble vow (of 
Propitiating Myself), he should perform My worship, which wipes out (all) Karmas, side by 
Side with (not neglecting) duties (of a binding nature) such as saying the Sandhya prayers, 
(thathave been) enjoined by the Veda. (11) An image has been declared to be of eight kinds 
according as it is carved out of (a block of) stone or wood, made of (molten) metal (such as 
brass or bronze), clay or sandal-paste etc., painted (on a wall etc.),made of sand or carved 
Out of a precious stone or conceived by the mind. (12) Animage, whichis a temple of the Lord, 
Is (again) of two varieties, movable and immovable. (The ceremonies of) invoking the’ 
Presence of or bidding farewell to a deity are not necessary In worship done through the 
medium of an immovable one, O Uddhava ! (13) There is option in the matter of invocation 
etc., in the case of a movable image (otherthana Salagrama stone, where no invocation etc.,

IS Needed); while both must be done in the worship through the medium of a raised ground

(Or through an image of sand). Only an image other than a painted one or that made of clay

Or sandal- be (invariably) bathed; in (all) other cases (mere) sprinkling all 
round i a a ae Baan a My worship through images etc., should be done with 
xcellent articles. In the case, however, of a devotee (who is) free from wiles (in the shape : 
°l a Selfish motive) it may be conducted with articles that are (easily) available. In (the cavity 
01) the heart, of course, worship is offered with love alone. (1 5) (Worship in the form of) bathing 
“Nd (decoration with) ornaments is highly desirable only in an image, O Uddhava; in a raised 
Yfound (of course) the (conceptual) installation of the various deities (viz., the principal Deity 
and His entourage) in their respective place (with the uttering of formulas sacred to each); =

LALLA ALRRLLLALKARLALAALAALLAAOAALALAALA AAR LLL AL LE Be Bee Be Be He BE Br Br Be Be Br Ge He He He He Ge Be Ke He Be Be Br Hr Be Br Br Br Br Ke He Br He Hr hy

in asacred fire, (the offering of) oblations soaked in ghee; in the sun, respect shown (to the sun- 
god in the form of offering Arghya and waiting upon Him with prayers) and in water, worship 
through (gratification by offering) water etc., is considered most desirable. Even water offered 
with reverence by a devotee is most pleasing to Me; how much more, then, are sandal-paste, 
incense, flowers, light and food etc., dear to Me ? On the other hand, anything offered by one 
‘who is not a devotee does not contribute to My pleasure even if it is abundant. (16—18)

Qf: Was: seed: aleaae: | sie: se areata wpa: 12e1 
PIU: HiAMat Real afar yal wot Mave wa amaqrarerdd ol 
dices (ETNA ss Saat Ofer Aloafecdedsdotes Gea 1221 
Ceasar Atfor aterfor fern: | ger siteoriar rae Maan aaa 122 | 
fos anatase eae Wi AA! sedi slamot eeMerd egfaary 123 | 
aaissaua fous ST A Aa: | Stlalelralfey WT ARNE AT WySTaAT 12% | 
PIGIPESEUICAMICIEUCIEIE § Genera | AAs Aa: Heafseaissad AA R&I 
UIases dA civichihaeode| Sua Aadaa Aa qlee 1261 
Gat Uses 9 nedleetemiqae ala aet sad aaa 1201 
Ad Ore WES Waus Busta Bins as da HAE HPACAVML I! 
Mt faa are faq Wed WI | AS SMe aM Gara Maoh: 121 
Having got together (all) requisites (articles of worship etc.), and prepared a seat with 
blades of Darbha grass pointing to the east, and sitting (on it) with his face turned towards 
the east or the north orin front of the image (to be worshipped) inthe event of the latter being 
immovable, and himself pure, the votary should commence worshipping (Me). (19) Having 
consecrated himself (by assigning the various syllables of the Mantra to be used in the 
worship to the different parts of his hand as well as to the limbs of his body), he should gently 
rub the image (with a view to wiping of the coat of sandle-paste etc., on it) when it has been 
similarly consecrated and (then) duly adorn (with sandal-paste and flowers etc.), the pitcher 
(full of water to be used for worship from the’beginning to the end) and the vessel containing 
water for sprinkling (and thereby consecrating) the utensils and articles of worship etc., 
with (20) Consecrating with that water the temple, the articles of worship as well as himself, 
the votary should get ready three vessels (filling them with water taken from the pitcher, and 
providing them) with (necessary) accessories* (for offering Padya, Arghya and Acamaniya, i. e., 
water for washing the feet and hands and rinsing the mouth of the Deity respectively). (21) The 
worshipper should (then) consecrate the said three vessels (containing water) for washing

the feet and hands and rinsing the mouth of the deity by breathing into them the sacred. 
formulas connected with the heart, the head and the tuft of hair on the crown (viz., ‘#¢ 7:’,

*The scriptures dealing with the details of worship lay down thatthe following accessories should be used alongwith water 
when washing the feet and hands and rinsing the mouth of the deity respectively:—

"Grains of Syamaka rice (which are very small as compared to ordinary rice), blades of Dirva (panic grass), lotus flowers, 
a kind of herb called Visnukranta etc., are approved for use with the water intended for washing the feet of the Lord with. Sandal- 
paste, flowers unbroken grains of rice, grains of barley, blades of the sacred KuSa grass, sesamum seeds, mustard seeds and 
blades of panic grass—these eight substances have heen prescribed for being used with the water intended for washing the 
hands of the Deity with; while the water intended for rinsing the mouth of the deity should he accompanied by the nutmeg, cloves, 
berries of Kankola plant etc.”

yi, 27 
is lanusneennannneroeeenennnnnn COOK ELEVEN ; 645

zaret’, ‘ferar4 82") respectively and last Bee thn . S 
Bot) body conceived as dried up by tid qace atri-Mantra (into all). (22) (Then) within

and oe: : 
of Lord Catia of which the Jiva is but a particle, installed on the lotus of the heart and 
contemplated by accomplished souls at the end of Nada (the fifth 
‘sting of 31,3,%, forthe nasa part of the sound of Pranava 
consisting eyne ligt alsoundand=rorthe echo).(23) On his body being permeated 
_ (asa house by the lig t emanating from a lamp) by that subtle form contemplated as his own 
being, he should (first) worship Me in that form(with conceptual articles) and, full of that 
resence, should (then) invoke My presence in the image etc. and, having installed Me there 
and assigned the syllables of the Mantra to the (various) limbs of the image, proceed with 
My worship. (24) Having (mentally) prepared a (high) seat for Me with Dharma etc. (viz., 
Dharma Or Righteousness, Jana or Wisdom, Vairagya or Dispassion and AiSwarya or 
Supremacy for its four feet; Adharma or Unrighteousness, Ajnana or Ignorance, Avairagya or 
Absence of Dispassion and Anaigwarya or Lack of Supremacy for its four sides; and Sattva, 
Rajas and Tamas for the three planks constituting its base) and the nine Saktis or potencies 
(viz., Vimala, Utkarsini, JAana, Kriya, Yoga, Prahvi, Satya, Isana and Anugraha or Purity, 
Exaltation, Wisdom, Activity, Supernatural Power, Humility, Truthfulness, Rulership and 
Graciousness mounted on it) and (mentally) spread on it a lotus of eight petals shining bright 
with its pericarp and filaments (and with the orbs of the sun and other luminaries fixed on it), 
he should (instal Me on it and) Offer to Me (various) articles of worship such as water for washing 
My feet and hands and rinsing My mouth with according to the spirit of the Vedas and the Tantras 
both and with a view to securing both (worldly enjoyment and final beatitude). (25-26) He should 
(further) worship in their order of sequence (the discus) Sudarsana, (the conch named) 
Paficajanya, the mace (Kaumodaki), the sword, the bow and the arrows as well as (the 
emblems of Lord Sankarsana, viz.,) the plough and the pestle in the eight directions and the 
Kaustubha (gem), the (Vaijayanti)garland and (the mark of) Srivatsa (all the three on the 
bosom of the Lord in their respective position).(27) He should (likewise) worship (the eight 
attendants of the Lord, viz.,) Nanda, Sunanda, Pracanda as well as Canda, Mahabala and 
Bala; Kumuda and Kumudeksana (as standing around the Lordin the eight directions) and 
(His carrier) Garuda (as facing the Lord). (28) He should (also) worship, by offering them 
water to wash their hands with and so on, (Goddess) Durga, Vinayaka (Lord GaneSa), (the 
sage) Vyasa and Viswaksena (all these four as surrounding the Lord in the four corners 
. _Intervening the four quarters), his own preceptor (as standing to-His left) and the gods (viz., 
_ the eight guardians of the spheres) each in his relative position (according to the direction 
In which their spheres are located), (all) of course facing the Lord. (29)

weteitendeag areata: laid: amerahaea fava aft 1301 
wulent yarn nerrenfaern | aekonfe Aral STAY TsraTicha: 138 |

aeastaauaaeNTATe: \aregela war Wael At senha 1321 
URE a Tal qadeisaarL! qaataaeraifer pale pea 
Tearereraditer TPMT | AALS I ata 13¥1 
SaS dataset Hoa, \ararenftrqente elfot URaraey 1341

The votary should, if there is (sufficient) wealth, daily bathe Me with water made yess 
Oy Sandal-paste Usira (a kind of aromatic grass), camphor, saffron and aloe-wood, eS tet : 
(all the While) sacred texts such as the Suvarnagharmanuvaka (or Rgveda, COMME GIT Ae —

the words ¥qati sq etc.), the Mahapurusavidya™ (a sacred text sacred to Lord Visnu, the 
_ Supreme Person), the Purusa-SuktaT and the texts of Samaveda such as the Rajana Sama 
and the Rauhina Sama. (30-31) My devotee should (also) lovingly set Me off in the proper 
- way with raiments, the sacred thread, jewels, wreaths of basil leaves, scents and sandal- 
paste. (32) The worshipper should (then) reverently offer to Me water to wash My feet and 
rinse My mouth with, sandal-paste flowers and grains of unbroken rice (for decoration), 
incense, light and articles of food. (33) Ifthere be wealth, one should offer as food (to Me daily 
or at least on festive occasions) jaggery (or sugar), rice boiled in milk and sweetened with 
sugar, ghee; large round cakes of ground rice, sugar and sesamum seeds and cooked in 
oil; piles of sweet cakes made of meal and sugar and fried in ghee; lumps of sweets 
composed of meal cooked in ghee; a kind of porridge made of wheat flour with ghee, milk 
and molasses; curds and seasoned soup of pulses.(34) Offering a brush (made of a small 
green twig with one of its ends crushed) for cleansing My teeth, perfumed oil for anointing 
My body with, a paste (of saffron and camphor powder) for being rubbed on the various parts 
of My body in order to free it from dirt; (bathing My image with.a preparation composed of 
milk, curds, ghee, honey and sugar as well as with scented water; clothing Me with costly-silk 
and adorning Me with jewels, sandal-paste and wreaths etc.), and putting a mirror before Me 
(in order to show Me how 1 look); offering Me food which could be (easily) swallowed (without 
mastication) as well as that needing mastication (together with fragrant water, betel leaves, 
a bed of flowers etc.), and (also) singing songs and dancing etc., should be arranged (at 
least) on a sacred day (e.g., Ekadasi or the full moon), and preferably everyday (if one's 
means allow it). (35)

fate fafed gus AMaermdatett: | stfrena afta: aged afore 136! 
Urea ween amnfater | stawarssare senfer slearat weada ATR! 
AASNACTT Wgaaierds: | odds! Wei valfepsiemaraay 1361 
Unieaiienenanleqaangsey \stamaed wise aaariert 1321 
aaa defer saatweata STII aT SISA ela: 1%o |

Wisaaiaera: | aaiferat aaa wa: fiausra aE: 1sQI

Depositing fire in a sacrificial pit, dug and constructed with due ceremony alongwith 
(three) zone-like constructions, a hollow and a raised ground, one should collect and 
concentrate it with the hand once it has been kindled (by fanning it).(86) Then enclosing it 
on all sides with twenty blades of KuSa grass, one should sprinkle water on the KuSa blades 
all round and, duly replenishing it with fuel while uttering the Vyahrtis (4:, ya: and so on) and 
placing (to the north of the sacred fire) articles to be offered to the fire and sprinkling them 
with water taken from the consecrating vessel, should contemplate Me in the fire as shining 
brightly like molten gold, distinguished by four arms resplendent with a conch, discus, mace 
and lotus, calm (and composed), clad in silk possessing the (golden) hue of the filaments of 
a lotus, adorned with a brilliant diadem, bangles, a girdle (round My waist) and excellent 
armlets, bearing the mark of Srivatsa on My bosom, distinguished with the lustrous 
Kaustubha gem and.with a garland of sylvan flowers. (87—39) Visualizing and worshipping 
Me (as such) and casting (into the fire) sacrificial sticks soaked in ghee and having made 
the two offerings of ghee known by the name of Agharas (and consisting of sprinkling ghee 
across the sacrificial pit from the northern to the southern end and from the southern to the

* fod d Weta Ted faa | Yaar AAKISeY AEETyaS II 
T The 16 Mantras of Rgveda. X. xc; Atharva. XIX. vi; the first 16 Mantras of Sukla Yajurveda XXXI and Krsna Yajurveda 
Ill. xii; Samaveda 617—621

‘uttering the fundamental Man

pis. 27 |

WWE BE ORE WERE BORER Be We we wy BOOK 
gtr tee PSE SES Bee a a ae etttnsnananeasnwe essen doe canteasny ch base 
We We Be Ke Ge He He He He He Ve Be He He Ge Be Sr 
northern end, uttering the formulas: 
py the name of Ajyabhagas (and c 
‘ormulas ‘374 tater’ and ‘arena

Snelstineatiee ‘Ta EaeT) and two (more) offerings known 
el’ re Ng Of pouring ghee into the sacred fire uttering the 
er. ePetlively), should offer oblations soaked in ghee,

tra (3% >a AT) and th 
en + nti ; én the hymn known by the name of 
purusa-Sukta (consisting of sixteen Mantr as); taking a fresh oblation (ina imited quantity

with every utterance). The knowing devotee should (further) offer oblations (through the fire) 
to Dharma and others In the order mentioned before (in verse 25 above), uttering the name 
of the deity with the Indeclinable "Swaha" added to it and (then) the oblation Known as 
"Swistakrt" (which Is offered at the end of a sacrifice with the formula ‘ama feeqa caret’ and 
is so-called because it is believed to turn the Sacrifice into a success). (40-41)

ceIssaTSt faq 9 aerk ead Wr Agee 13 | 
SoTL TO, FR Hava AH | HREM: gre ARE arforat TAL SY | 
waved: eit: ahr: spatter veite Waa aed Sa Ive | 
fart Ace: HAT aA A ALI sot Ue uni etd WeEtaM iwEt 
git et AT eat RTA AECL seEaaegel SAR a Ua: Ise 
sated el BA Mel At aa urdaaiadyages a walanenafera: vc!

Having worshipped Me (as indwelling the fire) and saluted Me, the votary should offer 
oblations (in the eight directions) to My attendants (Nanda and others, mentioned in verse 
28 above) and (then returning to the place of worship and taking his seat before Me), should 
repeat the Mula (principal) Mantra (as long as possible), contemplating (all the while) on the 
Infinite in the form of Lord Narayana. (42)(Then, visualizing Me as having finished My dinner 
inthe meantime,) he should offer water (to Me) for rinsing My mouth with and (again inviting 
Me back to My seat) should make over the remnants to Viswaksena (the foremost attendant 
to the Lord). (Again,) offering betel-leaves etc., containing aromatic substances, intended to 
perfume the mouth, he should then conclude the worship (by showering on Me flowers 
placed in the hollow of one's joined palms). (43) (Then) celebrating, recounting and 
dramatically representing My exploits, dancing (out of joy while doing so) and narrating or 
listening to My stories, one should remain immersed in joy awhile. (44) Glorifying Me through 
long or short hymns found in ancient works (such as the Vedas and Puranas) as well as 
through those composed by human beings, and praying in the words "Be pleased, O Lord !" 
he should salute Me falling flat (on the ground) like a log, placing his head at My feet and with 
his arms joined together (at his back after the fashion of a criminal) and saying, “O Lord, 
Protect me, afraid (as | am) of the ocean of worldly existence rendered all the more fearful 
by the presence of the alligator in the shape of death, and (as such) come to You (for 
Protection)." (45-46) Praying thus he should respectfully place on his head as if given by Me 
the flowers etc. offered to Me and in case he must send back the deity (from the image in 
the event of its being intended for temporary worship); the (divine) effulgence invoked into

€ image should be drawn back (from it and merged) into the (divine) flame burning in the 
Olus of the heart (and the image deposited into some holy tank or river).(47) One can worship

© through whichever of the media (enumerated in verse 9 above), e. g., an image, he 
Onceives a reverence for ona particular occasion; for, being the Soul of the universe. | dwell 
IN all Created beings as well as in the self (of the worshipper himself). (48)

Wa firearm: Anenahad: | ardguad: fate wet feracrsititrary 1st 
Teal oafrsre oh erage FEL! Tear TeUfoT Ysera SAL | ko |

We We We We Be Me We Be He Ree Re Ree ee Ree Re RB eR eee REE ee Me Mee He ee Bee He He He ee eM Be We We He Me We We We We ewe We we Sewer 
— —— = ay a a as mal

Usialat «= NateTea$ Ss HeTUdaeTaert ATI, aa eT Parftrare 142 |

wheat | aes CRT | Gee Gotfe selole fafsdcaraanfrard 142 |

amma amet Nima fae afeari a oa Wl a: GMa AMLI43 |

q: edt uted wma atasa:i af a aad faeq aaionmagaaa ius!

TE aRaeaaAada all cadort Mfrs: Ser ea a ALA 1 
Sa SAP Taa ASN GRAS SlearaAcHeareHel TAaans ea: 129 |

Worshipping Me as aforesaid in accordance with the courses of worship taught in the

Vedas as also in the Tantras, a man secures at My hands success of the kind coveted by 
him both here and hereafter. (49) One (who can afford to do so) should cause a strong

(enduring) house of worship to be built and, having duly installed My image (in it), should 
(further) cause beautiful flower-gardens to be laid out and make a (formal) grant (in favour

of the temple) of fields, markets, towns or villages helpful for the (daily) worship, (occasional) 
congregations (on sacred days) and festivals. Granting these for the regular (and uninterrupted)

conduct of worship etc., from day to day as well as on specially sacred days, one bids fair 
to enjoy a fortune as great as Mine. (50-51) Through installation (of an image) one bids fair 
to acquire sovereignty of the entire globe; by erecting a temple he is sure to attain dominion 
of (all) the three worlds; through worship etc., one can hope to reach the realm of Brahma 
and through all these three (combined) one can attain a state of equality with Me. (52) He 
who worships Me as aforesaid secures union (in thought with Me) through Devotion and 
through (such) course of disinterested Devotion one attains to Me alone. (53) He who takes 
away the endowment made either by himself or by others in favour of (the image of) a deity or 
a Brahmana continues for ten crores of years to be born as a creature living on ordure. (54) 
such a destiny (whether good or bad as depicted in verses 49 to 54 above) awaits hereafter 
the agent as well as his assistant, prompter and supporter too, since each (of them) is a 
partner in the act; and the reward or punishment is greater according as the action is more

dignified or atrocious.(55)

Thus ends the twenty-seventh discourse in Book Eleven of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CO | TSTaran sear:

Discourse XXVIII 
The Highest Truth Discussed 
ATTA Tara | 
UMaManaie A wlaa Wad! faqteiaih Gea Hal Feat ai 2 
GMa a: seta freftia sma wead eialaaatitraara: | 2 | 
asa fasaissaa fuse apaaa: | Aral sisifa Yai al daamiede Gar! 2 | 
fe va feans a daenaga: feadiarifed dag waa emma al x |

ee ee ee =~ _—

ges ee

area vies feet Gat gat wy: aaa aft fea feat ecitee 1 <1

Ta GeMISTeTE oat Prefer: | fretted fen Gefen onProar 
$e Tora fats fafaet aren a1 9

we eM Aged wafeargor a Pref aa eitft ote arf aa ct

TARGA Frrrenifee | srerraqegient Fast fete 1 <1

The glorious Lord began again: Visualizing the universe—though brought about by 
(the co-operation of) Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit)—as one in substance (as a 
manifestation of Brahma or the Absolute), one should neither praise nor condemn the 
(tranquil, vehement or torpid) nature and (corresponding) actions of others. (1) He who 
eulogizes or denounces the natural bent of mind and actions of others quickly strays from 
his (real) purpose (of Self-Knowledge) on account of his clinging to duality (which is 
unreal).(2) On the senses (evolved from the Rajasika ego) being overpowered with sleep the 
soul imprisoned in the body enters the realm of Maya (illusion in the shape of the dream state 
in the event of the mind continuing to function) and having lost its consciousness (of the body 
and its surroundings later on when the mind too becomes torpid) reaches the state of deep 
sleep (which has been likened to death). So does the man perceiving many things (instead 
of the one real substance) experience distraction on coming in contact with the pleasures of 
sense and later on finds himself sunk into the depths of ignorance). (3) In the midst of duality, 
which is unreal (the question does not arise) what is good (praiseworthy) and what is evil 
(deprecable) and to what extent a (particular) thing is good or bad; (for) whatever is 
expressed through word (i.e., whatever is grasped through the senses) as well as whatever 
is contemplated with the mind is false. (4) A reflection, an echo and an illusory object (such 
as a mother of pearl presenting the appearance of silver), though unreal, react on us (as 
though they were real). So do the body and other entities (continue to) inspire fear till they 
disappear (into their one substratum, viz., Brahma). (5) Therefore, this universe is (no other 
than) the (Supreme) Spirit, inasmuch as It is capable of assuming all forms and almighty 
(capable of evolving everything). It is that (Universal) Spirit (alone) which creates and is 
created, protects and is protected, destroys and is destroyed. (Itis both the subject and the 
Object). (6) Therefore, no entity other than the Self existing apart from that which is created 
and so on has been posited (by the Vedas).This threefold appearance (in the shape of 
creation, continuance and destruction of the universe) in the Self has been declared (by the 
wise) as baseless. Know the threefold existence (in the shape of the perceiver, the perceived 
and the act of perception), being a product of the three Gunas, as brought about by Maya

My deluding potency) . (7) He who comes to know (whatis meant by) this ripeness of Jnana 
and VijAana as taught by Me would neither extol nor revile anyone and would move about 
inthe world (free from partiality and prejudice) as the sun. (8) Realizing this world as having 
2 beginning and an end and (therefore) unreal (when conceived as apart from the Spirit) by 
means of perception, inference, the authority of the scriptures and one's own direct 
©xPerience, one should move about in this world unattached.(9)

IGq Sara 
Taerit = lee dafdeaeaat: israel HEL MQ 1201 
SITs: Be: awadlearaga: | sifveterectatetes: mee aaa: 192!

—_- =” 
POET Ee Se ORE

Uddhava submitted: Transmigration (or in other words, the experience of pleasure and 
pain etc.), is undergone neither by the soul, who is the perceiver and therefore self-luminous, 
nor by the body, which is the object of perception and therefore other than the Self. (All the 
same) itis experienced, O Lord! (The question, therefore, arises:) by whom is it undergone ? (10) 
The soul is undecaying, unqualified, free from impurities, self-effulgent like fire and 
unobscured (by the evil of Avidya or nescience) while the body is material like wood. 
(Therefore,) which (of the two) undergoes transmigration ? (11)

STAT TATA

qaq rehier: aaetwmidar: wedtreaqnetsatadies: 1221 
af «6 giammst dead faddi ead fase aasqaiat aa 123 
am wife sam saeqtyqia wa siaqae A a Alea acu lev 
BMenee vahl ele AAS STaa: SEERA GVA WA AYA A: 1eut

Gi Udtaeda Wa: aR sarenait clerda: 1261

Wearfaaranasrar Racakescar aft faaAGU: 1291

we fadant Perea TATA GAA |

am feud wad em Us ade feunae |

qaqa 8wa 8 60oaagdamt «= aac ALI NO

faarradthaaaens Tura aUlchlaead |

aaa == Afcitendd wa qu da AAAI!

a a Wetet Ga ust aA qa aac

YI wag A WT aq ad dca ad Siiela A ate 12g

sferisaaarad a anit wreath wa:

Hal aeattarar faxnta Farsaaiatacnfaay 122 |

Wa Be sealfacdcedih: Uae farines |

feraisseeedanad Mirrequishamantgqened: 1231

ae = a: uldamrsatt ar Gaalasics Geral: |

Tisama fas a cetegiat: a farferrefarar 12x

aoe: m: aei@rfonefiefon svaricafafamens: |

fafaemitea fe yz gat ureddfdmd wa: feieul

aa amt areata etartdadurt asta |

qmat uaaterimer wa: wafredit: aia!

a ae: ufaddtay Wr waanfaag arc

“Tekhat eat aaa wit fread aaa: 1201

The glorious Lord replied : So long as there is contact of the undiscriminating soul with

| bell

'

<r ) En

"wwameseFfkf

is. 28 J | 
Dic narsnsrsen seat —s_s sonunensnnensnnnean ne tise EN cnensonneecs, 651 
the body, senses and vital airs metempsych etree ete es

leasure and pain), even though ithas no gall 
of the various bodies) do not exist (inthe Self 
of pleasure and pain) does not cease in the 
of the objects of senses, even as calamities 
so long as the dream is not broken, altho

OSIS continues ‘to bear fruit (in the shape of 
Bae! Even though phenomena (in the shape 
- S86 Bite (consisting in the experience 
aaerck e embodied soul.continuing to think 
) as ah Hannes to afflict a man in the dream state 
appearing In the dream) do not (actually) exist aaa seentin it (ee ea aay 
many a woe to aman who has not yet woken—whil ) Just as the dream experience brings 
who has woken up—so what brings sorrow to th Hetil tanicn Meee UCM Cee an 
Grief, delight, fear, anger, greed, infatuation : rate does not afflict a wise man. (14) 
death are seen in relation to the ego and aaa and other moods as well as birth and 
body, the senses, the vital airs and the mind i the Self. (15) The spirit hidden behind the 
The subtle body (constituted of the Gunas ate pest ieee itself with them is called the Jiva. 
variously known as the Sutratma or the Mahat-t ees i manestaleh Sule 
Time-Spirit), it revolves in Samsara (the whirli attva. Controlled by God (in the form of the 
Wer tg sword of wisderiewhEnealD te patel of metempsychosis). (16) Cutting down 
Meee cotand (yet) Sao y orship (of God), this (tree of the) ego-sense—which 
Paiigevetc.), and/ls/ éntedainealif i multitudinous forms (such as those of gods, human 
contemplative soul roams about on Hee to the mindy: speech, Via ae ele a 
sense). (17) Wisdom consists in dstindletine Sent ba Nah ie 4 y pleds teas 
Vedas and askesis (in the shape of discharging one's own sacred obligat nah the ace 
PREY 5: : gations), the teachings

Ay eat pore bas eae with those teachings) and one’s own culate 
Niscriminating ea, A 4 e two) constitute the means to (the attainment of) such 
Bits atthe heats oes nd such discrimination results in the conviction that what alone 
Sena eek Dae of creation and will survive at the end of it exists in the middle as well 
FalWeb\wrou nae the revealer as well as the cause of the universe. (18) (Even) as gold 
Ree erelith 2 into various beautiful shapes (as ornaments), which existed before as well 
a eries(oa ats eee of it, is the same even at the middle, while itis being called by different 
Perutvor r-ring, bangle and so on), SO do| (the Cause of the universe) exist before and after 
Cae se and am designated by different names even at the middle. (In other words, the 
are an no way other than Me.)(19) That (one substance, viz., Brahma) alone is real, 
ianao 0 which—the fourth principle (consisting of absolute Consciousness)—O dear 
ine xe this mind subject to its three states (viz., waking, dream and deep slumber), the 
iriver unas or modes of Prakrti (which bring about the three states) as well as the threefold 
Adhi Se (consisting of the cause, viz., the Adhyatma or the senses, the effect, viz., the 
Sasi uta or the five elements —earth etc., and the agent, viz., the Adhidaiva or the gods 
SACI over the Indriyas) appear through invariable concomitance, and which substance 
tha:st y) persists even when this threefold distinction disappears (viz., during Samadhi or 
Baal of absorption).(20) That (on the other hand) which neither existed before nor will 
aa after (viz.,the manifest creation) does not (really) exist even in the middle except in 
lear alone. An effect is the same as that other substance (viz., the cause) through which 
mod; ie Into being and by which tt stands revealed: such is My conviction.(21) This world of 
ie ee though it did not exist (before), has evolved from Brahma through Rajas and 
6 xr ed (also) by Brahma, which (on the ot us 
eee of any other cause) and the revealer (too). (Therefore) itis Brahma (alone) which 
(the Sik as this diversified universe, consisting (as it does) of the senses and their objects 
tle elements), the mind (including the gods presiding over the senses and the mind)

the five gross elements. (22

her hand) is the cause of all by itself (and not —

) Resolving one's doubts concerning the Self by the Saat

We We We We We Me We We Be We Be We Br Sr Wr Hr Wr Ar Wr Be Hr Mr Hr We Br He Be Ke He Mer We We We ee ee eee eee ee ee eee ee Wee eee eee eee Be We Ke We We We Hr We Hee ¥, 
a Enna etLatatarrssssee eee eee ieee os,

aforesaid means of clearly distinguishing Brahma (vide verse 18 above) and by rejecting the 
possibility of the body etc., (which are other than the Self) being recognized as the Self and 
by the grace of a wise preceptor, and sated with the bliss of Self-Realization, one should 
dissociate oneself from all the senses etc., (thirsting after enjoyment). (23) Indeed the body, 
(which is) a product of the earth, the senses, the deities presiding over them, life-breath, the 
air, water, fire and the mind, which is sustained by food, reason and the intellect, the ego, 
ether, earth, the (five) objects of the senses and Prakrti (the state of equilibrium of the three 
Gunas) are not the Self (since they are all material). (24) What gain can there be to him who 
has fully realized My Truth through his senses, made up of the three Gunas, being composed 
or, say, what harm can befall him through his senses being tossed about ? What gain or loss 
can accrue to the sun through the clouds having gathered about it or dispersed ? (25) (Even) 
as the sky is not affected by the (drying, burning, drenching and soiling) properties of the air, 
fire, water and earth or by the peculiarities, that come and go, of the various seasons, so the 
transcendent Indestructible is never contaminated by the impurities (impure tendencies and 
actions) of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, which bring about the transmigration of one who looks 
upon the body as his self. (26) All the same attachment to the pleasures of sense, which are 
the creations of Maya (Prakrti) should be completely eschewed until the impurity attaching 
to the mind in the form of passion is shaken off through the intense practice of Devotion. (27)

aqissaismeafateniadt = At UA: wa: Uadelt ole!

Wi waiscenneted pat fae adasirc

Sarr a fafearradgeayathaeenrge: |

qd Skeeter Wa gaha at A gq Mada

ait ame fad a sq: carat alfeq sift

a wa fae sent feristt faagm: wmqamyen zo

fasta Aste Way ard daa |

MMA eaaea aaa eras ad 1321

ae ww wwacdetrdt aaaaRa faegnat

I Wad aad wit wm aelena fates

Wi Teta TurendeaaagaeraaeAS |

adit dq umteda a yaad ata fag semis

am fe wie yaa att frexra a aa far

wa anter fam adt 2 waist ger aa: 13x

wa AAAS SAAT Terayla: AHorduld: |

Unistediat ada fart aaa anreaastai3ul

(Just) as a disease in men sprouts again and again, if treated improperly, and causes much 
pain, so does the mind whose passions and (the latencies of) Karma to which they are traceable 
have not been burnt and which has conceived an attachment for all (wealth, sons, wife and so 
on) brings about the fall of one who has not attained perfection in Yoga (wisdom). (28) Those 
imperfect Yogis who are (thus) frustrated by (living) impediments in the form of human 
beings (such as wife and sons, kinsfolk and disciples) placed by the gods take once more

to (the practice of) Yoga, by force of the habit acquired in previous births, but never to the

elaborate course of action. (29) Impelled by some agency (the Inner Controller or force of

destiny Sh eaapeae ce man performs actions till his death and is subjected to. joy and 
sorrow Seni . oe aeaee thereby).The enlightened soul (however) is not so 
subjected, g in the body (a product of Matter), his thirst (for the pleasures of

sense) having ceased due to his enjoying the bliss of Self-Realization (and hence does not

undergo transmigation through performing actions all his life). (30) He whose mind is fixed

on the Self is not aware of the body whether it is Standing or sitting, walking or lying down, 
answering the calls of nature or masticating food or pursuing any other natural activity. (31) 
if at all a man of wisdom perceives the various objects of his extroverted senses, he does 
not recognize as real anything other than the Self—for such a thing would be contrary to 
reason — any more than aman rising from sleep recognizes as real an object seenina dream 
and as such vanishing. (32) This psycho-physical organism (a product of ignorance), 
wonderfully wrought by the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and Karmas (conforming to those 
Gunas), which was formerly (in the state of bondage) perceived as non-distinct from the Self, 
O dear Uddhava, now disappears in the light of Self-Knowledge. The Self (however) can 
neither be apprehended nor rejected. (33) Justas the emergence of the sun (only) disperses 
the darkness screening the human eyes, but does not create (anew) what has already been 
there, so My consummate and true realization dispels the darkness enveloping the mind of 
man. (34) The Self is never hidden from our view (but ever directly perceptible). It is self- 
luminous, beyond birth (and death etc.), beyond all proof, unlimited in point of time and space 
etc. (and therefore beyond all change), comprising all sorts of experiences, and remaining 
one (without a second) when all words cease to describe it. Soeech and the senses function 
(only) when impelled by It.(35)

Wariner aa fameug chacii sietgd waraaens a ae fe 13e! 
qari ahsatel yan | asareaareisa gat USsdaiany 131 
The notion of difference in the absolute Self is entirely a delusion of the mind; for other 
than one's own self there is no ground for this difference. (36) The view of some self-

conceited men that the duality (in the form of the body etc.), perceptible (with the senses) in 
the form of (so many) names and forms and consisting of the five (gross) elements cannot

be refuted is a meaningless tall talk. (37) 
Witriscparrea ged: art sted: | sretideta dat fafedt fafa: 13¢1 
ORTEMUTaT wiertatunbas: | aerated: aifagranty fader i3e¢t 
Hlsraaqear anragtdatets: | area at gala HaSSt: 1X0 | 
chfee defini ef: qaed aafe fe! fares fafastorra gaia facet xe 
7 fe aa qarenael dalarel waieien: | SieteraT HET Wed AAA: sz 
ah faadl fret pragda aerated | eae ATA SETA AE: 183 | 
areal at free vue ardedt ewe: BTA y sv!

t achieved perfection in Yoga and who is still striving 
ts etc.), appearing all of a sudden, the following is 
Id get rid of some obstacles (such as heat and cold) 
moon and the sun), others (viz., flatulence and

IS patie body of a Yogi who has not ye 
Dee by (Some) calamities (ailmen 
thro “ribed as a remedy. (38) One shou 
Oth vgn Yogic concentration (severally on the

@r ailments) by means of Yogic postures 4

ccompanied by concentration on the airand

—_— ee OS Se

: 
: 
: 
|

still others (viz., those brought about by evil stars and snakes etc.), through askesis (self- 
denial), spells and drugs (as required). (39) Some obstacles (such as lust and anger) yielding 
evil results one should gradually get over through continued contemplation on Me, by loudly 
chanting the Divine Names and so on, and still others (such as hypocrisy and pride) by 
waiting upon masters of Yoga. (40) Some men, having controlled their senses and made 
their living body exceptionally strong (proof against disease and old age) and ever young by 
various means, take to the practice of Yoga for the attainment of mystic powers (such as 
transferring one's soul toa dead body and tenanting it). (41) Thatis (however) not to be made 
much of by the wise; for the pains taken over such a consummation are futile inasmuch as 
the body (after all) is perishable like the fruit of a tree (and might drop any moment). (42) 
(Even) if the body of a man ever diligently practising Yoga attains exceptional fitness, a wise 
man should not lay much store by such fitness, discontinuing the (practice of) Yoga; he 
should (on the other hand) remain devoted to Me.(43) The Yogi who, depending on Me, 
diligently carries on the aforesaid practice of Yoga is not baffled by obstacles; he is (on the 
other hana) rid of all hankerings and enjoys the bliss of Self-Realization. (44)

Thus ends the twenty-eighth discourse in Book Eleven of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
! as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PID OISSESS

SINHA Sea:

Discourse XXIX

Courses of conduct pleasing to the Lord; Uddhava's 
departure for BadarikaSrama

SEI SAA 
Pesiaat ae ATTA: | Seraen Ga fea aa ESTA | 2 
ae: Quetta Gerd ath wa: | fastewreearaataaea fata: ten 
Aad 8 Wage Uae 8 86eal: Malar | 
Ga 3 fate amedteameat fae a ofa: 3 | 
fe ferret dade aedyqaey seer 
WN, We Wt: arian sitafdeaedifsauredta: 1 x | 
a ciaemeaiaaia waiie wpatae frgad at yi 
cal at tste fenata faeqasy yet fee at waa da Ulewsteyat a: 1 & I 
Ararat eeaea se paste: MCA: | 
Asidieeayayd fapanaddaac wat aah & | 
Uddhava submitted: | consider this Yogic discipline extremely hard to practise for one 
who has not been able to control his mind. (Therefore, pray) tell me explicitly, O immortal

Lord, the means by which a man may easily attain perfection.(1) Yogis (strivers) trying to curp 
their mind, O lotus-eyed Lord, get tired in their attempt to control it and often feel frustrate?

because of their not being able to compose it. (2) It is for this very reason that men who are 
capable of distinguishing the substantial from the unsubstantial easily and definitely resort 
to Your lotus-feet, yielding (the nectar of) supreme bliss, O lotus-eyed Lord of the universe! 
Handicapped (however) are they by Your Maya (deluding potency), who, being proud of their 
Self-Knowledge and (knowledge of) ritual acts, do not (So) resort to You. (3) That You should 
be subject to the will of Your servants (devotees) that are exclusively devoted to You, O 
Befriender of all, Is no wonder for You, O immortal Lord ! who found delight in the company 
of animals (monkeys etc.,in Your descent as Sri Rama as well as in Your infantile sports at 
Vrindabana), even though Your very footstool is (ever and anon) rubbed by the end of the 
brilliant diadems of Brahma and others (the rulers of the world)! (4) What man who is 
conscious of good offices done (by you) to Your devotees (in the past) can possibly turn his 
back on You as aforesaid, the Ruler and the Beloved, (nay,) the very Self of the entire 
creation, who bestow all desired boons upon those that have sought shelter with You ? What 
(knowing) man will as a matter of fact go in for something (other than You, even though gifted 
by You,) which is conducive to good fortune (alone) and later on, to forgetfulness (about You) ? 
What good fortune will not attend on us, who take delight in the dust of Your feet ? (5) (Even) 
enlightened souls cannot get square with You, O Lord! even through the span of life allotted 
to Brahma (viz., 31,10,40,00,00,00,000 years) and feel overjoyed while recalling Your 
obligations; for (they know that) appearing in the form of the preceptor outside and in the form 
of the Inner Controller within (their heart) it is You who drive away the sin (and impurities) of 
embodied souls and reveal Your true nature (to them).(6)

Tatar Sateen SITE ase: 119 | 
Sri Suka began again: Questioned thus by Uddhava, whose mind was excessively 
devoted to Him, Sri Krsna (the suzerain Lord even of Brahma and others, the rulers of the 
universe), who, having assumed three forms (under the names of Brahma, Visnu and Siva) 
through His own potencies (in the shape of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas), toys with the world, 
lovingly spoke (as follows) with a soul-ravishing smile (on His lips). (7)

MATA TAT 
ed a mefrentt aq wah Wager! apegaissae Aa Wat Stata gst | C1 
Hala Baler Halfer weet een: WL! Adasen Tega: 1 et 
CI Wasa ah: Sala: Brea! carga Hahladt a 120] 
UIE TT a Hel UdaAMeleaM | Hae «= heargqeretertstiayiaisy: 1221 
ama aaa Sega | SAMA A AMT AACR: 1221 
sit wali amit aad ele) Aa AA A acid: 1231 
WTI ua BA newash wplogad amt Heh da Arey Aled Aa: 1g¥! 
Wysiest werd dat waadshd! watgaiaea: Meg faaha te 1x4! 
qua Sa BA Set Atel a Shaw! TAG, qUSae_ YHA TAT, 1 2G | 
Te, aly wg wall aomadi macaquetd = areraearaghaty: 121 
Wa see dae fernssaraataan | uaz aA, Gadt Wma: 1221 
3a fe adencaml uillatat Adl AA! Fala: Baye Aalcenraghafa: 12¢1

Be Re Re Re Re Re eRe Re eRe Be Re AT Re Me Ree Be Re Re Re A Re RY AT AY Re AY Ay Be We Me Be Me Me Be My Be Be He Be Be Me Be Me Hee we We Be Ke Be Ke He We He we Br He We We Ke Be Ke Ke Ke Ke He He He Kehr 4; 
Neen ne ee enn TEESE Eat ce ee] eee ee eso

q deusdt wet veteleanattina aafea: aeefrturaeras 1201 
at a ala ut edt: aoad femora aq aera feel: ee wareRa Way i221 
Ua aie aheddtar a aaifeoriad aarddte Hel ATA 1221

The glorious Lord said: Hullo ! | shall tell you the most auspicious courses of conduct 
pleasing to Me, following which with reverence a mortal conquers death, which is so difficult 
to conquer.(8) With mind and intellect dedicated to Me and his mind and soul finding delight 
in the courses of conduct pleasing to Me, aman should gradually (learn to) perform allactions 
for My sake, remembering Me (all the while). (9) He should take up his abode in holy lands 
inhabited by pious men devoted to Me and follow the conduct of my devotees among the 
gods, demons and human beings. (10) He should arrange (either) individually or collectively 
in My honour on sacred days (such as Ekadasi) processions and great festivities alongwith 
songs, dances eic., spending large sums of money on a monarchical scale. (11) Pure of 
mind, he should behold Me alone, the Supreme Self, as pervading within as well as without 
and unconditioned as the sky in all created beings as also in his own self. (12) He who, 
embracing thus the point of view of Self-Knowledge alone, regards all created beings as 
identical with Me, O highly enlightened one, and honours them as such, (nay,) who looks with 
an equal eye upon a Brahmana and a low-born individual, a thief and a devotee of 
Brahmanas, the sun and a spark, a tender-hearted and a cruel man is accounted wise. (13-14) 
(The spirit of) rivalry (withequals), fault-finding (with one's superiors) and contempt (for one's 
inferiors) coupled with self-conceit surely disappear before long from the mind of a man 
incessantly (engaged in) looking upon men and women as (no other than) Myself. (15) 
Ignoring his own people (even) if they laugh at him and giving up the body-consciousness

(as a result of which one comes to regard oneself as superior and the low-born and animals 
etc., as inferior to one’s own Self) and casting to the winds (all sense of) shame, he should 
bow low to all down to a dog, a pariah, a cow and a donkey, falling flat on the ground like a 
log of wood. (16) Until the conviction about all created beings being identical with Myself gets 
rooted in him, he should worship Me in the aforesaid manner through the active agency of 
his speech, mind and body. (17) Everything is reduced to Brahma (the Absolute) in his eyes. 
(And) seeing Brahma (and Brahma alone) everywhere by virtue of knowledge (raised to the 
level of realization) gained by looking upon everything as Brahma, and freed from all doubts, 
he should cease from all activity. (18) Looking upon all created beings as Myself through the 
active agency of mind, speech and body—this indeed is considered by Me to be the best of 
all disciplines (conducive to My realization). (19) There is no (fear of) loss in the least degree 
of this course of conduct in the form of My worship, O dear Uddhava, once it has been taken 
up (in right earnest), because it is free from (all) craving and since it has been deliberately 
determined by Me, unaffected as it is by the (three) Gunas. (20) (Nay,) whatever worldly 
exertion, though fruitless (e.g., the act of fleeing and crying through fear etc.), yet dedicated 
ina disinterested spirit to Me, the Supreme, is exalted to the level of Dharma (righteousness), 
O most pious Uddhava ! (21) Here lies the wisdom of the wise, (nay,) the cleverness of the 
clever consists in this (alone) that one attains in this (very) life to Me, the (only) immortal and 
real substance, through this bogus and mortal frame. (22)

Wa dstifed: etl aaa dese: | aaenrafataa garaf ata: 1231 
ataered tet am faepahkeadi ue faq geld geet apeera: 12x! 
Gates da sa wade adalat sere ut wenfemresfa iui 
T UrAA AY AEN GAH ARTS | ARISTA SETA 126 | 
a Ue, aaetdia wet wei yaria yaereent wrdtta aaa!

————— = —— -—-— = —-———“‘—OO—SS

-

get CIE ec He 9 Tew we

uiafeidara |= tevaTa rary A | Slee Wares Fale UH: MPRAAAPL 132 | 
TAG, oy Way ude arafererd 1321 
wa cata 4 Salat eset | qari quit ara araiesé wafer: 1331

wet alo eRnEmETeat | fate fafeetidt a 
wage = Sie Ome Sa TCis« BI

The aforesaid teaching covers the entire range of Vedantic teaching, which has been 
taught by Me to you in a nutshell or in extenso, (as necessary) and which is (so) difficult to 
grasp even for the gods. (23) Repeatedly has this Knowledge (of Truth) been expounded by 
Me in a very lucid and reasoned way. Having grasped it fully a man will have (all) his doubts 
dispelled and bids fair to get liberated.(24) (Nay,) he who treasures (in his mind) this question 
of yours as well as this discourse containing my reply (to it) will realize the everlasting 
transcendent Brahma, thatlies hidden in the Vedas.(25) (Again,) | shall voluntarily confer My 
own Self on that teacher of Brahma who imparts this knowledge to My devotees most 
extensively. (26) He who repeats aloud in an intelligent way this most sacred teaching (of 
Mine). which is capable of sanctifying others (too), will get purified in that he will be revealing 
Me day to day (to others) by the lamp of wisdom.(27) A man who attentively listens to this 
(dialogue) with reverence from day to day will be practising (in effect) supreme devotion to 
Me and will not be bound by actions. (28) | hope, O Uddhava, my friend, (the true nature of) 
Brahma has heen fully understood by you; | presume also that your mind-born infatuation 
and grief too has totally disappeared. (29) Let this teaching (of Mine) not be imparted by you 
to a hypocrite, an unbeliever, a cheat, an irreverent listener, one who is not a devotee and 
to an insolent person. (30) One should speak about it to him who is utterly devoid of the 
aforementioned faults, to a devotee of the Brahmanas, to one's (own) favourite, to a pious 
and holy man, (nay, even) to the Sudras and womenfolk if there is Devotion in them. (31) 
Nothing remains to be known by a seeker of Knowledge after knowing this, (just as) nothing 
remains to be quaffed after taking a draught of the immortalizing nectar. (32) To (devotees 
like) you, O dear Uddhava, | (Myself) cover the entire range of the fourfold object (of human 
Pursuit), whichis (partially) attained by men (in the shape of, say, final beatitude) through self- 
knowledge, (Dharma or religious merit) through (the performance of prescribed) duty, 
(mystic bowers included under the category of Kama or enjoyment) through (the practice of) 
"Oga, (Wealth) through (the pursuit of) agriculture etc., (the vocation of a Vaisya), and 
\Gominion, also included in the category of enjoyment) through the wielding of a sceptre (a 
Symbol of ruling power). (33) When, having relinquished all duties, a mortal dedicates himself

©, he is chosen by Me as an object of special favour; and, attaining immortality, he then 
9&ts qualified in reality for becoming one with Me (or acquiring divine powers). (34) 
Sad

Fara | 
Serer) «= aSCCnfgetoaafegama: 124

es 5 dao We AAA: I 
bee Be ati afte WAAAUTarear 135 |

Sri Suka went on: Hearing the discourse of Sri Krsna of excellent renown, Uddhava, 
who had thus been shown the path of Yoga (union with the Lord), stood with joined palms, 
his eyes overflowing with tears, and could not at that time utter a word (in return) as his 
throat was choked with emotion. (35) Controlling his mind, agitated through affection, by 
firmness, O king, and accounting himself blessed, he (now) replied (as follows) to Sri 
Krsna (the greatest hero among the Yadus) with joined palms, touching His lotus- feet with 
his head. (36)

SEA SATA 
fastadt wedeeent a sit A daa aed 
famam: fe 3 adam ed aat Were 1301 
yada A adder yar faamna: sdla: | 
faal deta ege asad alee dla 13c! 
qasy «CS: «SC ASTTAN C MeqWaeTcHaTady | 
yaka: dBiaqgl waar waar wlerasledfaa 13¢! 
TAS A Aalit soaMafs aaM ams wa: eq ixol

Uddhava submitted : The thick darkness of ignorance that had been hugged by me 
has been dispersed by Your teaching. Can cold and darkness or the fear born of these 
possibly prevail against a man who has sought the presence of fire, O Creator (even) of 
Brahma ? (37) The lamp of wisdom (that had been snatched away by Your Maya) has been 
restored to me, Your servant, by You, compassionate as You are. Leaving the soles of Your 
feet, what grateful man would seek any other asylum ? (38) Nay, the most tough snare of my

ffection for the Dasarhas, the Vrsnis, the Andhakas and the Satvatas, that had been spread 
by You through Your deluding potency for the propagation of species, has actually been torn 
asunder by You with the sword of Self-Realization. (39) (My) salutation be to You, O Supreme 
Master of Yoga! (Pray,) instruct me, who have come to You for protection, so that unceasing 
love for Your lotus-feet may abide in my heart. (40)

SM ATATTATA tt 
Telga Aaissest acatet nami aa Acediefe errata: alfa: xe! 
Seamer fayertancaa: | Taal demote AMY Ca: we: 1s?! 
faidagenrron 4 qailes: adhe: 1 ara: aatfeditrer weafaqmeaa: 1x3! 
Tisdaad wad fafamaquraa i nenakmaacfadt wmf wal 
Sthised Wetter AAA Ad: AA Ise

The glorious Lord replied : Enjoined by Me, O Uddhava ! proceed to My hermitage, 
called by the name of Badarikasrama. Hallowed there by bathing in and drinking the water 
of the (holy) Ganga (which has washed My feet and acquired sanctity thereby), nay, purged 
of all impurities by the (very) sight of the Alakananda (a tributary of the Ganga), wearing the 
bark of trees, O dear one! living on wild fruits and free from (all) hankering for pleasure, 
enduring all experiences in the form of pairs of opposites (such as cold and heat), amiable 
of disposition, with your senses fully controlled, calm and possessed of a collected’ mind, 
endowed with wisdom and Self-Realization, ruminating most thoughtfully upon whatever you 
have learnt from Me and devoting your speech and mind to Me, remain assiduously engaged 
in duties pleasing to Me. Transcending the three courses of destiny, (viz., ascent to heaven 
in a celestial form, rebirth as a human being and being cast into the womb of any subhuman

ee ate tee

pis. 29 ]

t

We Me VOW E WeMERe He H

659

ature, according to the predominance 
fen attain to Me. (41— 44) of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas respectively), you will

CT Were Fad wad safe 
Pu utara waxgssatey we, ferqeat 1x1 
AaAVIAeY = Walaa Prepare Weraq aca | 
sages YAS YETTA erst Aas xe 1 
gid AAEMad ASM TAA Gece WHAASSEATA: 12° | 
Sri Suka resumed : Instructed thus by Sri Krsna (devotion to whom puts an end to 
metempsychosis), Uddhava went round the Lord keeping Him always to his right (so as to 
ensure His constant goodwill) and, placing his head on His feet while departing, bathed them 
with drops of tears, his mind (too) being moistened with emotion, even though he had 
transcended the pairs of opposites (in the form of joy and sorrow etc., as a result of the Lord's 
teaching). (45) Alarmed at his (impending) separation from Sri Krsna— whose affection was 
most difficult to turn one's back upon— and unable to leave Him, Uddhava felt ill at ease and 
suffered (great) agony. (Then) bearing on his head the pair of wooden sandals belonging to 
his Master (and gifted by Himself as a token of His pleasure) and bowing to Him again and 
again, he departed. (46) Having firmly installed the Lord in the inmost of his heart, the great 
votary of the Lord then reached Visala (another name of Badarikasrama); and, practising 
austerities according to rules, attained to the state of Sri Hari as taught by Sri Krsna* (the sole 
Befriender of the universe). (47) He who tastes ever so little with real reverence this nectar 
Of wisdom, churned out of the ocean of bliss (in the shape of the Upanisads, so-called 
because they reveal the nature of Brahma, which is all bliss) and taught to Uddhava (a great 
devotee of the Lord) by (no less a personage than) Sri Krsna, whose (lotus) feet are resorted 
to (even) by masters of Yoga (like Lord Siva), is not only liberated himself but the world (at 
large) gets liberated (through his fellowship). (48) | bow to the Supreme Person known by 
the name of Sri Krsna, the First Cause, the Author of the Vedas, who in order to put an end 
lo rebirth (in the case of devotees that have turned their face from the world) and the tear of 
Old age and disease etc., (in the case of those following the ways of the world) extracted like 
a bee (the twofold) nectar, viz., 1-the quintessence of the Vedas in the form of JAana (Self- 
NOwledge) and Vijhana (God-Realization)— which are the only valuable things (in life)— 
aNd 2-the immortalizing beverage of the gods (churned) out of the ocean, and gave the 
(tWofold) nectar to the (aforementioned two) classes of His devotees to drink. (49)

Thus ends the twenty-ninth discourse in Book Eleven of the

| a -Pura therwise 
reat and glorious Bhagavata Purana, oll é 
; ate as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ox peaned 
PISSED

Vide verse 34 above.

Wr We We Be We We Sr Be Sr Hr He Sr St Ke We He Be Wr He Her He We Be Re He We Br We Wr Me Sr We Be Ve We He We We ee We We Hie Be He Hee We We Be We We We We He We We We We We We We We We We Wee We We Wee We We We We He We Ve We We we 
LL a a a a a a a a a dal

sig Branseara: 
Discourse XXX

Holocaust of Yadu's Race 
UMA 
ad eaumad sed Frid aaqignaat feaata wTaM yaaa: 1 2 | 
Saas Ma TTA: | aT AION sa] As HTML! 2 
Wass AAAS! GA GA A wap: HUifas A ala adl ad Parma 
Gasca Saaid ta fe a aM Halal apr fron: wad Ga acai: | 3 |

The king (Pariksit) submitted : Uddhava, a great devotee of the Lord, having 
proceeded to the woodland (of Badarikasrama), what did the Lord, the father of (all) created 
beings, do next in Dwaraka ? (1) His (own) race having been wiped out through the curse 
of Brahmanas, how did Sri Krsna (the foremost of the Yadus) cast off His body, the most 
beloved of the eyes of all, from which ladies could not withdraw their eyes (once) riveted on 
it; which, having (once) entered the ears of the virtuous and (then) clung to their mind 
(through the passage of the ears), never departs from it; whose splendour (when glorified 
by poets) gives a delightful character to their speech and what goes without saying, brings 
honour to them, and looking on which, (when) seated in the car of (the all-victorious) Arjuna, 
warriors (who fell in battle) attained similarity to it ! (2-3)

fafa Yordka a valatar, Ader! ssissetar qaalat por: we satan | x | 
Ui Ut Hela gaat ANeda: 1 gedat a Bana Al aqugan: 1 & | 
feat aes Gels Wee Asad: | aa TAS ARAM BA yeeH Ata | « | 
cai aa sarer yaated: ead: gsaem: aaeaaest: | 9 | 
MAIR ASAI Hada Aa mMyfewaarahiristaraagay: lo 
fafa Re Age@laaqaaicafesrman ge yg at wva:1 2 |

The sage (Sri Suka) replied : Seeing evil portents of a grave nature manifest in the 
heavens and on earth as well as in the air, SriKrsna spoke thus to the Yadus sitting (together) 
in (the assembly hall known by the name of) Sudharma. (4) "These grave portents of a terrible 
nature appearing in Dwaraka are indications of a holocaust. We should not (therefore) stay 
here even for an hour, O leaders of the Yadus! (5) Let the womenfolk, infants and aged men 
move from this place to (the sacred spot called) Sankhoddhara, while we shall proceed to 
Prabhasa, where the river Saraswati flows towards the west (and joins the sea). (6) Having 
bathed in that river and (thus) purified, and remaining without food, we shall (all) worship the 
(images of) gods with a fully concentrated mind by bathing them, daubing them with sandal- 
paste and offering (other) articles of worship. (7) Having been blessed (by the Brahmanas) 
through the recitation of benedictory Mantras (sacred texts) and offering of flowers etc., We 
shall also honour the highly blessed Brahmanas by gifting them cows, lands, gold and 
raiments as well as elephants, horses, chariots and dwellings.(8) That is the surest way of 
dispersing evil and the best means of securing happiness. Worship of gods, the Brahmanas 
and cows brings supreme exaltation to men.” (9)

sf Wad amenvd acqet vafes: adit Alfred sere wag wa: 1201 
der, «wiadisses agedt Alea: | ay: WHA Ase aasaragfeds 12° |

“

eon Oe Tete wy | fepfasifirafir aegausad afd: 122 
Strat GRE generis ag: BARTER 88 | 
qaqa: TACT ceoreararcenfea: | erafieatiasieatarhirder fire:

. : | 3 : Lew 
faa: arena: Weal «= amettteia fear” «raat 
seq ara BSAA Ma eGATTaT 
ware = EErevt meh ator «= aeitara: 1261 
wat oa 4 a fadeqe: wefreateqgen: | 
sae | nereefiet «aE feeifeat «| yeiewl 
SIA Wa eH Vista eager TAA: 
fest: gam: gaa faoedisa faara deere 
Gt 86g fagfruiqhtias «= @reftaetfeafagqerarae: |

| fort faa: gee: aefegidicae_ waa wa Fat: 1291

My «ataate way Faqiaeg aaa «= yfShastguat: 1201 
a ageneu Wiad UE Yea Yat: | safest: HOM adam” dq aA aie 
Wadi UTA aovs BA fed: ied Hele Wasaga stadia: 1221 
aq daft «Wepelaerel pert erase «ae Tee 1231 
AeA aAgGSrAt POTATATGATAATA | Aeon: ae Pa aoratshreteat AAA 1™ 
Wi ay way Hey BY Hea: aaa gat ae git AAsaetieea: 1241

Attentively hearing this speech of Sri Krsna(the enemy of the demon Madhu) and saying 
‘Amen !", the elderly among the Yadus all proceeded to Prabhasa in chariots after crossing the 
sea by means of barks. (10) There the scions of Yadu performed with supreme Devotion 
whatever was enjoined by the Lord alongwith all (other) means of ensuring prosperity. (11) 
Then, their judgment having been vitiated by (an evil) destiny, they drank there a highly 
intoxicating and delicious drink known by the name of Maireyaka, by the filtrates of which the 
intellect is perverted. (12) There ensued a very bitter clash between the heroes, who were 
(all) proud at heart and were hard drunk with the strong beverage and were (further) deluded 
by the enchanting potency of Sri Krsna. (13) inflamed with anger and equipped with arms 
they contended (with one another) on the seashore by means of bows, swords, spears, 
Maces, bludgeons and lances.(14) Closing with one another In chariots and on elephants

etc., as well as on (the back of) donkeys, camels, Bus:

“nsigns i ze,

even as pe Cele if ee ic strike one another with their tusks.(1 5) Pradyumna closed 
on the battle-field with Samba, Akrara with Bhoja, Aniruddha with Satyaki, Subhadra with 
angramajit, Gada (Sri Krsna's brother) with Sri Krsna's son of the same name and Sumitra 
in ASuretha. All the pairs looked very fierce, their rancour having grown very intense. (1 6) 
linded by intoxication and utterly infatuated by (the enchanting potency of) Sri Krsna (the

©stower of Liberation), others too, VIZ-» Nigatha, Ulmuka and so on, the chief of whom were ~ 
ahasrajit, Satajit and Bhanu, metand struc

k one another (atclose quarters). (17) Casting ( I) : id : gs

affection to the winds, then, the Dasarhas, Vrsnis, Andhakas, Bhojas and Satvatas, the Madhus 
and the Arbudas, the Mathuras and the Surasenas, the Visarjanas, the Kukuras and the Kuntis— 
these contendedwith one another. (18) Sons fought with their fathers and brothers with brothers: 
while maternal uncles, maternal grandfathers, nephews and sister's sons severally crossed 
their swords with their sister's sons, daughter's sons, uncles and maternal uncles. (Likewise) 
friends contended with friends, and relations with relations; while kinsmen killed kinsmen, 
deluded as they (all) were. (19) When (the stocks of)-arrows began to be exhausted, bows 
began to be broken (when used as cudgels) and (the stocks of) weapons began to be 
depleted, they tore up with their clenched hands blades of Eraka* grass. (20) Held by the 
clenched hand they turned into (So many) clubs studded with iron, (which were) almost as 
hard as adamant. They (now) began to strike their ememies with them, and, being checked 
by Sri Krsna, they took Him as well as Balabhadra to be their adversary, deluded as the 
were. (Nay,) resolved to kill Them, the desperadoes came up (before Them), O king ! (21-22) 
Highly irritated, They too took up handfuls of Eraka grass, (presently) converted into 
clubs, O delight of the Kurus, and struck them (in return with those clubs) moving (from one 
place to another).(23) The fury, engendered by rivalry, of those warriors, who were 
possessed (as it were) by the curse of the Brahmanas and whose judgment had been 
obscured by the deluding potency of Sri Krsna, brought about their destruction (even) as 
fire (produced by the friction) of bamboos would consume a (whole) forest. (24) All His own 
people as well as clans having thus perished, Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of Brahma and Siva) 
concluded that the remaining burden of the earth was (also) removed.(25)

Wa: Pade aM wei das oleh AGS Paha 1261 
waratmea war canta: | feae ioe quiere fore i201 
favsqust wa uifsray seer war! fean fafa: ada fagn sa alae: 1221 
Tags wea dagelemadaniakargm uid qase12e! 
alkeidacatiest dispdeaveds | QUsttHisa Waetctpuser izo! 
qledasteldatchlenechige: lerqarastia: 9 oagqta ferfrr. 132 
aaa afdataricnae: | peat aamt ead ussis0ry 132

Resorting at the seashore to Yoga in the form of concentration of mind on the Supreme 
Person, i.e., (in other words) identifying his self with the (Supreme) Spirit Balarama cast off 
the human semblance. (26) Perceiving the ascent of Balarama (to His own realm Patala), 
Lord Sri Krsna (Son of Devaki) went up to a peepul (the sacred fig tree) and sat down quietly 
on the ground (resting His back against its trunk). (27) He revealed His resplendent four- 
armed form and, like a smokeless fire, dispelled by His own effulgence the gloom of (all) the 
quarters. (28) It bore the mark of Srivatsa (a curl of white hair on the breast), was dark-brown 
(of hue) like a (rainy) cloud, was wrapped in a pair of silk pieces and (thereby) shone like 
burnished gold and was most auspicious (to look at). (29) It had a lotus-like countenance with 
a lovely smile playing on it, was graced with dark hair, had a pair of delightful lotus-like eyes 
and was adorned with a shining pair of alligator-shaped ear-rings. (30) It was decked with 
a girdle, the sacred thread, a diadem, a pair of bracelets and armlets as well as witha peat! 
necklace, a pair of anklets and rings and the Kaustubha gem. (31) Its limbs were encircled 
by a garland of sylvan flowers; (nay,) It was waited upon by His own weapons (discus, mace 
and the Sarnga bow etc.), in a living form and was seated placing the left-foot, (with its sole) 
ruddy as a lotus, on the right thigh. (32)

* it will be remembered that when the steel pestle generated by the curse of Brahmanas had been crushed into powder 
and cast into the sea, the particles of the powder were borne by the waves to and deposited on the shore, where they grew into 
a grass named Eraka (vide verses 21 and 22 of Discourse | above).

...' S 882

pis. 30 I epeweenerettere cet BOOK ELEVEN _ 663

aera fad : 
1 fagiditet caeaiser aaa: uaat fini at 
é aura Ttetgea wes: fe aa a aan eta WONA: 1321 
Jara, a hunter, who had forged (the head of) his arrow out of the iron piece that had been 
left after pulverizing the (steel) pestle (generated by the execration of Brahmanas), pierced

(asit were) His (aforesaid) foot, that resembled in shape the mouth of a deer, suspecting Him

tobe an antelope. (33) Discovering (his quarry to be an other than) a four-armed personage,

the hunter, who was frightened on account of his having committed an offence (against the

Lord), fell (prostrate) at the feet of Sri Krsna (a sworn enemy of the demons) touching them

with his head. (34) (He submitted:) "Be pleased, O Slayer of the demon Madhu, to forgive

this transgression of mine, sinful as | am, O Sinless One, in that it has been perpetuated by 
this sinner unwittingly, O Lord of excellent renown ! (35) Offence has been done by me to

You, O Lord Visnu, whose remembrance, they say, is capable of dispersing the darkness of

men's ignorance. (36) Therefore, speedily kill me, a sinful hunter of (innocent) deer, O Lord

of Vaikuntha, lest | should commit offence against noble souls any more as | have done (this 
time). (37) How can we of impious birth make any observation directly about this gesture (in 
the shape of the wholesale destruction of Yadu's race) of Gours as Sri Krsna, the work of

whose handmaid (Maya) even Brahma (the creator), his sons, Rudra and others, and the 
seers of Veda whose vision has been obscured by Your Maya, are unable to know. (38)

PTA GAT 
om Ssh aug wm ws ad fe Alas @ vag: St Tpit wa 1281 
The glorious Lord said : Don't you be afraid, O Jara, get up; indeed this part (of making

Me the target of your arrow) has been played by you as desired by Me. Ascend you as 
Permitted by Me to heaven, the abode of the virtuous. (39)

serest oo amaat | eration | Ht: oft tert fea fed sat vot 
alech: srerragetaraearTA ai ad 4 qefaenrtensraaa Tat S21 
4 oa frmgieadt creme pda oi

fol a aR a wa a wha aa Pereggt sae Isy 
sh matt ai a wit nesomet Wad WIR wee seletd: te 
Tras feoatt fren ai aictaternat =“ TAATE Wet: 1¥4 1 
7S gradi qa antat Pert fle: regio fate wget ale mea xe 
Gat wa wa wakes wey: aa ai agit aye: gratreta iveol 
4S uf wet ange fad a tiomaiam: wl Fare wera ive 
S a ougierena whe sae: | ermal | feeretaey Ae Ie

| 
|

Be Re Re Be Re Ree Re BBR RRB Re Re RR Re RRR RE Re RE RE RE RE REA Re RR Re Rr Be BER Be Bee Be Me Re We Pe He Ge Be He Be Fe Hr Ke Be Be Bi Be Be Be Fe Be Ke We We Be Ke We He He We wy BBs ew 
a LSE = Ss a nee oe. ae

Samal Ue Tae UA: UA: | dene sitweforena air: saat gi 140} 
sfa stared ASR GRAS Seca FRSA: 1301

Commandedthus by Lord SriKrsna, who takes a form at will, the hunter thrice walked round 
Him clockwise (so as to keep Him ever to his right and thus ensure His benignity) and, bowing 
to Him, ascended to heaven in an aerial car (brought by His attendants to take him). (40) Hunting 
up ahd tracking out the whereabouts of Sri Krsna by inhaling the breeze charged with the 
fragrance of Tulasi, Daruka (the Lord's own charioteer) sought His presence. (41) Seeing his 
Master actually seated there at the base of an Aswattha (the sacred fig tree) and surrounded 
by weapons (appearing in a living form) possessing a dazzling brilliance, the charioteer jumped 
down from (his box in) the chariot and fell prostrate at His feet, with eyes full of tears, his mind 
overwhelmed with affection. (42) (He said,) “O Lord, my vision has completely gone and stands 
envelopedin darkness (opacity) ever since | have ceased to behold Your lotus-feet. (Even now) 
| fail to recognize the (four) quarters and find no peace (of mind) any more than a traveller on 
the moon having set at night." (43) While the charioteer was speaking thus, the (Lord's) chariot, 
which was distinguished by the emblem of Garuda (on its banner), rose to the sky, horses, 
banner and all, Oking of kings, while Daruka stood looking up. (44) The transcendent weapons 
of Lord Visnu (Sri Krsna) too followed the chariot, Sri Krsna (who is solicited by all men) said 
to the charioteer, who felt much astonished at heart at the aforesaid occurrence:— (45) 
"Proceed, O charioteer, to Dwaraka and communicate to My kinsfolk (there) the destruction 
of their relations at the hands of one another, (nay,) the departure (for His own divine realm) 
of Lord Sankarsana (Balarama) as well as My own predicament. (46) (Tell them on My behalf:) 
"You should no longer stay at Dwaraka with your relations inasmuch as the sea will submerge 
the capital of the Yadus (now thatit has been) forsaken by Me. (47) Taking (with you) each your 
own family and possessions as well as Our parents (Devaki and Vasudeva) and guarded by 
Arjuna, you should all leave for Indraprastha without exception." (48) As for yourself, follow the 
course of conduct (the path of Devotion) which is dear to Me, get established in the knowledge 
of your being one with Brahma, cultivate an attitude of nonchalance (towards the world) and, 
realizing this (visible) universe to be a creation of My Maya (enchanting potency), acquire 
calmness (of mind)." (49) Instructed thus (by the Lord), Daruka went round the Lord (clockwise 
SO as to keep Him always to his right), bowed to Him again and again and, placing His feet on 
his head (and then removing them) proceeded to Dwaraka, sad at heart. (50)

Thus ends the thirtieth discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PISS SERENEN, ola

ST Separate:

Discourse XXXl

The Lord's Ascent to His Divine Realm 
| AMY FAA 
BA CAM Se VAM A at Va: Aes eal YA: AAMT: |g 
farm: fagrral faeeneren: | anon: aerate fara fest: 1 2 | 
sear saad $= ator aeitcent: | Meas Words at: malfor seq ai 2 |

ee ee ee + ~— ——

Dis. 31] 3 BOOK ELEVEN 665

Is Wea aqyeraeaa aAlasaqate amt Ace | 
Qpissaenqiasd fae ard Gea Aen: A Ad 12k 
aaa a Wedd Weleda al Adare: Wee | 
fraisseardandaaeeda: fa Ged wea ade 1221 
AMT Urea ATA AG A aedaaaralh he 
Soa sig aga afd wea fe wemid saRtayie3

Know the advent, sports and disappearance of the Supreme Lord among embodied ° 
(human) beings, O king, to be a (mere) acting by dint of His Maya (deluding potency) as that 
Ofa dramatic performer. Having created this universe by Himself (unaided by others and with 
NO material other than His own volition) and then entered it (as its Inner Controller), sported 
(in it) and withdrawn it (into Himself) at the end (at the time of final dissolution) and retired

[565] B.M. Part II—50

(from all activity). He remains established in His own glory. (11) Could He have been 
incapable of protecting Himself (preserving intact His own divine Personality)— He, who 
brought back in his mortal frame the son of His (own) teacher (Sandipani), that had been 
taken to the realm of Death, and revived you (O Pariksit), that had been burnt to death (within 
your mother's womb) by the supreme missile (presided over by Brahma and discharged by 
Aswatthama, the son of Dronacarya), and (thereby) gave relief (to your mother, who had 
sought refuge with Him), (nay,) who conquered even Lord Siva (the Destroyer of Death 
himself), and bodily transferred to heaven the hunter (Jara by name, that had struck the Lord 
with a shaft in the sole of His foot) ?* (12) Though being the independent Cause of the 
evolution, continuance and destruction of the whole universe, wielding as He does all 
powers, the Lord did not, however, choose to retain His body here (on earth) demonstrating 
thereby (to the world) the sublimity of the ways of those established in the Self and showing 
their unconcernedness about the mortal body. (13) He who, rising (from his bed) in the 
morning, sings, with devotion and full of self-control, the story of the aforesaid transcendent 
voyage of Sri Krsna (to His own divine realm) will attain to the same highest destiny. (14)

ghee ageaeaat: afer wonadeifesra qeorfereqa: 1941

arama at qwiat peal Aideoaiignecat Gal: <Alenfaqfasa: 12a

taal Wevl wa aged al | HORMaaaged: emia fasts: Say 18C!

sonst «= sfasteetat ss MTfateIqU: | say died «=faarareeg: $9 Fert: 128 1

WaIsasy deed tenaaitaa | AqeaaeaaT a ETAT. Bt: SST: | 
PUUMSHAMAA MeAVATEM Tale: 120 |

Returning to Dwaraka and falling at the feet of Vasudeva and Ugrasena (the king of 
Dwaraka), Daruka (the charioteer of Lord Sri Krsna), (now) bereft of Sri Krsna, bathed their 
feet with (his) tears.(15) He narrated the story of the wholesale destruction of the Vrsnis,O 
Pariksit. Grieved at heart to hear of it, the people (of Dwaraka) fainted with grief. (16) Upset 
at (the news of) their separation from Sri Krsna, they hastened, beating their heads (all the 
way), to the spot where their kinsmen had been lying (dead). (17) Stricken with grief not to 
perceive their Sons, Sri Krsna and Balarama, Devaki (Sri Krsna's mother) and Rohini 
(Balarama’s mother) as well as (Their father) Vasudeva lost their consciousness. (18) Nay, 
afflicted at their separation from the Lord, they gave up the ghost on that (very) spot. The 
womenfolk ascended the funeral pile and, hugging each her own husband, entered the 
fire.(19) The wives of Balarama entered the fire, embracing the (dead) body of Balarama; the 
wives of Vasudeva followed suit, hugging the latter's body, and the daughters-in-law of Sri 
Krsna did the same, clasping to their bosom Pradyumna and others (the sons of the Lord).

Similarly Rukmini and others, the Spouses of Sri Krsna, entered the fire with their mind fixed 
on the latter. (20)

Set: Sad: AS: Hore faxed: | snes araarara Horta: Galena: 12V 
oat Asana: werftenigaat amar awmaaquedar: 122! 
SReel BRON Ahi WAsIsgIaadd AUN asia AEN sflassTaciay 123! 
fea afaferet | ar Wee: | eRTTRLaL Aang OAs | 2X |

* Vide verse 33 of Discourse XXX above.

pis..31 | ’* BOOK ELEVEN - 667

gat Aes eR TaaTmeI: | eat eq aerert Gear ay: BA Tea 126 | 
a Ure sacaet feet: aration ort a1 akergen ve: adurd: sper 1201 
ea Ruined <srcraadtalnn Teas A sa | 
wr te A am Wo agen ufs ut mean waa 1201 
Se APE TAC AENQU SerfeeeIMEe ETEK TTR fear wash eAT: 1321

—_—— Xo o——

SCUHTSNT: Chee: weg: 
Ble: So AT

Thus ends the thirty-first discourse in Book Eleven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita, 
composed by Bhagavan Vedavyasa and consisting 
of eighteen thousand Slokas.

resumably been other than the Yadus, inasmuch as the curse of the Rsis embraced the entire

* 
T ° 
he survivors must have P ted; foritis stated elsewhere that Vajra was the only exception that had —

ws ‘¥ Yadu—women, children and the aged not excep 
~SCaped destruction.

Slant: hel: 
31 Tera seaya:

UAT 
Saat PN Agaalayevl! Ha agisvad yadda A qr! g |

The king (Pariksit) submitted: When Sri Krsna, the Jewel of Yadu's line, had left for 
His own realm in Heaven, whose dynasty ruled over the earth ? (Pray) tell me this, O

(revered) sage ! (1) 
AIA SAA 
MSA: Wea AT Meat aAesal AW AMAA Baal sal saa! 2 | 
Weidde Usd hdl Ad Wem: Wa: i faanaqaaan wfaat sted: | 3 | 
areal tera: UZ Weld «SA Biante Meaha gfeedt yar: | x |

Sri Suka replied: O Pariksit ! Puranjaya, who has been spoken of as the last- named 
(king) in the line of Brhadratha’, is yet to come. His minister Sunaka, for his part, will 
assassinate his master and instal as king his own son, named Pradyota, whose son will be 
(called) Palaka. His son will be (known by the name of) VisakhyUpa and from him will follow 
Rajaka. (2-3) His son will be (called) Nandivardhana.These five kings, (collectively known 
as) the Pradyotanas, will rule over the earth for a hundred and thirty-eight years. (4)

gare wer: ceacig aaa: aaemt wer aa: aaa: aaa: 1 4 | 
faferan: AMM | sea Wel admeana: Bad: | & | 
arcadia ome Hera: Odean 86a Aaa! 8 |

wm staat yfeet Gee Het FU: | Vera WH, YshtHtaat Tet | ¢ |

* Vide IX. xxii. 49, where Puranjaya has been referred to under the name of Ripunjaya.

ee a eeEeEeEeEeE

_ ‘Neludes the name of Dagaratha as the fifth in order from Candragupta.

DSN, acter ttn vce sc wscwe Wasa eee BOOK TWELVE 669

neat: Hisar: aaAtearatae vfasira QWouraneaatHehl

siSunaga will come i! pee

Sis ga next and his son will be Kakavarna. The latter's son will be 
Ksemadharma and Ksetrajfia will be the son of Ksemadharma. (5) His son will be Vidhisara 
and Vidhisaras son will be Ajatasgatru. Darbhaka will be his son and Darbhaka’'s son has 
been named as Ajaya. (6) Nandivardhana will be the sonof Ajaya and Mahanandi will be the 
son sprung from the loins of Nandivardhana. These ten kings, (collectively known as) the 
Sisunagas, alone will rule over the earth for three hundred and sixty years during the age of 
Kali, O jewel among the Kurus ! Mahanandi's mighty son, who will be born of Sadra woman, 
O king, willbea certain Nanda, whowillowna huge army or untold riches and will bring about 
the ruin of the Ksatriya race, Thenceforward the rulers of men will be mostly Sidras and 
unrighteous. (7—9)

a Unasall Yladiaqraigaarea: | afer weet feta sa wWnta: 1201

qa ast wf GAIA: Fal: | af sat WMleaka Tel Usa: SA Bld AAT: 1221

qa wer fe: wisq soareiteaa | aera smdi alat aMeaka & wet 1221

a Wa asa a fest weashteai aa after dasa: 13

Gan Mad Aas Aga: Waa-aa: | anfegqeneretear «areal «= afererfa 1 ex

adeaa ade wat da gesa:iatal aa al ya: auras | 
Sal wMeaia Uae Het HeHolss 1241

wal gesa we aa aaafa: acti yet Usie: aad wa afea | 
AAAI FPUBISA VfaeTer 12 |

aaa ass yfercl wfacdl ad: ad ale: Gdetene antaat ulead 1g!

aa wanaaerene sayfahkia Ad: ast aalt Meaha yl acigrafeeny 192

Like another Paragurama (a scion of the sage Bhrgu) the said Mahapadma will bring the 
(entire) gobe under one sceptre and nobody will (dare) violate his commands. Eightsons with 
Sumalya as the eldest will be born to him; they will rule over this globe as kings for a hundred 
years (all told): so the tradition goes. (10-11) A certain Brahmana (Canakya or Kautalya by 
name and also nicknamed as Vatsyayana) will uproot (all) the nine Nandas (Mahapadma 
and his eight sons) who will be at heomercy. On their destruction it is the Mauryas that will 
rule the earth during the Kali age. (12) That very Brahmana will instal Candragupta on the 
throne. His son indeed will be Varisara and ASokavardhana will be born to the latter. (13) His 
son will be Suyasa and Suyasa's, Samgata. Saliguka will be born to him and his son will be 
Somasarma. (14) Satadhanva will be born to Somasarma and to him, Brhadratha. Indeed, 
these ten* Maurya kings will hold sway over the earth for a hundred and thirty-seven years 
In the Kali age, O jewel of Kuru's line ! (15) Assassinating Brhadratha, the Maurya his 
generallissimo, Pusyamitra, bearing the surname of Sunga, will assume the reins of 
government himself.t Agnimitra will be born to Pusyamitra and to him again, will be born 
Ujyestha. (16) His son will be Vasumitra and Vasumitra's Bhadraka; to him will be born 
ulinda. Ghosa will be born as a son to Pulinda and from Ghosa will follow Vajramitra. (17) 
9 him will be born Bhagavata and to Bhagavata, a son known by the name of Devabhuti.

stenonly. The list givenin the Visnu and other Puranas

The numbe aq: including Empesror Candragupta, |

Pe ae : His name should therefore be taken as included in the

list j : 
Stn order to complete the number ten.

_ T The first two lines of verse 16 have not been recognized by Sridhara and some other commentators too.

670 SRIMAD: BHAGAVATA Dise"1,

These ten Sungas will rule the earth for more than a century. (18) 
qa: ava grated, TT Ug eel Aalst Hvala HAT 1 ke | 
wai Rea wai ageal wef: ida oR were Anau: qa: | 
ARTs Alaa Barat ATH fasya: 1201 
SMa SA Yt aie va al aah ati Meaha aaton a Hot aT 1221 
Sal HOS GAA Aaya Gir aeat | TM MeaaewMdla: Hd HOTTA: 122 
SATA AMAT staat yfertafa: | sitetcnoterga: Ulotae Age: 123 | 
ome daaaeifatent qa: deaiiisismmccnty AM Ales 
aipaat 4 eURM@heS «MIST: 1 asieergaed UST ST: 1 RG 
ae agat aa fraerfeiten: | cee mada: gitar faa ad: 1261 
Ref: fragt aside: | fasted sersrsias: aerate: 12001 
wT faqudasadeamda waivers gferdi wear Herat 121 
Then this earth will pass on to the Kanva Kings, though they will be possessed of poor 
merit, O protector of men ! Having assassinated the lewd Devabhtoti of the Sunga clan, his 
very clever minister, Vasudeva of the Kanva dynasty, will, as a matter of fact, assume the 
reins of government himself. Again, Bhumitra will be his son and Bhumitra’s son will be 
Narayana. (And) Narayana’'s son will be widely known by the name of Susarma.(19-20) 
These kings of Kanva's race will rule the earth for three hundred and forty-five years in the 
Kali age. (21) Assassinating Susarma of Kanva's line, his (own) servant, Bali, a vile Sudra 
of the Andhra race will hold away on the earth for some time. (22) His (own) brother, Krsna 
by name, will succeed him as the ruler of the earth. His son will be Sri Santakarna and the 
latter's son, Paurnamasa. (23) His son will be Lambodara and Cibilaka will succeed him 
as king. Meghaswati will succeed Cibilaka and Meghaswéati's son will be Atamana. (24) 
Anistakarma and Haleya will come next and Haleya's son will be Talaka. His son will be 
Purisabhiru and Sunandana will succeed him as king. (25) Cakora will come next and then 
(by turn) his (eight) sons, (collectively) known as the Bahus, the last of whom will be 
Sivaswati, a chastiser of his foes. His son, again, will be Gomatiputra and Puriman will 
come next. (26) Medaéssira and Sivaskanda will come next and Sivaskanda's son will be 
Yajnasri. Vijaya will follow Yajfhiasri and his sons will be Candravijfia and Lomadhi. (27) 
These thirty princes wilt (successively) rule over the earth for four hundred and fifty-six 
pears, O delight of the Kurus ! (28) 
SAA Saye at AeA AOI: | HSI: Wesat waren Afaerafasteat: 128! 
ASS AGA ASMA Geen: | Wat eer WSvStsy ular waresla q 1201 
Ut weet yieet areata ai qarftrent a sata dar weres fara 1321 
WMeraeqdas Aor a: dead ad: | fafefnerat qada waaelsea ate: 1321 
RRMres daw aaiate: sd: isaa a ada ufaerafien 9133! 
wa Fale aa afeas siigent: | yetisr wir sfiatse ada a 13y! 
Uereriel ga YI: AAEM: HA aiden: faq wen freee wa fe 134!

Seven Abhira princes having their capital at Avabhrti, ten Gardabhis and sixteen of the 
Kanka dynasty, (all) most rapacious, will hold sway (one after another) as kings. (29) Then 
will follow eight Yavanas, fourteen Turuskakas; again, ten Gurundas and then Maunas 
numbering eleven only. (30) These (Thirty-two) kings (excluding the Maunas) will rule over

©

the earth for mie thousand and ninety-nine years, while the eleven Maunas will hold sway 
over the earth for (another) three hundred years, O dear Pariksit ! When they cease to be, 
Bhitananda are wus son) Vangiri, the latter's (younger) brother, Sigunandi, (his son) 
Yasonandli an a son) Praviraka—(all) these will actually reign at (their capital) Kilikila 
for a hundred and six years only. (3133) They will leave thirteen sons, (collectively) known 
as the Bahlikas. Again, there will be Puspamitra, a Ksatriya, and even so his son 
purmitra.(34) (All) these will hold sway (over different territories) at one and the same time. 
Seven (of these) will be kings of Andhra and seven of Kosala. The rulers of Vidura and 
Nisadha indeed will also come out of these (the Bahlikas).(35)

amar ¢ Ata faaenht: Gee: take auiiz Ufercaenschlt, 136 |

TTT: wares gife: diam, agar uraat a a a 
APRA Tat wet Aes 1319 1

ARTETA «—-AT SaeHToaM: | aa fen veer yarn sarferat: 1321

feaiteré wart aiet artes | MAA YS ATEN Wresisiselaaa: 1381

Among the rulers of Magadha there will be one Viswasphurji, (also) known as Puranjaya 
the second, who will convert the higher castes into Pulindas, Yadus and Madrakas (tribes that 
will be no better than Mlecchas).(36) Being evil-minded and powerful, he will exterminate the 
Ksatriya race and settle in the city of Padmavati (his capital) a population consisting mostly of 
casteless people, ruling over the well-guarded tract of land extending along the banks of the 
Ganga up to Prayaga (from Haridwara). (37) (As Kaliyuga advances) the Brahmanas of 
saurastra, Avanti, the Abhira territory and (the principalities of Sura, Arouda and Malawa will 
become Vratyas or fallen men (because of their giving up the Samskaras or purificatory rites, 
especially the ceremony of investiture with the sacred thread), and the rulers will be mostly of 
the Sddra class. (38) Sudras, fallen Brahmanas and members of other higher castes who have 
given up the Vedic courses of conduct and Mlecchas will rule over the banks of the Indus and 
Chandrabhaga, rivers the city of Kaunti and the territory of Kasmira. (39)

(ariel sf Us owas ya: | Uaseahya: MelekttAnaa: 1Xo| 
Barer festa sy URERATeA: | SSAA AISTATATEUCHIgG: 1X 1 
steep: fradlal TET AAAISSAM: | Sete Valse terest WeATSMT: 12 | 
THI 4 waderdsieranaled: = | Saat Us eet areata Uifsat: 131

sft SETaa HEI TRAST Mera STEHT AAAS: 18 |

These kings, O Pariksit, who will (all) be contemporaries, will be no better than Mlecchas

(in their course of conduct) and will be given over to unrighteousness and mendacity, illiberal 
and furious. (40) They will kill women, children, cows and Brahmans, covet—others' wives 
and wealth, experience vicissitudes of fortune In quick succession and will be poor of 
Strength and courage and shortlived (too). (41) They will cease to perform purificatory rites, 
Willbe devoid of righteous actions, and dominated by Rajas and Tamas and, being Mlecchas 
the garb of Ksatriyas, will suck the blood of their (own) people. (42) The people ruled over 
ythem too will acquire their habits, ways Of life and mode of speech and, oppressed by one

sNother as well as by their rulers, will go to ruin. (43)

Thus ends the first discourse in Book Twelve of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

. ae es 24 
mI

We We We We We Se Me Me Wee ME Re Ree Me RM MME HE REE HE We We Me Wee He Ne ee ee eee eee ee 2e Wr 8 we wy Sew 
ee — ——————— -- a a hf

Discourse Il

The Evils of Kaliyuga 
My Jara

qd wt: aa ah aa eal aed afew wr Aaa Be: | 
faa aol WU sarees: | ieee art aena fe | 
araasfrafadqataa Slade | Sika GEA a fe vafera gana fe 1 
SASSI AAAI «| SGN Aaah urfveat ara aa: 1 
sHiaaaayea aya aI Wa qi Glan wa alee SAA yar 
R ada did wave ageism ae: aaa apita fF 1 
qe peau asset wtdaaqiud senfsderitrentet = fafaauec 1

Saacsags at act afadt qu:issn fe wel wreifidoreerify: 1c 1

sikeaenstamn aretha fitter aengenarattsmegearpssr: Kw

sagen faagara eiigrnwifem: | aitaarraasiqefentarad: 9 ASM: 1201

aaa anatasa aad a fara! fafgaftastin arg: Aet FOI Ret

aaa ey deat ciectsd: | auismant we as aqua FMT 1e21

ust aT I I clalqagqerigerahy A TRB

suprarareng 8 way wrasifadedy Ay ZF aq ieul

sai eel Tad wt q eed enone «=a | ATaMadheaict 1261 
Sri Suka began again: Thenceforward, day after day, by force of the all-powerful Time, 
O king, righteousness, veracity, purity (of mind and body), forgiveness, compassion, length 
of life, bodily strength and keenness of memory will decline. (1) In the Kali age wealth alone 
will be the criterion of pedigree, morality and merit. Again, might will be the only factor 
determining righteousness and fairness. (2) (Personal) liking will be the deciding factor in 
making the choice of a partner in life, and trickery alone will be the motive force in business 
dealings. Capability of affording sexual delight will be, the (only) criterion of masculine or 
feminine excellence and the sacred thread will be the only mark of Brahmanhood. (3). 
External marks will be the only means of knowing the Asrama or stage in life (of an individual) 
and the (only) guide in determining the mode of greeting which people should adopt when 
meeting one another. Justice will have every chance of being vitiated because of one's 
inability to gratify those administering it, and voluble speech will be the (only) criterion of 
scholarship. (4) Want of riches will be the sole test of impiety and hypocrisy will be the only 
touchstone of goodness. (Mutual) consent will be the sole determining factor in marriage and 
toilet alone will be regarded as a sign of bath. (5) A distant tank or pond will be the (only) holy 
resort for bath etc., and wearing (long) hair will be regarded as the (only) sign of beauty. Filling 
one's belly will be the (only) end of human pursuit and audacity of speech will be the only 
criterion of veracity. (6) Skill will consist in supporting one's family; virtuous deeds will be 
performed (only) with the object of gaining fame; and when in this way the terrestrial globe

will be overrun by wicked people, the person who would prove to be the most powerful 
amongst the Brahmanas, Ksatriyas, Vaisyas and Sudras will become the ruler. Robbed of

“Aa 0? © MM FSF K W A BW

Dis. 2]

Wee ew: We We We We He He We We He wr

Hi f ’ ” 
oy wy Wee we we FC SESE, EWE He mE we we ww, *;

We WE We We WEE Wee We We We We Wee He ee ew ee

their wealth and women by greedy and merciless Ksatriyas behaving like robbers, people 
will resort to mountains and forests and subsist on leaves. roots, meat, honey, fruits flowers 
and seeds. (7/9) (Already) Oppressed by famine and (heavy) taxation people will perish 
through drought, (excessive) cold, storms. (scorching) sunshine (heavy) rain, snowfall and 
mutual conilict. (10) In the age of Kali men will be tormented by hunger and thirst, ailments 
and worry and their maximum age will be only twenty to thirty years. (11) When through the 
evil effect of Kali the bodies of men get reduced in size and emaciated, the righteous course 
chalked out by the Vedas for men following the system of Varnas (grades of society) and 
Asramas (Stages In life) gets lost, when religion is replaced by heresy to a large extent and 
rulers mostly turn out to be thieves, when men take to various pursuits like theft, mendacity, 
wanton destruction Of life and so on; when members of the three (higher) castes are mostly 
converted into Sudras and cows are reduced to the size of she-goats and begin to yield as 
much milk; when people belonging to the four Agramas mostly become householders and 
the conotation of relationship will extend only to the relatives of one's wife: annual plants get 
stunted in growth and trees are mostly reduced to the size of a Sami (a small tree); clouds 
will mostly end in flashes of lightning (rather than pour rain) and dwellings will mostly look 
desolate (for want of hospitality to strangers); in this way when the Kali age, whose career 
is so severe to the people, is well-nigh past, the Lord will appear in His divine form (consisting 
of Sattva alone) for the protection of virtue. (12—16)

TAT ar OT ATT TOT: l\eadauTa «Mya wa Hala ie 
AIO «= ATI AI: | Me fawjaera: aie: sresfaerta 122! 
SMART ade siete: | sfeareqenaapaedzunbaa: 1281 
fara =o alwar «= aaa: | qufeeerct ce atfeat Prefrerfa 1201

Lord Visnu, adored of the whole animate and inanimate creation, and the Soul of the 
universe, appears (in this world of matter) for protecting the virtue of the righteous and 
wiping out (the entire stock of) their Karma (and thereby liberating them). (17) The Lord will 
appear under the name of Kalki in the house of the high-souled Visnuyasa—the foremost 
Brahmana of the village of Sambhala. (18) Riding a fleet horse named Devadatta 
(obviously because it will be presented to Him by the gods) and capable of subduing the 
wicked, the Lord of the universe, wielding (the well-known) eight divine powers (Anima and 
SO 0n) and possessed of (endless) virtues and matchless splendour, will traverse the globe 
on that swift horse and exterminate with His sword in tens of millions robbers wearing the

Insignia of royalty. (19-20) : 
ai Asi ufyerha uaifa faga al amano 
ATS & EAHA 12° | * 
ast osonfrenis wifes: wetaett i areea ata Me te a

Geradion © Ta aiaefiatren: | pd aieeata det serrgictat atiaent 1231 
aet gis am uaa aera el aft A PAIS 
Nila ‘exterminated, the minds of the people of the cities

Now w bbers are (thus) yee 
and the eaidi a eG become pure indeed because Of their enjoying the breezes wafting 
the most Pails fragrance of pigments on the person.of Lord Vasudeva. (21) With Lord

i their progeny will grow exceedingly

asudey nt of strength, in their heart 3

Strong ra paren eaneites Lord Sri Hari, the Protector of Dharma, appears as Kalki, 
atyayuga will prevail (once more) at that time and the progeny of the people will be of a

Sattvika (virtuous) disposition. (23) When the moon, the sun and the Jupiter rise tog

~ Pr N 
- 4 
*

« 
ether 
(Me OO eS 5 es 
; we ky : oe a ra - 
oo AO 
- s>

ks fief Beef Phcd Pd Med Med Med Mic Md Pied Med Mad ST ahh, thal the Biel Wicd tec Pied Woe! Mic! Mod Whol Mick Mad Mel Med Mil cL Med Med Bcd Med Mid Med Mel Med MeL} We We We We Be We We WE We We We Oe We Be Ae Fe Ce He We WE We WE He HEHE He We We we wy,

in’ one zodiacal house and the Pusya constellation is in the ascendant, then it will be (known 
as) Satyayuga. (24) 
Asdat ada & wfserta a urféfar: la ad sealad: Skat aait: aradar: 1241 
STORE COMES MECICCOUCE COU ORIG MERC Corso ME MIO MEES CON LCe EL 
aasiot aq at yal aead slant fefai cate aed vat qead aq aa Per iw 
ada wave Gelitasieaad =U A wale fast: Gores Stel sre FNM: 1201 
Those kings of the solar and lunar dynasties who are no more; who are present and who 
are (yet) to come have been briefly mentioned to you. (25) The period commencing from your 
birth and ending with the coronation of Nanda would come to one thousand one hundred 
and fifteen years. (26) When constellations comprising the Great Bear rise in the heavens, 
two of thembecome visible first. Midway between (in the north-western line,) appears at night 
one of the constellations (from among ASwini and others). (27) The stars of the Great Bear 
remain united with that constellation for one hundred human years. The said stars now 
appear near the constellation known by the name of Magha during your regime. (28)

fasnsinad dq: HaTeaise fea wa: | dalled, cafes we aq We SA: 1291 
Wad A Weuaa Ware Wola: | alad afore yferat ated A Aeend_ 130 | 
qeql ease: aq uerq fata feiaer sane alogiagteagrdicen: 1321 
Jel Waal aera yataret veda: i del Aer Nye Hlesdhs wea 1321 
ae wen fed aeeiasa acai sito afeanta oe: qufad: 1331 
fess Heard adel J Wt: Hay! Afawit sal FUT AA Seah 13%!

The all-effulgent personality (consisting of pure Sattva) of Lord Visnu (Himself) appeared 
under the name of Sri Krsna. The moment He ascended to (His divine abode in) Heaven the 
Kali age entered the world, when people take delightin sin. (29) Solong as the aforesaid Lord 
of Laksmi touched the earth, Kali could not prevail over it. (30) When the seven stars

constituting the Great Bear enter the constellation of Magha Kaliyuga embarks on its career 
of twelve hundred celestial years (or 432,000) human years). (31) When from the Maghas

the stars of the Great Bear pass on to the constellation of Purvasadha, then from the time -

of King (Mahapadma) Nanda onwards Kali will gain ascendancy. (32) Persons learned in 
ancient history maintain that the age of Kali set in on the very day, (nay,) the very moment 
Sri Krsna ascended to (His abode in) heaven. (33) (Pariksit !) at the end of one thousand 
celestial years and of the fourth Yuga (Kaliyuga) Krtayuga will prevail again, when the mind 
of men will reveal (to them the true nature of) the Self.(34)

Sah UMal aa am wenaa yfai am ffeqefasot aren Aa at a 134! 
Ue AMisea Gea aera Harmar alata fer yf 36! 
ead: « Wedaaiel §=ASAeaipaas: | He «aaa «Hela aestfadt 1301 
Wied motd algeddfafadtianierad et yea serfeerd: 13¢1 
od At gat a afesia aaqdimisna maar wa sft ada 13cl 
Used Fat Sieet §=« AReaTetarat 1 yet aed Heard feaat fer TA: Ivo! 
EES EO

Tee 4: yeh yeti aa a de aaat deter aT 1x? 
saoaacnt la Weleasseeangen: | el Wada alst fecardseata wat: 1¥3!

TIPwT

TW 8) | Se ae

A ——— ee

Fe ERE See Ss

a a yadat qerha 
ae : SESS | STO A se: wa SOTA: HT SS 
Even) as the career of Manu! FecHensear: 1

(I ahs anu's race on earth has been described (with its ups and downs) 
the rise and fall, from age to age, of the Vaisyas, Sidras and Brahmanas (too) should be 
similarly understood. (35) Of the high-souled men mentioned heretofore, who are (now) 
known (mer ely) by theirnames and who survive in the form of (their) stories (only) glory alone 
remains on earth. (36) Devapi, brother of Santanu, and Maru of Ikswaku's line, both of whom 
are possessed of great powers of Yoga, are (still) alive inthe village of Kalapa. (37) Instructed 
(and commanded) by Lord Vasudeva (Kalki), both will appear (once more) on earth at the 
close of the Kall age, and Propagate virtue as before alongwith the institution of Varnas 
(grades of society) and ASramas (stages of life). (88) The round of the four Yugas, viz., Satya, 
Treta, Dwapara and Kali, runs its course in this order of sequence for (all) living beings on 
earth. (39) These rulers of men mentioned by me as also others claimed this earth as their 
own, but they had to leave it in the end and died, O king ! (40) He who perpetrates violence 
against living beings for the sake of this body, which will be ultimately called by the name of 
‘worm’, ‘excrement or ‘ashes’, no matter if it enjoys the title of ‘king’ (now), is not alive to his 
own interests; for such violence (surely) paves the way to hell. (41) "How may this earth, held 
(in sovereignty) entirely by my forbears and now enjoyed by me, continue to be in the 
possession of my son and grandson and posterity ?" Indulging in such (anxious) thoughts 
rulers wanting in wisdom and looking upon the body, (which is) a product of fire, water and 
food, as their own self and the earth as their possession, have eventually quitted both and 
vanished (into nothing). (42-43) All those rulers, O king, who by force of their might enjoyed 
the sovereignty of the globe have been converted into mere themes of stories narrated in 
discourses. (44)

Thus ends the second discourse in Book Twelve of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BIA Featseaa:

Discourse Ill 
Vanity of kings; righteous conduct for every Yuga; the means to escape the 
4—loud chanting of the Divine Name

sine Sat 
SBIssathy a SI JAH, Salt efter! stat aT fafsettaha Get: salsteet TT: 1g 
ara wa atarott wha: wire fagarafa | aa Betas fees AsietsertsaT Gar: 1 z 
ud fifties weet Seat asian: | a: ahaa | HVS! 2 | 
Ua sao see: godt ATTRA SAMAR ARTA STH | 
Wagan . Srereefeeratere | ferrareraTeTerer are TAa THeLI & | 
ae qantd Ge At Al Were: 1 § 1

evils of Kaliyug

: ‘. ys 
- ce = * 
: Oe. tng ~ ar 
= * s = 
: ‘ yes 2 < 
° - ae 
*e - . A es ¢ “ sad 
: = —- =e Dae . 
. 5 rf q a. 2a ~ 7 
- Wi ae. — Md 
™ - Sas > 7 ~, 
2 it . _ - 
b a, *» ¥ — ~~ o 
: to é ; - 
— "1 (ll t 
‘ =" * : « 
<<" € 
. me - 
4 
~ ay

qaad Heal Het A a yela ater: | alan fat ata fad Bena FT: 1 c | 
yy: Usa wMfeest sedisaia: | AMAT GI WA: Gealet Geel TT: 1 <1 
queries Walla: weata: | ikea: Hawara: Hepat Ase FT: 1201 
fora oo Uaut 389 Sleetaur: | aafa: ara tat ferateiise ae: 1221 
31 a agal eal Usa A NeW: 1 aa adiae: au: ad adfeatshra: 1221 
Wadi 48owaada 4 cpclddcterfiur: | Heater: Hea Menara: sat fast 123

Sri Suka began again: Seeing the kings (so) impatient to conquer her, this earth 
laughs at them (and says):—" How surprising it is that these kings, (mere) playthings (in 
the hands) of Death, wish to conquer me thoroughly ! (1) Fruitless is this ambition of the 
kings, by which these rulers of men have been led to repose utter faith in the (human) body, 
which is (evanescent) like a bubble of water, even though they are aware of this fact. (2) 
(They say to themselves:—) ‘Having at the outset conquered the six Indriyas (the five 
senses of perception and the mind), we shail then reduce to submission the counsellors 
and ministers of (hostile) kings as well as their relations and friends, the citizens and drivers 
of elephants (in fact, the entire army of the enemy); and having removed (all) thorns (in the 
form of thieves and robbers), we shall thus by degrees bring under subjection the (whole) 
earth with the oceans as its girdle.’ With their hearts held fast by such aspirations they fail 
to see Death standing at hand. (3-4) Having conquered by their might one Dwipa 
Surrounded by the ocean, they embark on a sea-voyage (in order to conquer other 
continents). What a poor reward it is for their conquest of the mind and senses (since all 
this is transient) ! Liberation is the (true) recompense for subduing the self." (5) "These 
stupid fellows", Mother Earth goes on, O jewel among the Kurus, "hope to conquer through 
war me, whom (even) the Manus and their sons had only to leave (in the end) and departed 
as they came! (6) For my sake indeed springs up a conflict between father and sons as 
well as between brothers of evil intent, whose mind is held fast by the notion of myness with 
respect to their kingdom. (7) Contending with one another in the words. This entire globe 
is mine and not yours, O fool !' rulers of men strike one another and die on my account. (8) 
Prthu, Pururava, Gadhi, Nahusa, Bharata, (the thousand-armed) Arjuna, Mandhata, 
Sagara, Rama, Khatwanga, Dhundhumara. Raghu, Trnabinduand Yayati, Saryati, Santanu, 
Gaya, Bhagiratha, Kuvalayaswa, Kakutstha, Nala (king of the Nisadhas), Nrga, 
Hiranyakasipu, (the demon) Vrtra, Ravana who caused people to cry (in terror), Namuci, 
Sambara, the demon Naraka (son of Earth), Hiranyaksa and Taraka, and many other 
demons and kings, who were suzerain rulers (of the world), who understood everything 
and were all brave and conquerors of all, and were invincible (themselves), claimed me 
as their own and led an exalted life; but mortal as they were by nature, they were actually 
converted into (mere) themes of a story by (the cruel hands of) Death, their object 
remaining unaccomplished.” So concluded Mother Earth, O Pariksit ! (9Q—13)

ea sat afaa aele fad othe ae: uataemi 
faeraaaan fam ata gq uemedqiew 
PERALTA TOMTAG: Titra: | 
wma fat Aeredtet qpwisnet 3 wafpariican: 124

These stories of glorious men who, having spread their fame in the worlds, passed away 
have been narrated to you with intent to impart to you the knowledge of the unsubstantial

nature of worldly enjoyments and teach 
are (nowever) a mere display of words you how to develop a distaste for them, O lord ! They

exposition, on the other hand, of the fuse L Nae gion Deihehesar tle ae 
constantly extolled (by the righteous) of Lord Visnu (of excellent renown), which is

: , Pu 
devotion to Sri Krsna should rapaatcdhiers \ ees ee Ons.sagsq1o et SnNBEl: 
UAT

The king (Pariksit) submitted: (Pray,) tell me in detail, O divine sage, the way in which 
men will (be able to)shake off the accumulated evils of the Kali age in the Kali age (itself).(16) 
(Also) tell me (something) about the Yugas (aeons), the courses of conduct prescribed for 
each Yuga, the duration of life of the cosmos as well as of the period of its final dissolution 
and the course of Kala (the Time-Spirit),a potency of Lord Visnu, the Supreme Spirit, the 
Director (even) of the Rulers of the universe (Brahma, Siva and So on). (17) |

Wylh Fava

Hel sere qdaquanistead: | Gea aa aat aafata arer fata ici

GAS: HET AAT: AFA Sefeetieara: | SAAT: AAS: WAR: SOT SAT: 121

Taras eturerat 6 qaiat «dad a: | aenioreeqafeeraefase: lol

aa feeraasr =afafeer a ore: \Aafierediqg: aut welt 771221

aq: AaeaTasgel Sate Bat | fearqeaqagaeerentoayal: 1221

GakRaa ASalet: MeaaeAal Al: | Sea: Heat CS aul: atarfestraat: 1231

wel ad edtqat datanseteaits: 1 wer: aftaaon ad asia fereeata 1261

dmemen grant fda: yeeditor: i gm yftasiss ected: As: 1241

ad wen sf mad we Wi aieasitiqaet a uRada oreh 126

syafa gar wa Wael aida pagt faarg cata aq efa: 1201

wet aati « owfadafe efeartiaag At wighatit site qa 2c!

Wal Ad wat fat feet faSTeatL | Sel Bel Wa eat G Hoar: Ba: 180!

Tad, asa Hat: ARAM AEM: | alfa adds vas Reeisadt: 132

SIAR! waUaT aa: UTeueged: Usa seTMam: feratarret fest: 122

saat aedissvar faaas gear: | cafe aarer ~afeatseioteat: 133 |

Sear nee yioen Tiga: | waengaeniiwastiatoree: —— 1a¥

uurfaeata & ait: fencer: PEs: | Stace Ward Alal Meslay 1341

unt wena fidet yer srahacrrrn! yet ferrt aa: ale Maat: 1351 
‘StiSuka replied: In the Satyayuga, O protector of men, Dharma (virtue) runs its course 
On (all) its four feet, and is held fast by the people of the age. Truth, compassion, asceticism 
and affording protection to all are the (four) feet (of virtue in its integral form). (18) People 
Of that age are mostly contented, compassionate, friendly (to all living beings),tranquil and

forbear ke delightin the Self, look upon all with an equal eye 
ng. They practise self-control, taxe dellg ! 7 4 
and take sain as Self-Realization. (19) In the Treta age a quarter of all the (four) feet of —

We Wee We We Re ee Re Re RRR TE Re Re RRR RR RR RE ORE Re Re RE ROE ER eR Ree ER He Mee EE HE Ne He BE We We We We We We We We We We Se We We We He We We We Wee Wee We ee We We Rey, 
ee en a a ek

Dharma (virtue) gets gradually encroached upon by falsehood, violence, discontent and 
discord—the (four) feet of Adharma (unrighteousness).(20) In that age (of Treta) people 
remain devoted to the performance of Vedic rites and austerities. They are not given to much 
violence nor lewd. They pursue the three objects of human endeavour (viz., religious merit. 
worldly possessions and sense-enjoyment). People are advanced in Vedic rites and among 
(the four) grades of society the Brahmanas form a majority, O protector of men! (21) Assailed 
by the four feet of Adharma, violence, discontent, falsehood and hatred, those of Dnarma— 
compassion, austerity, truthfulness and a charitable disposition — diminish by one half each 
in the Dwapara age. (22) The people of that age are fond of glory and given to the 
performance of great sacrifices, take delight in learning the Vedas, are affluent and happy, 
and maintain big families. Among the (four) grades of society the Brahmanas and Ksatriyas 
are predominant. (23) In the Kali age, however, a quarter (alone) of the (four) feet of Dharma 
remains. (Nay,) due to the feet of Adharma gaining ground that too steadily declines and 
ultimately disappears altogether. (24) People in that age turn out to be greedy, immoral and 
merciless, enter into hostility without cause and are unlucky and extremely covetous. The 
Sidras, fishermen and the like take the lead. (25) The qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas 
are seen (manifested) in men; impelled by force of time they wax or wane in the mind. (26) 
When the mind, intellect and senses abound in Sattva, and when people are interested in 
practising asceticism and acquiring wisdom, then one should understand that Satyayuga 
prevails. (27) When people are fond of religious merit, earthly possessions and worldly 
enjoyment, then know that there is Tretayuga, when Rajas Is active, O intelligent one ! (28) 
When, however, greed, discontent, pride, hypocrisy and jealousy prevail and man is fond of 
actions prompted by desire, know that it is Dwapara, when (both) Rajas and Tamas 
predominate. (29) When duplicity, mendacity, drowsiness, excessive sleep, violence, 
dejection, grief, infatuation, fear and wretchedness prevail, that is recognized as the age of 
Kali, characterized by (the predominance of Tamas, as a result of which people become dull- 
witted (viz., unable to judge things in their proper perspective) and are unlucky but voracious, 
voluptuous and destitute. And women (too) turn out to be profligate. And unchaste. (30-31) 
Countries are infested with robbers; the Vedas stand condemned by heretics; rulers exploit 
the people; and the Brahmanas remain devoted to the gratification of sexual desires and 
intent on filling their belly. (82) Religious students will give up the course of conduct 
prescribed for them and fail to observe purity, and householders will take to begging; hermits 
will take up their residence in villages and recluses will be seized with an ardent longing for 
wealth. (33) Women will be short-statured but voracious, prolific and destitute of modesty. 
They will always speak harsh words and will be given to thieving and wiles and very daring. 
(34) Low-minded traders will carry on business transactions and practise fraud. Even when 
they are not in distress people will favour pursuits which are condemned. (35) Servants will 
leave their masters when reduced to penury, though superior in every (other) respect; and 
masters too will discharge their servant, when incapacitated for service (through ailment 
etc.)., even though he may be hereditary. (Even so) people will cease to maintain cows when 
they no longer yield milk. (36)

faguigdesdia, feet 9 aleddtedi: | Aarazaredaral ear: BO: Het AW: 130! 
Wat: Maer «86 aataalusitfad: | eri agaentat arfereginqaraaa_13¢! 
Peafgararar Gitigenahia: if = Yas UST fBWaTaT: 12°! 
aR SAMAR aa aaa aU: | Stu: fearrerereant afaeata cet Sst: 1¥o | 
aon caifenftrnsast fare: wenetect: | weaha a fra sro ehrerha wenraiy 1g

; We We Wee VOM. OWE He eRe HER ee, 
oe we Ye EE CR WEME Rew ww, 
we 8088 CREME MEM He He He we HE Hey, 
8 Wr we wr

lagmenation samt aft smith aaah Ad cet Wat: 1x1

ct SEM, Sea wate, eee frre ema, yea: ISG) 
a AE SAA: OSTA TASH ATL FO Satie STAT ARM ATTRA 1S | 
aan et feat afagdet ea erga! warrant fener area, 1S | 
Tereneta: SrOT Pa ersten ferent: 
TMT SNS at We aaa ve 
CH AAT TSM, a HE haa! fast gaferaa af at wise 
fremont = aT OR: Later ae wale adesra: 140! 
poate Utah Weal We WU: aki Her UGS: We AALI4R! 
Pd Ae aad fowl Arai asidl Aa: gat ufatar wet aghatdar 1421

sft SM eMad Fa GRAS Steal sea Tas: 131

In the age of Kali men will become slaves of women and miserable. Sexual pleasure 
being the (only) ground of their affection, they will forsake their parents, brothers and (other) 
relations and kinsfolk and take counsel with their sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law (alone). (37) 
Sudras will make their living by putting on the garb of hermits and receive charitable gifts. 
Those who have no knowledge of religion will occupy high seats and preach religion.(38) 
Oppressed with famine and (heavy) taxation—land being divested of food-grains—and 
Stricken with fear of droughts, people in the Kali age will ever remain perturbed in mind. 
Destitute of clothes and ornaments, (nay, even) food and drink, bed and sexual enjoyment, 
they will go even without a bath and put on the appearance of a fiend. (39-40) Quarrelling 
even for a very small sum of money equivalent to 20 cowries, having cast (all) goodwill to the 
winds, people in Kaliyuga will kill even their own people and part with their own dear life.(41) 
Mean-minded fellows will concern themselves only with the gratification of their lust and 
Satisfaction of their hunger and fail to maintain even their aged parents; while parents will 
disown their sons, though clever in all matters. (42) With their mind perverted by heretics, 
O king, mortals in Kaliyuga will not generally worship Visnu (the immortal Lord), the highest 
Object of adoration for the (whole) universe, whose lotus-feet are bowed to by the rulers of 
the three worlds.(43) People in Kaliyuga will not worship Him by uttering whose name (even) 
Nelplessly while dying or afflicted, toppling down or stumbling, man is freed from (all) 
impediment in the shape of Karma and reaches the highest goal. (44) Enthroned inthe mind 
Of men Lord Sri Hari (the Supreme Person) drives away all evils occasioned by the Kali age 
aNd arising from substances, place and mind. (45) Heard of or glorified (by chanting His name 
“Singing His praises), meditated upon and worshipped or even gen ee ee 
iN men's heart and drives away (all) their sins committed in thousands io ae (46) ove ing 
iN the mind of Yogis (strivers) Lord Visnu wipes out the seeds of their evil Karma in the same

¢Y as fire applied to gold burns all its impurities c 
€ mind (of a man) does notattain absolute purtt 
el breath, friendliness (towards 4

aused by (its admixture with other) metals. (47) | 
y through worship of gods, asceticism, control 
ll), a bath in sacred waters, observance of sacred vows, e F

SUNG «16 ees . _

* * > =o ane . 
Ts santninhiemaniil ilies i Sencainl : ip aad ae 
a es mp te rete «

charitable gifts and muttering of prayers as it does when tke infinite Lord is enthroned in the 
heart.(48) Therefore, with all your being O king, instal Lord Sri Krsna (the Ruler even of 
Brahma and Siva) in your heart, thinking of Him with a concentrated mind while dying; You 
will thereby attain the supreme goal. (49) The Lord, who is the Supreme Ruler (of the 
universe), the Soul and Shelter of all, deserves to be meditated upon at all times; (for) those 
who are about to die meditate upon Him (as a result of practice incessantly carried on while 
living) He leads them to the state of oneness with Him, O dear Pariksit ! (50) Indeed there 
is one great virtue possessed by the Kali age, the storehouse of (all) evils, O Pariksit ! By 
merely chanting the names and glories of Sri Krsna one is freed from (all) attachments and 
reaches the Supreme. (51) Whatis attained in the Satyayuga by one contemplating on Lord 
Visnu, in Treta by one who propitiates Him through sacrifices, and in Dwapara through 
worship (of the Lord), is attained in the Kali age (merely) by chanting the name and singing 
the praises of Sri Hari.(52)

Thus ends the third discourse in Book Twelve of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BY Adaseara:

Discourse IV 
The Fourfold Pralaya

AYP SAA 
cloned qavaiieisoatiateada | Hie BM aA AU Measara | 
aie da wet feqedia wae aq wagade faaiod | 
ded Neda salt UbrecrEM | Aa Seal FA A Head Teas fe | 
wa Afufin: sip: seal aa farga i sas fagaeraHea areTy: | 
feoei aia TOT: «9 OA: acl Neda: GA wea Seas at 
Wa Mipital Ute Noa aa Glad stveaia agit faa scared | 
Usa: Waar wat Ue A adit act fea weet wera: arene: | 
Ma Beard Wien: chledagd: ws: 1 ag Sew wht wa aladat wa: 1 ¢ 1 
teats: faad ur: wd Aa fagefaiaa: dadat afe: agdorqeifer: 1 < | 
caMeoana: Za WaamMaisada: wade ferarfudieagedar: 1201 
qa fame aenimafquadiad: wausuadt aalonafien sai2e! 
TE: Alec at PG Weissqai ad AMpertgy faraviena: 122! 
Wa aul adta aeta waet:iat waleh fed meus e3!

Sri Suka began again: The divisions of Time commencing from a Paramanu (its 
minutest division) and ending with two Parardhas (comprising the life-time of Brahma) have 
already been described to you, as also the duration of the four Yugas (in Discourse XI of Book

CO © mM ££ K WwW A BW

—.cc

eae SERVE 681 
AN heey als6 Be We We We We We We We We ee ee ee ee 
Dee calution) O anal re of a Kalpa (One round of creation) and Laya (the period of 
fina! end Kali aie spats is thousand revolutions of the four Yugas (Satya, Treta, 
Dec fourteen Manus (s Ol as a day of Brahma. This constitutes a Kalpa, in the course 
4 fally long period of Palatal (lect Were King ! (2) At the end of a Kalpa an 
equ ISSolution) follows: it j : = - 
for during that period these three worlds ( av ne spoket eae pieusoiey LIE!

aes Neaven, earth and the intermediate region) remain 
dissolved. (3) This is called Naimittika (Occasional) Pralaya (because it is et by

sella See eee S Is different from the Mahapralaya or Final Dissolution when 
Branma sloa close). During this Pralaya Lord Narayana (the Maker of the 
universe) withdraws the whole universe into Himself and remains asleep on His couch of 
Ananta (the serpent-god) and Brahma (the self-born) follows suit. (4) When the lifetime of 
Brahma, the greatest of all (the Jivas), consisting of two Parardhas, has expired, all the seven 
causal principles (viz. , Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence, Ahankara or the 
cosmic Ego and the five Tanmatras or subtle elements) actually get dissolved (in Prakrti or 
Primordial Matter). (5) This constitutes, O king, the Prakrtika Pralaya, asin this, the occasion 
forfinal dissolution having been reached, the aggregate of (all) the (twenty-four) fundamental 
principles in the form of the cosmic egg gets (finally) dissolved. (6) For one hundred years, 
O king, the god of rain does not send down any shower on earth. Then, tormented by hunger, 
the earth being divested of food—grains, people actually begin to eat one another and, 
persecuted by time, gradually perish. Rendered much brighter by the ‘period of final 
dissolution, the sun sucks up by its fearful rays all the water in the seas, on the earth and in 
the human bodies, and does not release it.Sprung from the mouth of Lord Sankarsana (the 
serpent-god) and rising in flames by the force of the wind, the fire characteristic of the period 
of dissolution then burns the subterranean regions, already desolate (all their inhabitants 
having been burnt long before due to their moisture having been sucked up by the rays of 
the sun).Being burnt above and below as well as on all sides by the rays of the sun and the 
flames of fire, the cosmic egg now looks like a burnt ball of cowdung. Then a strong and 
violent wind characteristic of the period of final dissolution blows for (a little) more than a 
hundred years, so that the sky gets enveloped in dust and assumes a smoky appearance. 
Next, O dear one, numerous hosts of clouds of various colours pour down showers fora 
hundred years roaring with violent peals of thunder. Then the universe within the cosmic egg

IS Swept by a single sheet of water. (7—13) 
qa ye || Ta Sya | TAPTAN -_ UfMat Seat edd 19x 
sai zaast awe setsa aka i aed asta SA atgetsied Taq kul 
Stade Ast arat: GW Fat TH a & feraia GP Usietaal THAT ToT 1 | 
Te 86g eerictrerrgeran | asraarxaeag Sart, sentient TUT: 191 
TEM, Waes YoU: Aeaeas IHL HAASE THT LOM TOT AT 18 
qT aa aiemaa: ofa TUM: | Saree frat HNO 128 | 
a oa aa Towa a ae at GH ao Feqeaist 
a Woraalratectal a a faa: AG TlehaHea: 1ol 
er as

TEER EEE LCE. et GI Wear 128 | 
| ° aia Di 
ma: oompitar oy qearerarateiay | na: Hee FAT: cleagt: 1221

Everything being submerged in water, th

[ED Pe de) id Mic Mid Mil cht bed Mick Mick Mick Mick acd Oe! i Be 80 Me We we We By ww 
ce

e latter absorbs the (essential) property ofthe ce

—— hee

oe a . ge gh re oe & << eee,

See) 6+ 1 pmemeg etna nm ~ 4

earth, viz., smell; denuded of its smell, the earth then gets dissolved (in water). (14) Fire then 
absorbs the property of water, viz., taste; and deprived of its taste, the water (too) is forthwith 
dissolved (in the fire). Then the air absorbs the property of fire, viz., colour; and, divested of 
colour it loses itself into the air. (Likewise) ether absorbs the property of the air (viz., touch) 
and gets dissolved {in ether), O Pariksit ! Then the Tamasika aspect of the Cosmic Ego 
absorbs the property of ether, viz., sound; alongwith it ether (too) gets dissolved (in the 
Tamasika Ahankara); and the Rajasika type of Ahankara absorbs the Indriyas alongwith their 
functions. (Similarly) the Sattvika type of Ahankara absorbs the gods (presiding over them), 
O dear Pariksit ! (15—17) The Mahat-tattva absorbs the (triple) Ahankara; while the (three) 
Gunas (modes of Prakrti), viz., Sattva etc., absorb Mahat. Impelled by Time, the Unmanifest 
(Prakrti) reduces the (three) modes of Prakrti to the state of equilibrium, O king ! (18) Prakrti 
is not subject to the (six) states* such as modification, brought about by the divisions of time 
(even as they pass),. it is without beginning or end, unmanifest, constant, the cause (of all) 
and not subject to decay. (19) In that state, there is no speech, no mind, no (modes of 
Prakrti, viz.,) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, no Mahat and other products of Matter, no breath, 
no intellect, no senses nor the deities (presiding over them) and no conception, much less 
location of Lokas (spheres). (20) (Again,) there is no dream nor waking life nor deep slumber; 
no ether, water, earth, air, fire or sun. Itis something like deep sleep or vacuity; nay, beyond 
conception. The Vedas speak of it as a state which is the root of the universe. (21) This is 
(what is known as) Prakrtika Pralaya (the Dissolution of everything into Prakrti or Primordial 
Matter), when, impelled by Time, the potencies of the Supreme Person as well as of the 
Unmanifest (Prakrti) are completely and helplessly withdrawn (into their substratum).(22)

Selsaeean Aa Milt Aas! ceacaleaintenaaerdacae = AT_ 123 | 
aaFAT SA a valirat A ya Mai Ua et: GI APIA A Arata | 2 
qemu 4s: aakta areadi wee wr AM sera ie 
aM weet aie vara a daha aiseuile am fawnageqeareard 26! 
aa gage: sim: waalaafaqite | fants wd wears ada: 121 
ad, aaAraasrnaqretd A WA: | SAMA AAAdacaag A121 
faa: SAIS sea | at Peenseaon areca seta 128 |

a fé aaa amantaga afe aad i ara fosadescarfasrataathta 1301

In the form of the intellect, the senses and their objects it is consciousness alone, their 
ground or substratum, which shines forth. Whatever has a beginning and an end is unreal, 
because it is open to perception and has no existence apart from its cause. (23) Light, the 
eye and colour (which are all modifications of fire) are not distinct from fire. Similarly the 
intellect, senses and their objects are not distinct from Brahma (the only Reality),which is 
quite different from them (inasmuch as It exists even when they cease to be, while the reverse 
is not true). (24) Wakefulness, dream and deep slumber, it is said, are so many states of 
Buddhi (intellect); the plurality attributed to the pure Self (in the form of ViSwa, Taijasa and 
Prajna, as severally presiding over these states), is mere illusion, O Pariksit ! (25) (Just) as 
clouds appear and disappear in the sky, this universe (too)—because it has a beginning and 
an end and since it is made up of parts, sometimes appears and sometimes disappears in 
Brahma. (26) In this world, of all objects consisting of parts, the part alone has been declared 
(in the Sruti texts) to be real; for the parts are seen to exist (even) in the absence of a 
composite just as the threads of a cloth can be seen even when the cloth is not there, O dear

one! (27) Whatever is perceived as a cause oran effect is an illusion, because a cause and 
an effect are correlated to one another. Therefore, all that has a beginning and an end is 
unreal. (28) Though manifest (to us), the phenomenal world cannot be explained in the least 
degree independently of the Self. If it were (at all) capable of being so explained, it would turn 
out to be (self-effulgent) like the conscious Self and (as such) unitary a& the Self. (29) There 
can be no diversity in that which is real. If anignorant man were to recognize (such) diversity, 
it would be (unreal) like the distinction between the space enclosed by a pitcher and the

infinite (expanse of the) sky, between the sun and its reflection in water, or between the air 
outside and inside the body. (30)

ar fewad agen aaa Safe: «= frenfiretaeraatg | 
TW adfinitesdtestt ane ctfnandfedstt: 1321 
aa eMishvelscheRict «genie a RTTRTT: | 
Wa ae sequdiadt sae seen: 1321 
at aarensvat faded wa: wed vate aati 
aa wes safer «feat = aRafa AMGEN 133 | 
qed fadeneitar BS IDIOTIC CSE tal 
safase aaa HAS AAA 13% 
Even as in practical use gold is found by men wrought in numerous forms (ornaments) 
according to various processes, so the Lord, who is above sense-perception, is described 
by (egotistic) men (in different ways) in secular as well as Vedic parlance. (31) (Just) as a 
cloud, though born of the sun and revealed by (the light of) the sun, prevents the eye, which 
is a part of the sun, from beholding the sun, so does the ego, which has its source in Brahma 
and is illumined by Brahma, stand in the way of the Jiva, a particle of Brahma, realizing 
Brahma; which is the same as the Jiva. (32) As soon as the cloud born of the sun is scattered 
the eye sees the sun, which is its own self. (Similarly) the moment the ego, which veils (the 
true nature of) the soul, yields to inquiry (about the Self), the soul realizes its identity with 
Brahma. (83) When, having torn—in the aforesaid manner with this dagger of wisdom, 
Ahankara, a product of Maya, which veils (the true nature of) the soul, and realized the all- 
Perfect Self, the Jiva stands fulfilled, they call such a state the everlasting Dissolution, O dear 
Pariksit ! (34) | 
frat wat «|e T seach | aA: AMAA 1341 
aIoariaagy ferme faa akon waned: 1261 
Seat HIOAMaAaa | ae Aa aed faait sarasnita 1z01 
fret Sfifredta ae writ wa: oretans afer: areer aerigait 1321

Some men, knowing the subtle state of things, O tormentor of foes! declare the creation 
and dissolution of all created beings from Brahma downward as going on all the time (every 
moment). (35) The successive stages that are gone through by (all) changing things (such 
@S a stream or the flame of a lamp) serve as an index of the constant appearance and 
dissolution of the body etc., (of a created being), which are being rapidly worn away (every 
Moment) by force of the stream of Time. (36) The (successive) stages (of growth and decay 
Clc., of created beings) brought about by the aforementioned Time, a manifestation of the

Imighty, which has no beginning or end, are certainly not perceived (even) as the stages S| 
Movement of luminaries (coursing) in the heavens. (37) (In this way) the Nitya (see a 
“S Well as the Naimittika (occasional), nay. the Prakrtika (or final) and Atyaritike:(evenaenag ee

eo

| 
! 
;

a ee a a ea ay ee a ere a 
-

——<. « ”"” =

Ye

types of Dissolution have been described (by me). Such is the course of Time. (38) 
UH: HOAs MAGA AVTAT AAA: 
Slowed Hilal: Parad: ceeta Asiseferqia: 13e1

aaRagenaisars: yal Wiad: year | 
CiomwIRaaaaae «dat wad fafaee-aeardte ixo!

Guu fed Mary eahaonsare: lane Ut We HVeasAa a: ive 
a a ud We War aaa: 1 gat vad sia: feat acafimam ise 
Wi aie ga minal afereaiddat pets ays: alaaiefz: iva

Sfa Steerrad AS UAE Sleds sazreps AqCaiseaa: rs

In this way, O jewel among the Kurus ! have been narrated (by Me) in brief the stories 
of the sportful activities of Lord Narayana, the Maker of the universe and the abode of all living 
beings as well as of all strength and goodness; (for) not even Brahma (the birthless creator) 
is capable of relating them in all their details and entirety. (89) To a man tormented by the 
wild fire of manifold miseries and seeking to cross the ocean of metempsychosis, (which is) 
most difficult to cross; there is no vessel other than constantly enjoying the nectar-like stories 
of the sportful activities of Lord Purusottama (the Supreme Person). (40) Of yore (at the 
beginning of creation) the omniscient and immortal Lord Narayana taught the compilation in 
the form of this (Bhagavata) Purana (in four verses”) to the sage Narada (through Brahmart) 
and the latter to (my father,) the sage Krsnadwaipayana (Vedavyasa). (41) Full of delight, 
O great king, the said divine sage Vedavyasa (who lives in a grove of jujube trees) actually 
taught me this compilation (consisting of 18000 Slokas), which is equal (in worth) to the 
Vedas. (42) Requested by the sage Saunaka and others, O jewel among the Kurus! that Stta 
(sitting over there) will expound it to the (eighty-eight thousand) Rsis (going to be assembled) 
in a lengthy sacrificial session at Naimisaranya. (43)

Thus ends the fourth discourse in Book Twelve of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

BIA GSAISeaa:

| Discourse V 
The (Final) Teaching (of Sukadeva) concerning Brahma 
aye sara 
SAlqavddsmient faa war st: | AA Walestt we wa: wleTaqea: | 2 | 
@ qd Us Akela agate safe a soa: seas tear a aqeafa | 2 |

* Vide II. ix. 31 —34. 
T Vide Il. ix. 43-44.

F ‘5 ’ F 
DIS ON atta aaa aa ee Same eetaeaes BOOK TWELVE 685

ee ier trie irri it lier tiie 
1 Sica Yet a qadbnftecar dong seed FOG: 1 3 
aa aa RRS ws: AA | AR UR SRVT Aa SAAT AINA: |X I 
Be Fe SMTSSATT ATE: ALAM BT Ue BR BY sitet wer wa wa 1 4 
re: alfa St Se TOT aaah ara: |: BRA Urea aah Ser eh 1G | 
aelasradtidann madd iadt doe duatd Rend wa: 1 
WERTH Basa fararzafa 1 6 | 
A caren weatfral carrera: ox: | se Fa aT galsaniiamena: | 2 |

Sri Suka began again : In this (Bhagavata-Mahapurana) stands celebrated every now 
and then Lord Sri Hari, the Soul (Controller) of the universe, of whose exultation and anger 
were (severally) born Brahma (the creator) and Rudra (the god of destruction). (1) You for 
your part, O king, give up this (foolish) notion, characteristic of a brute, that you will die. Unlike 
the body—which is born at a/particular moment while it was non-existent before and, 
therefore, perishes—you (the/Soul that you are) were not so born and (therefore) will not 
die.(2) You were never born (as a father) nor will you be born in the form of ason and again 
in that of a grandson, and so on as the tree from a seed and (again).a seed from the tree; 
(for) you are (quite) distinct from the body etc., just as fire (is distinct from the firewood). (3) 
Since—just as in the dream state a man himself sees his head lopped off—one witnesses 
the death etc., of one’s body (alone, and not of the self, which is the seer and different from 
those states), the self (within you) is as a matter of fact undying and unborn. (4) (Just) as when 
an earthen pot is broken the space enclosed by it is (once more) the same as it was before 
(the pot came into existence), so when the body is (finally) dissolved (as a result of Self- 
Realization) the individual soul becomes one with Brahma again. (5) The mind alone creates 
bodies, objects of senses and actions for the soul. Itis Maya that creates the aforesaid mind; 
and from Maya proceeds the transmigration of the Jiva. (6) A light maintains its character as 
light (only) so long as there is found the combination of oil, that which holds the oil, a wick 
and fire. Even so itis through the action of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas that a body appears and 
ceases; while transmigration has its root in mistaking the body as ones own self. (7) (Just 
as with the going out of a light the element of fire does not perish, so) the soul encased in

a body does not perish (with the body)—the soul which is self-effulgent and lies beyond the »

physical no less than the astral body, inasmuch as it is the support of all, immutable and all- 
Pervasive, (nay,) endless and unparalleled like the sky. (8)

VaR AAA Aa yar Tat | aeMAMva «=| -arqeaafercat 1 < 
Sit frsareda a ai seat aan: yaa Aoseaha qaqa yaa 10! 
3 Wa UW am we WH WIM Waa Freane 1221 
Rd deh we load faorad: | Feat AN a fast a Germars: 1221 
Ui Afr aa aasse Upar, FAI Ridaeaser fe ya: atgfrests 1231

Full of constant thought of Lord Vasudeva, O king, investigate thus (the truth of) the Ge 
©N¢ased in your psychophysical organism, by your own effort with the help of syllogis a 
feasoning, (9) Urged by the curse of aBrahmana, the serpent Taksaka will notbe able to burn

You (the soul within your body, even though it may bu

rn the body). (All) the agents of Death 
Combined) cannot burn you, who are (no other than) the Death of deaths, theralmighiybeld

i ee

~

* 
¥ 
* 
_ 
-_

4 
4 att * Lp 
me ~_ 
ne ial

Ag aie

> = 
d Ata rr. 
a a a = on, 
ay "ae? 
ee 
4 ¥ 
:

| (Himself). (10) "l am Brahma, the supreme support, and Brahma, the highest goal am | !""

Thus identifying yourself with the Absolute (your very Self), and realizing your true nature, 
you will behold neither the serpent Taksaka biting you at your feet with its poisonous fangs 
nor your body nor the universe as apart from you. (11-12) (All) this has been narrated to you 
(by me), O dear Pariksit ! in response to what you, my very self, inquired concerning the 
pastimes of Lord Sri Hari, the Soul of the universe, O protector of men ! What more do you 
desire to hear ? (13)

Thus ends the fifth discourse in Book Twelve of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

ZI WPISeaa:

Discourse VI 
(Pariksit attains the supreme goal and Janamejaya commences a snake-

sacrifice;) Classification of the Vedas into so many Sakhas or schools 
Yd sald 
iiaera aPmiiaied oie ares fae ae t 
aanesetga Add yal agefoadtene a fanned: | 2 | 
Sita began again : Having heard this discourse of the sage Suka (the son of Vyasa), 
who beheld the universe within himself and. looked upon all with an equal eye, the said

Pariksit, who had been granted his life by the Lord, approached the soles of the sage's feet 
and with bent head and joined palms spoke thus. (1)

UNA

fagiseayedisha Wad Heoneati snfadl aa A aaneaeerdt ee: 1 2 |

Weegte At ede sy AMAR 6A Cede: | 2 |

Torte 8 vad 8=89aaiaet wexmaclal wrarqavda | x |

Wiaaiaan Ae aA faaeqisfast sa fate aid qari & |

aie Al Ae as Aoradast | ama Ad: sasa fags. & |

it a Pet A Walageiapari vam cid Ad at wad: wedi wv | 
The king (Pariksit) submitted : | stand accomplished of purpose and have been 
favoured by your gracious self in that | have been directly told of Sri Hari, who has no 
beginning or end, as well as of the means of attaining Him. (2) | do not consider it surprising 
that the grace of exalted souls, who have given their mind to Sri Hari (the immortal Lord), 
descends on the ignorant creatures tormented by agonies. (3) We have heard from you the 
compilation in the form of this Purana, in which the most illustrious Lord has been described

asa matter of fact. (4) Lord || am afraid neither of Taksaka nor of other agencies of death, 
since | have (now) entered the fearless and all-blissful state of oneness with Brahma (the

ae teens OT Seen te we +

Absolute) as shown by you. (5) (Now) give me 
(all my senses Including) speech and, having

Ud sald 
SHAAN WTA. Sree: 1sima faerie: ure aaa ghia: 1c t 
wmreirere TRITAAATET | TATE Ut eeaTeTEraTEeeT qe: 1 8 
org STS Wg EE: we went feagfeedara: 1901

Suta resumed: Thus addressed and worshipped by the king, the divine Sri Suka (son 
of Vedavyasa) took leave of him and departed alongwith (other) ascetics. (8) Uniting his mind 
by force of reason with the Self, the royal sage Pariksit for his part contemplated on the 
Supreme Spirit, remaining breathless like (the trunk of) a tree. (9) With (all) his doubts 
resolved, (nay,) identified with Brahma (the Absolute) and free from attachment, the great 
Yogi sat down on the bank of the (holy) Ganga facing the north on blades of Kuga grass, the 
ends of which pointed to the east. (10)

dan: “fet fas: get fasrqaat! eden Fa esq cant uf meqa eel 
q dan xsfantad fageror fares: CHIARUISET AAA 122 1 
Mela UstieeisteRoraal | AYA AMAA Al: Wadi Adefeary 1231 
Cela Herre ya a fea ada: i fafat wat aad canqeaed: 12x! 
cage agieaterat @W:laqy: qeauitr fagen: areata: 1241

Directed by the infuritated son of a Brahmana and going to (see) the king with the 
intention of bitting him to death, O Brahmanas ! Taksaka met on the way (a Brahmana 
named) Kasyapa. (11) Having gratified KaSyapa, who knew how to counteract the effect of 
Poison, with gifts of money and sent him back, the serpent, who was capable of assuming 
any form at will, and came disguised as a Brahmana (approached and) bit the king. (12) By 
the action of fire produced by the poison of the snake the body of the royal sage, who had 
become one with Brahma, was instantly reduced to ashes, while all men looked on. (13) 
There arose a terrible outcry on earth as well as in the heavens and in all the quarters; while 
gods and demons as well as men andall others were really struck with wonder. (14) Celestial 
kettle-drums sounded (of their own accord), Gandharvas and Apsaras (celestial musicians 
and dancing girls) sang praises; while gods sent down showers of flowers, raising shouts of 
applause. (15)

waa: wirat Al ern UARAT | AMT Gera Theat ATTA, Tat BE fast: 1 8G 
ied afrarct EI, WET GER Sela: wT at get 
orden wat TT Urine fee! aT Tae: HET SMATLTI: 1 C1 
a atm wae wee: AAA aa Cede: RTA UaeraT 18S 
Untfara sft aa Weteast saref: | ease fast arat fener aTett 120! 
Teeassagaim: et dah We caH Tae HGS Weta Ct

a 
. ~ hay 
eo -« 
*e ~ 
’ a a a a 
: k 7 Fs ba, - 
"oe . ye - ss : *. ce = Sony CPAs 
@ e ¥ . yo > fe _* as ~~ in a 
e e . e ¢ ~ . oe xs &; eg ee ~ 
» 5 e e LENT 5 P wh . : , es eS eee eee 
° . e , ; “ é * : ey Agr sees we Shae x wy 
e : pea Pen ee Figs > - 
era Oe et et re : 
7 4 v 7“ “ * 
eP LA oo ny 
Qen Sess tee :

< owas fama | weamea| faclaenige: We THT

ee Se tt. 2 2 2 2 2 2 tt th kk kok hekoh hhh lh ahhh Rink hhh hhh heheh Wr We We We We He We We We We He We We We We Ke Hew, 
Sr nn ema eon een nana mnaeinemeemes eeemeeee e

a3 aa was ammda adueisma diaamgaqna al SmERTAT: 12% 
Sifad AUT smitifa: Aa Hao Uses ARTS Tela TES Ga: 1241 
adage: ayesha iusaped syye smered aq 126 | 
Tad BAe Us Ueidairnies eat srarral aren safes fe yeaa i201

Enraged to hear of his father having been consumed by Taksaka, Janamejaya with the 
help of Brahmana priests started in the course of a sacrifice offering snakes in the prescribed 
manner into the sacrificial fire. (16) Agitated with fear to see great serpents burning in blazing. 
fire at the snake-sacrifice, Taksaka sought (the presence of) Indra for protection. (17) Not 
seeing Taksaka there, King Janamejaya (son of Pariksit) inquired of the Brahmanas as to 
why Taksaka, the vilest of all snakes, was not being burnt. (18) (They replied,) “Indra, O ruler 
of kings, protects him as the latter has sought him for protection. The snake has been held 
back by Indra, hence he does not fall into the fire." (19) Hearing this, Janamejaya (son of 
Pariksit), highly intelligent as he was, said to the priests, "Why should Taksaka not be invoked 
by you, O Brahmanas, alongwith Indra to fall into the sacrificial fire ?" (20) Hearing this the 
Brahmanas invoked (the presence of) Taksaka alongwith Indra in the sacrifice thus: 
"Taksaka ! soon fall down here with Indra, who has the (forty-nine) Maruts (wind-gods) for 
his followers." (21) Indra alongwith his aerial car, Taksaka and all, was made to move from 
his abode by the maledictions uttered by the Brahmanas and felt greatly agitated in mind.(22) 
Brhaspati, the son of Angira, expostulated (thus) with the said king (Janamejaya) when he 
saw Indra falling from the heavens alongwith Taksaka and the celestial car:—(23) "This king 
of serpents cannot be killed by you, O ruler of men; for he has drunk of nectar and is therefore 
unquestionably immortal and immune from old age. (24) Life and death of a living being as 
well as its existence in the other world is determined by its own doing, O king ! None else can 
bring happiness or misery to another than the latter's own doing. (25) When a living being 
meets (its) death through the medium of a snake, thief, fire or lightning, or through hunger, 
thirst, disease and the like, O protector of men, it (only) reaps thereby the fruit of such Karma 
as has begun to bear fruit. (26) Therefore, let this sacrifice, actuated as it is by a malevolent 
purpose, O king ! be stopped, as serpents burnt through it were (all) innocent. (But you too 
are not to blame; for) as a matter of fact, itis the fruit of one's own (past) doings that is reaped 
by living beings.” (27)

Yd sad

sae: A AAs Aelia da: i adeno: wsrarara areata 121 
ao famitigmrerenreaaiesamn «9 aati aera «=A TUT fafa: 1291 
4 at asitava fauhta araissaarsamercanteru: | 
a alee fafa wags wugeafancaaft adizot 
I aw ga gadwa: a gay sfafafataqcae 
dedgcenareart fifa «ania fama wa af: 1321 
um ud amanmaha aq aafa Adedefagera: | 
fagea «= eieaaeiteet «= eeraenafad «= rfat: 1321 
aq Udelrrsia fata at uenism vata deter a aat deter 133! 
sidtateiedidad 8Naaad 8 asia aad egos at adia afar i3vi 
am Wad dA AMaHvsnaa | acerqeceamid Afeaaeamnfaard 134!

Dis. 6 ] BOOK TWELVE 689

shih Sara

donfefireatafererctararetrtarcta: | dary cHften Sra Wad Beasts A: 136

Saunaka submitted : Into how many schools were the Vedas divided by Paila and other 
great souls, teachers of the Vedas and pupils of Vedavyasa ? (Pray) relate this to us. (36) 
Yd sara

aaa «SEL WAI]: «UAB: | Reel afeieteTe, faserdt 1391 
aque We afte | weerer: | weafenarenenTet aT ATTN AA 131 
aaisyfaaalsnt aisramva: BUTE! Talery ATA ART: ALATA: 1981 
suit a sH Ble GAA a SAGE | FAP SAA AS SAU ATA: oO | 
MUNA AAI: Batlle ara: WA: | A adusamasestst 9- GAIA SR

Sita replied : From the cavity in the heart of Brahma (the creator), who occupies the

highest position (in the universe), while his mind was composed (through meditation), O 
Saunaea ! there oat a sound, which can be distinctly perceived (by all) through control of

the function of hearing (by closing one's ears), and b

y focussing one's mind on which,O —

ee ee tate es Pe hel Meal es Peel es ac Pc Pe al ed Mid Med el Maeda Rl Met Med Mad Me ak Med Red Riel Rick Rc Ml Med Me! Mel Med Ried Med Bd Mel Bl Sr we We We Ee He We Be Ee He Ee He Ne eee ee We We Wee We He We ae 
eee eee ne nen ne ee 6S]... a,

Brahmana sage, Yogis shake off the impurities of the mind—occasioned by the Adhibhita 
(the body), Adhyatma (the organs of action) and Adhidaiva (the senses of perception)—and 
attain Liberation (cessation of birth and death). (37-38) From that sound emanated (the 
sacred syllable) OM—consisting of three parts ( A, U, M),—whose origin is unmanifest, 
(nay,) which flashes (in the heart) by itself. It is this syllable which reveals (the true nature 
of) the almighty and infinite Supreme Spirit—that hears this unmanifest (inarticulate 
humming) sound (even) when the sense of hearing has ceased to function (due to the ears 
having been shut) and whose cognition is intact (even) when all the senses are inoperative 
(as insound sleep or Samadhi)—by which (sacred syllable) speech (in the form of the Vedas) 
is manifested and which owes its manifestation in the cavity of the heart to the (Supreme) 
Spirit. (89-40) That syllable (again) is directly expressive of its origin, the infinite Supreme 
Spirit; it is the hidden meaning of all Mantras (Sacred texts), the eternal seed of the Vedas 
(being no other than Brahma Itself). (41)

qa Gea aut sane weeindd seal war qormmrediqaa: 1x2 
Ad SALAH STS WTA: | AA Vea gacaiarawry, «18 
wat «= aga AIG Hdadiay: Wenge 4 aenisdelafaaan ivxi 
Matai Addi sealed q aalaesR: wus: aaa isl 
a Gee emteeiefaad: | aaeitget ore alamel «wefefsa: ise 
SUNS: load Ged Steal hie: | aa, Aaa Sear eewregqdatiad: iso

The syllable (OM), O jewel of the Bhrgus ! comprised three letter-sounds— 3, 3, and 
y, which (severally) hold (in the form of a seed) sets of three entities (viz.,) the (three) 
Gunas (modes of Prakrti— Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), the (three) names (Rk. Yajus and 
sama), the (three) substances (spheres, viz., Bhuh—the terrestrial globe, Bhuvah—the 
aerial region and Swah—heaven) and the (three) states of consciousness (viz., wakefulness, 
dream and sound sleep). (42) Out of the aforesaid (three letters) the almighty Brahma (the 
birthless creator) evolved the alphabet, comprising Antahsthas (semi-vowels), Usmas 
(aspirants), Swaras (vowels), Sparsas (sibilants) and the short, long and prolated measures 
of sounds. (43) With this alphabet the (mighty) Brahma gave expression through his four 
mouths to the four Vedas—alongwith the (three) Vyahrtis (BhUh, Bhuvah and Swah) and 
OM (prefixed to the Gayatri-Mantra while reciting it—with the intention of pointing out the 
duties of the four priests (officiating at a sacrifice, viz., Hota, Adhwaryu, Udgata and 
Brahma). (44) He then taught them to his (mind-born) sons (Marici and others), who were 
(all) Brahmana sages and (accordingly) expertin reciting the Vedas (with proper intonation 
etc.). The latter in their turn proved to be the promulgators of righteousness and taught the 
Vedas to their sons (Kasyapa and others). (45) Received from generation to generation in 
the course of the four Yugas by the pupils of the various sages—pupils who observed the 
vow of (lifelong) celibacy (in order to retain them in their memory)—the aforesaid Vedas 
were later on divided by great seers (into Samhitas, Brahmanas and so on) at the end of 
the Dwapara age (lit., the period preceded by the Dwapara age). (46) Perceiving the men 
to be shortlived, deficient in energy and dull-witted due to the action of Time (in the form : 
of unrighteousness prevailing in it), the Brahmana seers rearranged the Vedas as directed 
by the immortal Lord residing in their heart. (47)

SAAR We wWialeslHulad: | Heansetaroalrarar amiga isc 
WRN Ataaaaoa fay: 1 saduit agrt aq am adfelerixei 
AAA | UR «= ata: bade: 9 efedige® aarifermon ga iho!

is. 6 
DS seek aen wen waenwwraaaareiieea tte BOOK TWELVE 691

Bese, aay Rrra eMait: | Ueheat feat wetcharst eat fag: 1421

aaa Ta ela «rene aapfon 142 
ae . TS TEM Satria aerated am wafers qadad 143 
ue: Wales Fairer GM: | arenera a Giseng frets: deat BML GY | 
agen ore STA agaTaAT TTT | UTE SOMATA 1 
seme Blea at MTORR aa wer iret after: teratiees sare | 
WMereRiygt: A TC TFN SA ear | ARIA FORTIGATE «1 GON 
siqerds dha: amen adie aermisdaetaet at WP: 1421 
areale: TTA amare | as Aes: arate dit 2a: 141 
aeqga: den dat waite: | eeescet amd ada: sme ico!

Descended from (the loins of) the sage ParaSara through Satyavati in the form of 
Vedavyasa (representing a ray of Sattva, forming part of Maya, the divine potency) as prayed 
to by Brahma, Sankara and other guardians of the spheres, for the vindication of righteous- 
ness, O Brahmana sage, in the current Manvantara too, The almighty Lord, the Life-giver of 
the universe, divided the Veda, O highly blessed one! into four parts. (48-49) Picking out and 
classifying in four (distinct) groups the multitudes of Mantras belonging to the categories of 
Rk, Atharva, Yajus and Sama, (even) as various kinds of gems are assorted into so many 
groups, the said Maharsi compiled four Samhitas or collections out of those Mantras. (50) 
Summoning in his presence four (of his foremost) pupils (Paila and others), the powerful 
Vyasa of mighty intellect imparted one of those collections to each, O Saunaka ! (51) He 
taught, they say, the very first Samhita under the name of Bahvrca-Samhita (because 
consisting of a collection of Rks or psalms) to Paila and the body of sacred texts in prose, 
recited during sacrifices and bearing the name of Nigada (prose), to another named 
VaiSampayana. (52) (Even) so he taught the body of Samas or songs, going by the name 
of Chandoga-Samhita (because sung in various metres) to Jaimini and (the fourth called) 
Atharvangirasi, to his (fourth) pupil Sumantu. (53) The sage Paila taught his own (Bahvrcha-) 
Samhita (in two parts) one each to Indrapramiti and Baskala; the latter too divided his branch 
into four parts and taught (one each), O scion of Bhrgu, to the disciples Bodhya, Yajnavalkya, 
ParaSara and Agnimitra. Indrapramiti, a man of selfcontrol, taught his collection to the 
learned sage Mandiukeya; and his pupil was Devamitra, who (in his turn) imparted its 
knowledge to the sages Saubhari and others. (54—56) Mandukeya’s son was Sakalya, who 
for his part divided his collection into five branches and taught them to (his pupils) Vatsya, 
Mudgala, Saliya, Gokhalya and Sigira. (57) The sage Jatukarnya, another pupil of Sakalya, 
imparted the knowledge of his own collection (in three parts), as well as of its Nirukta 
(explanation of obscure words), to his (four) pupils, Balaka, Paija, Vaitala and Viraja. (58) 
Baskala's son, Baskali, made out of all the (aforesaid) branches the collection bearing the 
name of Valakhilya-Samhita. (His pupils) Balayani, Bhajya and Kasara (learnt and) 
memorized it. (59) By these Brahmana sages were (learnt and) preserved the Samhitas 
forming part of Rgveda. Hearing of the calssification of these Mantras of the Veda one Is

earns ll sins. (60) 
Completely absolved from hee s ereaheresate: saat SRIATT 1G | 
amacaasy aser sent wre fra! aera | -aARese | PESTER 
; ari fanaa fretot need wonfafa 163!

Saumga: wish woke aqRT TOM ae acter rat ATR, TOT GL a

aa fart wat dewloudarsseg: | chatter sft Aa: RIT STE TARTeT: 1G 41 
Gare «Aa Sceafemase INiadanihs OAS AT 1

As is well-known, some pupils of Vaisampayana were known as Carakadhwaryus 
because they went through on behalf of their teacher a course of penance to expiate the 
sin of Brahmanicide. (61) (Thereupon) Yajnhavalkya, another disciple of Vaisampayana, 
submitted (to his preceptor), "Oh, of what account, venerable sir, will be the reward 
obtained through the penance of these pupils (of yours) of poor strength ! I shall undergo 
a course of penance very difficult to practise." (62) Offended, when addressed thus, the 
preceptor retorted, "Get away (from here). | have nothing more to do with you, a pupil 
contemning Brahmanas. Give up at once all that you have learnt from me." (63) Vomiting 
the portions of Yajurveda (which he had learnt from his preceptor), YajNavalkya, son of 
Devarata, too immediately left the place. Sages beheld those portions of Yajurveda and, 
greatly enamoured of them, assumed the form of partridges and picked them up. 
(Thenceforward) that most attractive branch of Yajurveda came to be known by the name 
of Taittiriya (connected with partridges). (64-65) Seeking to obtain additional Srutis not 
known even to his preceptor, Yajnavalkya, O Brahmana sage, thereupon duly extolled the 
Sun-god, the Master of the Vedas (as follows). (66)

WAAC SATA 
AMeeratidrdeang sfeta arene saecaadaat vara wa 
HUTA AAA aA AAO ATA AAA lHAATAAASaA 1 G9 | 
qq € aa faqada alacnenaaquamencmalatetatsaamahae- 
Chghadiais Wad: aavetats MAqaAISaA 1c | 
aq se ala fermen fetal wastage: Saad 
Fareata 1&8

UdRaaesyal WaAeNaAaAeia 1190 1 
Ud Sanaa dA HAccHlalatletwSasdieut: 1192 | 
AW @ Wada AUelenqie ffyaqqeltdaraqneramdamad:nia 
STERTATA 1'92 | 
_Yajnavalkya prayed : Hail to the almighty Sun-god, denoted by the sacred syllable 
OM! Dwelling as the very Soul of the universe in the heart of multitudes of created beings— 
falling under four categories (viz., mammals, oviparous creatures, the sweet-born and 
those sprouting from the soil), from Brahma down to a clump of grass—and outside too as 
(the wheel of) Time revolving in the form of years made up of (minute) parts like an instant, 
a moment and the twinkling of an eye, yet unlimited by any condition, like the sky, You 
maintain the progress of the world all alone by sucking (in the hot season) and releasing 
the moisture (during the monsoon). (This passage explains the meaning of the first foot of 
the Gayatri-Mantra.) (67) We duly and devoutly contemplate on that well-known orb of 
Your venerable Self, O Jewel among the gods, which is burning over there, O Father (of 
the universe), who burn away all the sins and miseries (resulting from them) as well as their 
seed (viz., ignorance) of those who wait upon You (with prayers etc.) in the manner

prescribed by the Vedas thrice everyday ( 
assage explains the meaning of the sec 
Controller of the multitudes of immobile an

morning-and Evening as well as at midday). (This 
ond foot of the Gayatri-Mantra. (68) As the Inner

d mobile creatures in this (visible) universe, which 
as is well-known,constitute Your own bodies, You being their very Self, va direct their mind,

senses and vital airs, which are (all) material (and therefore inert). (This explains the meaning 
of the third and last foot of the Gayatri-Mantra.) (69) Seeing this world swallowed by the 
diabolical python bearing the name of darkness and wearing a most dreadful aspect, and 
(therefore) lying unconscious as though dead, You a lone rouse it by Your mere glance out 
of compassion, supr emely compassionate as You are, and direct it thrice everyday to the 
adoration of the Supreme Spirit, leading to the highest good under the name of their own 
sacred duty. Like a king You go about instilling fear in (the heart of) the wicked and waited 
upon at every point by the guardians of the quarters with offerings of water and lotus buds 
in their joined palms. (70-71) Obviously for the same reason, O Lord, do | resort to Your 
lotus-feet, bowed to by those (Indra and others) adored in all the three worlds, desirous as

| am of receiving knowledge of the portions of Yajurveda (hitherto) unknown by anyone 
else. That is all. (72)

Yd saad 
wa qa: A War area ek: i aperararnf 9 qrasert, sarfed: 11031 
agitate ame wzdley: 1 aygatstarem: apvanteateated: 10%! 
Sr: Sree, GCA GE: | Gale aeyTEMATechent wT ear 18k | 
gqeat «ala aes: «amaentter aeadiedde ash art adt fest: 10a 
fea: mae: wera qadur: | Rrent syed start safes: 1901 
Sera: ATT: REM SIGH USAMA Ft | Gres AAT ATA aa 1192 | 
annfamigte: ger: aete: pata a chakra seyg: ferret at AA 108 | 
pat 486 fatuaarel «= Ad faarferatfen: | rer sel areata: SM Sta Sa | C01 
ofa SETA ASU ORAS Seca SAHA ASIAN AA AISA: 1€ |

Siita continued : Extolled thus, the celebrated and glarious Sun-god felt (highly) 
Propitiated and, assuming the form of a horse, taught the sage such portions of the 
Yajurveda as were (hitherto) unknown to anyone else. (73) Out of the countless Mantras 
of Yajurveda (revealed to him by the Sun-god) the powerful Yajhavalkya compiled (as 
many as) fifteen Sakhas known by the name of Vajasan!. Sages Kanva, Madhyandina and 
others learntthem. (74) Sage Sumantu was the son of Jaimini, the chanter of Samaveda (as 
taught to him by Vedavyasa—vide verse 53 above) and Sunvan was the son of Sumantu. 
Jaimini taught one collection to each of them. Then Sukarma another Brahmana pupil of 
Jaimini, who had a mighty intellect, divided the tree of Samaveda into a thousand 
Coliections of psalms. (75-76) Hiranyanabha of Kosala, and Pausyanji, the two pupils of 
Sukarma; and a third pupil, Avantya (by name), the foremost of the knowers of Brahma, 
learnt them. (77) Pausyafiji and Avantya as well as Hiranyanabha had, it Is said, five 
hundred pupils, who hailed from the north (and learnt as many Sakhas of Samaveda). 
(Yet) antiquarians call them Pracyas (perhaps construing this word in the sense of the 
ancient and not in the sense of easterners). (78) Laugaksi, Mangali, Kulya, Kusida and

Kuksi, (other) pupils of Pausyaiiji, learnt a

hundred collections each.(79) Krta, another =

We We We Ve We We Br Br Be We Be Br Ne Be Hr Hr He He Hr He Be He He We We We We Me We Wee We Be We We We re He He Hr Be Ke He Ke He We We Be We We Fee We We We We We We We Be We Be Ke He We We He Ke We We We We He We We wy Be He we wy, 
ee a a ae ee. |

pupil of Hiranyanabha, taught twenty-four collections to his (own) pupils; while Avantya, 
(who was) a man of self-control, taught the rest to his. (80)

Thus ends the six discourse entitled "The classification of the Vedas into (so many) 
Sakhas schools", in Book Twelve of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PII SONS

HAZ yA seara:

Discourse VII

Different Schools of Atharvaveda and the Characteristics of the Puranas 
Ud sald 
WAalad, GAWs Rremeaad Wr Ad aisha wear aceaia arHart! 2 | 
AlalaMaelateaiele: fone: \acasha firemd ueafstenaat sy 1 2 | 
Sue: Wal se sisissraadiad! ay: Rraisefgxa: Aare wa a | 
stelaal Aled ¢ Mavala | 3 | 
Aganed: was meausared: | wd snedurerat: qu ukaforenrt AA |X |

Suta began again : Sumantu versed in Atharva-Veda, taught his collection to his pupil 
(Kabandha’) who in his turn taught it (in two parts) to (his pupils) Pathya and Vedadarsa.: © 
(1) Sauklayani, Brahmabali, Modosa and Pippalayani were the pupils of Vedadarga (who 
taught them his collection in four parts); now hear the names of Pathya's pupils: Kumuda, 
Ssunaka and Jajali, amaster of Atharvaveda, O Brahmana sage! (were the pupils of Pathya, 
from whom they received his collection in three parts). Babhru, a pupil of Sunaka (born in 
the line of Angira), and Saindhavayana (another pupil) studied two (separate) collections 
(at the feet of their master); (while) Savarnya and others were the pupils of Babhru and 
Saindhavayana. Even so there were others, e. g., Naksatrakalpa and Santi (the authors 
of Kalpas or tretises of these very names on ritual acts, giving rules for them), KaSyapa and 
Angirasa. These were the teachers of MTEINES Veda; (now) hear of.the teachers of the 
Puranas, O Saunaka ! (2—4) |

Tae: «=seaas =a eps: | aarurateniat WE A ukafvrnt sal & | 
Head Aare Med Akaard | Uhemaedaa fee: wal: Ae! «& | 
eeaiseé A Maul waensmaavt: | safe ararendaal yoafedt: | 9 |

Trayyaruni, KaSyapa, Savarni, Akrtavrana, Vaisampayana and Harita—these, as 4 
matter of fact, are the six teachers of the Puranas. (5) They learnt one collection each from

" Vide Visnu-Purana, which says:- 
| audae BG -aM: Aqageaaefa: 
Remar hay asf a femi 
Fa g¢ aeama am wa dari

EEEEEE==_ ~~ eee a eeeeeeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeEeaea»aRRm9BRma>a>E>EE——_—_— Et

Dis. 7 ] ‘BOOK: TWELVE: - 695

the mouth of my father (Romaharsana), the pupil of Vedavyasa; while I, as their pupil, studied 
all the collections. (6) Kasyapa, Savarni, Parasurama's pupil Akrtavrana and myself 
Fcc learnt four (more) original collections from (my father) Romaharsana (pupil of 
Vyasa). 
eat te afer sug) | agra «6 Aaaeeea: | C 
antisera feerta ot tarrait aidan dead den tamer: 1 et 
eafrcemie aot feet fag: | fea weld we aeerreraeT 1201 
STAM SPAT A AAA aga sea: lata ewsa: al sea 122! 
GOAT aaaAaa areas: | faertisa Garent sisne sist areal 1221 
gry Yt wore waigd Qa a at mMera aries! 
targa «farang at at iedgqeifiaag wart Sealife: ev 
Wadi |= Ada UT: «0 WR: I eNaisenadna «oR: | NefaereTa 1241 
Tat wage ageefeaisaa: idarqeahtd ast ad agen A126! 
afafien: sepitent Frat streataent wa: | Getfa fais: sieet aaeter wurad: 1291 
Sasa anictiaerendente: (a 9 Alaa = eke 1201 
akrteardat aa seasqay! warag da sel silaafayorsra: 12e1 
UeIay aql sat waa Soa | ateieastararg aay + AdladtylQol 
facta aat fad feat aft wmaniana at assem aden add 1221 
(Now) hear, O Brahmana sage! with a clear mind, the characteristics of the Puranas as 
determined by Brahmana seers according to (the viewpoint of) the Vedas and Sastras. (8) 
Those well-versed in the Puranas declare the Puranas as distinguished by ten features 
(discussing the following ten topics), viz., Sarga (creation) of the universe, Visarga, Vrtti, 
Raksa, the Manvantaras, VarmSas (dynasties of kings), Vamsanucarita, Samstha, Hetu and 
Apasraya.* Some teachers recognize the features of the Puranas as fivefold (only), O 
Saunaka! side by side with the distinction of great and small (according as they deal with ten 
topics or fivet only). (9-10) The evolution of Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmicintelligence) 
through the disturbance in the equilibrium of the three Gunas constituting the Unmanifest 
(Primordial Matter), of the threefold Ahankara (from the Mahat-tattva) and (from the threefold 
Ahankara) of the five subtle elements, the (eleven) Indriyas (the five senses of perception 
and the five organs or action and the mind), and their objects (viz., the five gross elements 
as well as of the deities presiding over the senses) is called Sarga or creation. (11) Visarga 
is (the name of) this collective creation, both mobile and immobile, of the aforesaid (causal

Principles) fecundated by the Supreme Person (God), and brought about by the latencies of 
(past) Karma (of the countless Jivas), proceeding from seed to seed (as a countinuum). (12)

* These terms have already been mentioned with some variations in Il. x. 3—7. The words ‘Vrtt’ and 'Raksa’ should be 
laken as synonymous with ‘Sthana’ and ‘Posana' occurring in that text; what has been referred to here under the name of 
'‘Varh$anucarita’ should be taken to mean ‘iganukatha’ the word ‘Samstha should be understood in the sense of 'Nirodha, and 
also as covering the idea of ‘Mukti’; and the word ‘Hetu should be construed to mean ‘Uti’ a ‘Apasraya’ of course is the same 
as Asraya’, ;

tThe five features are:—Sarga and Pratis 
couplet shows:—

Wie wire aah Aaatn a 1 eae aia Get Tact

The other five are understood as included in these.

arga, Varngas and the Manvantaras and Varhsanucaritas, as the following ©

Ud manent aon © yUfae: | qraispresr se: aleoentia Hela 1221

Me Wel and a ta os AMNESIA wmaqa caredheri23i

Waa seldad AlehUss Bara! ane ae He a weNSrerfala farsa 12%

Setae wae Areas qr: 1 frereaskreaot sedsifaaea 1241 
ed AA EMad ASU USS fecal Sea AAAISEAA: 191

Sages well-versed in the antiquities tell us of eighteen Puranas, big and small (in 
volume), distinguished by the aforesaid characteristics. (22) The eighteen Puranas go by 
the names of Brahma, Padma, Visnu, Siva, Linga, Garuda, Narada, Bhagavata, Agnl, 
Skanda, Bhavisya, Brahmavaivarta, Markandeya, Vamana, Varaha, Matsya, Kurma and 
Brahmanda. (23-24) Inthis way has been duly narrated (by me), O Brahmana sage, the story 
as to how the sage Vedavyasa and his pupils, their own pupils and pupils of their pupils

classified the Vedas into (so many) branches—a sto ichi ifi 
ae = which intensifies to a great extent the 
Brahmanical (spiritual) glory (of those who listen fof. (25) ;

Thus ends the seventh discourse in Book Twelve of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

STATA SEAT:

Discourse VIII 
The sage Markandeya embarks on a course of austerities

and receives a boon

Mas Sara 
aq Sita fat aret aq A aaa aia wat amt @ ues: 1 2 1 
sTefanrgqayae = YS AT 1G: Hou Sdhal AA Dediee WTI 2 | 
@ a setepotaa: weiss antads: | tare art aga: wis saa t 3 | 
Uh Vania wer aaa get faoliacmye dh Wat Ata! xX | 
wl a: Gaal yar we ales aa: id aARera aeethr george aera: 1 & 1

Saunaka said : O Sita, O good one, may you live long! (Pray,) tell us one thing, O jewel 
among speakers ! You (alone) are able to show the way out to men wandering in endless 
darkness (in the shape of mundane existence). (1) People speak of Markandeya (the son 
of Mrkanda) as a seer blessed with a long life, who remained alive even atthe time of Pralaya 
(marking the close of a day of Brahma), by which (the whole of) this (visible) universe was 
swallowed up. (2) The said Markandeya (the foremost of the scions of Bhrgu), however, was 
born in this (very) Kalpa and in our own race and (so far as we know) no wholesale 
destruction of created beings has taken place (during the present Kalpa) even to this day.(3) 
Itis (further) said that while drifting all alone in the single sheet of water (with which the entire 
world was flooded), he beheld the Supreme Person lying as a matter of fact in the form of 
an uncommon babe on a leaf of a banyan tree, formed in the shape of a cup. (4) O Suta, 
this is a matter for great doubt to us, due to which there is (great) curiosity (in our mind). 
(Pray,) resolve the aforesaid doubt, O great Yogi, esteemed as you are even for your

knowledge of the Puranas. (5) 
Ya Sara 
UIE dsisd sdl GlhwAe: Lanna aa iat afore! & | 
srafonterant ardese: fig: war eater efor aaaremaga: 1 | 
FSA: MM Beat AcHoUA: \ faut waves cUsqUdid atae| ¢ | 
HUA Mats Has frauga | sadness, « Wea! <I 
ari wa: TRA Maret ara TA TAT ATA: pat aguifed: 1g01 
wet semrecreret raforrergaregrys orrererers, etehet Foret Ay STINET 
[565] B.M. Part II—51 ye paee he

A

fe CB a he Sati “ ¥ = pl 
x _~ ’ PY ng A inD ney 
A Sa 
ae Fe 9: yee ae

re,

sar yydat cat seus Aa ati qaqa WATAA Aaa: 122 
sa Geese AASAH: | cetaeiest Brit easier 1231 
qd gadis wears alfa: | adler Wer Giet WaRdaSIee: 12x 1 
Wid US weal aqase fori aie wae afseramieu

Sita replied: This inquiry made by you, O great sage, is (Surely) intended to dispel a

(great) misapprehension lurking in the mind of the people. (Moreover) in replying to this will 
have to be told the story of Sri Narayana, which (when sung) washes off the impurities of the 
Kali age. (6) Having gone through at the hands of his father in due course the sacred rite of 
investiture with the sacred thread (which constitutes the second birth of a boy of the twice- 
born classes) and studied the Vedas in the righteous way (according to the scriptural 
ordinance), Markandeya was equipped (in course of time) with asceticism and knowledge 
of the Veda. (7) Observing the vow of lifelong celibacy, and free from passions, he wore 
matted locks (on his head) and the sacred thread and a girdle of Munja grass (about his 
person) and used the bark for his clothing. He carried (in his hands) a staff, a handful of (the 
sacred) KuSa grass, a Kamandalu (a vessel made from the shell of a wild cocoanut) and the 
skin of a black buck and a rosary of Rudraksa beads (on his person). For the enhancement 
of his virtue he worshipped Sri Hari both morning and evening through the medium of the 
sacred fire, the sun, the preceptor and (other) Brahmanas, as well as by identifying himself 
with Him. (8-9) Bringing food by way of alms morning and evening for the sake of his 
preceptor, he silently partook of it (only) when allowed by his teacher and at times remained 
without food if not (so) permitted (due to the sudden appearance of an unexpected guest). (10) 
Remaining devoted to austerities and study of the Vedas as aforesaid and worshipping Sri 
Hari (the Ruler of the senses of all) for a crore of years, he conquered death, which is most 
difficult to conquer. (11) Brahma (the creator), Lord Siva (the Source of the universe), Bhrgu, 
Daksa and all the other sons of Brahma, (nay,) men, gods, manes and other created beings 
were much astonished at that (extraordinary achievement of Markandeya). (12) Observing 
thus the vow of lifelong celibacy and equipped with asceticism, study of the Vedas and self- 
control, the Yogi (Markandeya) contemplated on Lord Sri Hari (who is above sense- 
perception) with a mind that had turned inward due to (all) hindrances (in the shape of 
ignorance, egotism, likes and dislikes and fear of death) standing in its way having been 
completely destroyed. (13) (Even) as the said Yogi was (busy) concentrating his mind 
through the great Yoga (of meditation on the Lord), a very long period, covering six 
Manvantaras, elapsed. (14) Coming to know of.this and alarmed at (the magnitude of) his 
askesis, Indra the lord of paradise), itis said, started interrupting itin this seventh Manvantara 
(for fear of losing his throne), O Saunaka ! (15)

Tea: aM aMddeameti qa Aaa Wraieaet daw ies! 
a a dad smyfeme: uf sati qerus ad aa faaren a fates fat ie! 
aaa «WU UMS Valestqenenlel «© QUI esses 2 C1 
Tawa Ed Tdcntlenen ts | Adaetetera Tdlasihorhor | 2 | 
aq: sfas steaa feaetaiteai qa: afte aaa, W120! 
Seeasraaaa: Walser: | Wagiedisteetaratd, HaAeht: IRV 
sree Treaittenerguen: | era: Meat: | FAR: 12

‘@ Snake. (29) Though assailed as aforesai

(In order to bring about the sage's downfall 
musicians) and Apsaras (celestial nymphs) 
over) the vernal season and the south wind (

) he sent to the sage Gandharvas (heavenly 
. ee (the god of love), (the deities presiding 
It., aDreeze blowing from the Malaya mountain), 
as well as greed (the pet child of Rajas) and pride. (16) They zy repaired, O sowGrel bate 
to the hermitage of the sage along the northern Slopes of the Himalayas, where flows the river 
Puspabhadra and the rock named Citra stands. (17) The hallowed site of that hermitage was 
acorned with Sacred trees and creepers, crowded with families of holy Brahmana sages and 
studded with sacred pools full of pellucid water. (18) The hermitage was full of the melodious 
humming of (honey-) intoxicated bees and the notes of joyous cuckoos. It was marked with 
the ecstasy of dance of blithesome peacocks and teemed with flocks of joyous birds. (19) 
A breeze bearing the cool spray from waterfalls and embraced by (fragrant) flowers entered 
the hermitage and (gently) played on it, kindling love (in the hearts of men). (20) There 
appeared the vernal season with its evenings made charming by the rising moon and with 
rows of young leaves and bunches of flowers, and trees and creepers in close embrace. (21) 
The god of love, followed by Gandharvas with bands of musicians expert both in vocal and 
instrumental music, and leading troops of Apsaras, was (also) seen (there) with bow and 
arrows in hand. (22)

ala «Aq aay: eles: i afeat «= geet | afetratare 1231 
THe Ua: = feist weet WT: | yageturaureater APAAA 1 2X 
Vaiss Waal BM: wad ainda Gel saya Sua iu! 
ISA: UA UEM: Gran: MIN! Yarienaeare: —- hatferetfarterst: 1261 
SARITA MAGS WYHgHA| AMEN aga: Pat Afedtaer 1x1 
fagast dat at weal a Ged SE: 1 aad «aaa STE: 1221 
aq semupdat Werte Wiad agqd: yeteafeftrarstet: 12¢1 
Sdistqetista 4 oaftidtsf «= Neat: | ararTeat ae A diet Fea fe 1Z01 
ae Rats art al wa BUTE! Aaa Hei TTA, LIRR

The servants (emissaries) of Indra saw the sage comfortably seated with closed eyes 
near the sacred fire after pouring oblations into it and formidable like fire in human form. (23) 
The damsels danced and the songsters sang, while other Gandharvas played charmingly 
on clay tomtoms, lutes and small drums before him. (24) Then Love set the five-pointed arrow 
{0 his bow; while Spring, Greed (the son of Rajas) and other servants of Indra tried to agitate 
the sage's mind. (25) (Even) as Punjikasthali (the chief of the Apsaras) was sporting with (a 
Number of) balls (in front of the sage) and running after them, her (slender) waist getting very 
unstable under the weight of her (full) breasts, wreaths of flowers dropping from her braid, 
and eyes moving this way and that, the breeze blew away the fine garment (about her loins), 
the waist-band (that held itfast) having given way. (26-27) Taking the sage as won by himself, 
Love darted his shaft that (very) moment; but, like the undertaking of an unlucky man, all his 
€ffort proved futile against the sage. (28) Thus offending against the sage, but being

Scorc i _ they withdrew like children that would run away after rousing 
ed by his glia d by the servants of Indra, O Brahmana sage, the

fall a prey to egotism. It is indeed no matter for wonder in

great 5 id not : 
sage (Markandeya) dl rious Indra (the lord of paradise) was seized with great

the case of exalted souls. (30) The glo 
Wonder to see Love and his entourage ©

heerless and to hear (from their lips) of the glory of at es

E * = on - ve

_ LS ———— ——_ weéeomt

_ a _ ae” 6S 
. LoS >

Be Be Be Wr Be Be He Be We We Bee Ke Be Ke He He Mee We Se We Ve Be Be Ve He We Be We Ke We Ve We We Ve We We We Ge We We We We We We We Ke RRR RRR RRR ARERR ROR BER Ke Ree ae 
Geen eee Sees 5

the Brahmana sage. (31) 
qed gadis 9 aa-arearadan: | stquerafedioanranit at: 1321 
at ert Adeaett way wthaacHorad | 
Ufaaant sudidh fad BAUS Gey DW aura 1331 
GMNatiedd was ad a aaa wa wlan | 
AaSsUi ARS FAST IE earat fagerfsnfeidt 1261 | 
a a wad Sl ATEUNge | qBrennauidtamigs QUSAT_ 1341 
a dereatreMadiearsaara: | EAT A ae aAadiiaqiise 
SUM wale: we sieeraieata laa aq edie aye wAWeelat: 1301 
TARANTO TAMIA 132 
Tear seats wtignera meat afterercusdta 13

To shower His grace on the sage, who was thus concentrating his mind (on the Lord) 
through asceticism, study of the Vedas and self-control, Lord Sri Hari appeared before him 
in the form of (the divine sages) Nara and Narayana. (32) Lords Nara and Narayana, the 
adored (even) of the chief of the gods (Brahma and others), were (severally) fair and dark- 
brown of complexion with eyes resembling fresh-blown lotuses, possessed of four arms 
each and clad in the skin of a black buck and bark (respectively). They wore rings of (the 
sacred) KuSa grass and the sacred threefold thread (each consisting of three strands) as well 
as a String of lotus seeds and carried a Kamandalu, straight bamboo staff and a broom (made 
of yarns) for sweeping the ground and clearing It of insects (without killing them) as well as 
a handful of KuSa. They were tall (of stature) and by the golden lustre (of Their body) 
resembling the bright flashes of lightning looked like two direct embodiments of asceticism 
itself. (33-34) Markandeya rose on seeing the sages Nara and Narayana, the two well-known 
manifestations of the almighty Lord, and greeted Them with great reverence by his body 
fallen flat like a log (on the ground). (35) With his body, senses and mind exhilarated through 
joy occasioned by Their sight at close quarters, hair standing on end and eyes filled with 
tears, the sage could not look at them. (36) With joined palms he stood bent low, as though 
embracing Them out of longing, and said to the two almighty Lords in faltering tones, "Hail, 
hail (to You both) !" (37) Fetching Them a seat and washing Their feet, he worshipped Them 
by offering Them water to wash Their hands with, sandal-paste, incense and garlands. (38) 
When the two most exalted sages were comfortably seated and looked favourably disposed, 
the sage bowed at Their feet once more and spoke as follows. (39)

Waey Sara 
fe avid aa fast agiifidisg: dered aaq atgashecnitr | 
Gad 4 aque werent ssa sraery: 1x01 
Wat sa wad andaciaem: aor aafama a qe | 
amt faueifaqradqdae gst uadafa adfaarotarit: ive 
data: feenrimatryes ae aA ade: werd |. 
aq. 4 eqata Fanta asrattet earaha Aceca yaeetaned 1x2 1 
qa daengudaeratigd: a sare ufiatitra gar faa: | 
Ten fanaend feauefewa: aioe a fad depdstlacnrary 1s |

Sereretrrereaf aT fret ot oafé | aeteritfeareity wx 
Set GST FAT Teereret aan: feefreetentadlser | 
CoO eT Aa Trea ery aa Unt Seite ATMEL 1s 
ae WTSAT Meet Ys dy Salat geet ash | 
AA AAT: TORT esl tcl AAMAS A SAA ISE | 
we wat wat yewra qa fee fea uaa 
TTT A A aA gaa dai fea ivol 
444 aq faamanding: wi weyay watt gaudy | 
THAIS: AS Ua Aalaeleathaeerae Aa 1X 
Tealt POT senEveret agit aa salsa aad: | 
a 8 edariarasitrenis ae vemqeacrfyeatert ive 
Sf sitertad Aeget oRAse Sedat geaHASeHISeA: 121

Markandeya prayed : O Lord ! how can | extol You ? For, propelled by You (alone) 
function the vital air and following it the speech, mind and Indriyas (the senses of perception 
and the organs of action), not only of (all) embodied beings but even of Brahma (the birthless 
creator) and Lord Siva (the god of destruction) as wellas of myself; yet You behave as afriend 
of the soul (and not only of the body as the parents and others do) of those who worship You 
(with these) ! (40) These two forms of Your omnipotent Self, O Lord ! stand revealed for the 
well-being, (nay,) for putting a stop to the (threefold) suffering and for the liberation (lit., 
subduing the death) of (the denizens of) the three worlds. (But) just as You assume many 
other forms (such as that of the divine Fish) in order to protect this universe, so (too) do You 
Swallow everything after evolving it (just) like the spider (which produces a web and then 
Swallows it). (41) The impurities incident to actions, the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and 
Time (and the aforesaid agonies etc.), can never contaminate him who takes refuge in the 
Soles of feet of that Saviour (of the world) and Ruler of the immobile as well as the mobile 
creation (in You). (Nay,) in order to attain to those feet, as Is well-known, sages that have 
treasured up (the spirit of) the Vedas in their heart extol, devoutly bow to, worship and 
constantly meditate on them. | resort to those (very) soles. (42) We know no Safe retreat, O 
Lord ! for the Jiva, beset with fear on all sides, other than resorting to the feet of the Lord in 
You, the Embodiment of final beatitude. (Even) Brahma, whose realm endures for two 
Parardhas, is immensely afraid of Kala (the Time-Spirit), which is a (mere) play of Your 
eyebrows: what wonder, then, that it inspires fear in the heart of living beings created by 
him ? (43) Therefore, turning my back upon (giving up all attachment to) this body and all that 
iS Connected with it—which obscures the Self and serves no (real) purpose, is unsubstantial 
and transient, and (really) no other than the (conscious) Self—I actually take spe in Be 
Soles of feet of the Supreme in You, the Embodiment of true wisdom, the Director O : se : 
for if a man resorts to those feet, he bids fair to secure from You every = ae Psa E or (oy 
him), (44) Although Rajas, Sattva, and Tamas, O Lord, which are products o ae ( er i) 
and (severally) responsible for the appearance, continuance and dissolution o t is niet e) 
Universe, O Befriender of the soul ! have been laid hold of by Yourself for (carrying on) Your 
Pastimes (of creation etc.), Your Sattvika form (alone) is conducive to everlasting peace (in cee

€ form of final beatitude) and not the other two, from which proceed suffering, in gic aoe

Thus ends the eighth discourse in Book Twelve of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

CIS SEI OD

BIA Aaqaseara:

Discourse IX

The sage Markandeya witnesses the Lord's Maya 
Yd saq : 
Ga wnat uarchosaa aM ANAT ALG: sit se se g |

Suta began again: Duly extolledin the aforesaid words by the talented sage Markandeya; 
Lord Narayana, accompanied by Nara, felt (highly) pleased and spoke to that jewel among

the Bhrgus (as follows). (1) 
APTA TATA

a a aeftaaita fag eneranfier a caesar aa-ereqradat: 12 | 
wat a ug: wm mageptedariat sd ag 2 aeneviiftai 3 |

The glorious Lord replied : Hullo ! you have attained perfection, O jewel among the 
Brahmana seers ! through concentration of mind, through unceasing devotion to Me as well 
as through asceticism, study of the Vedas and self-control. (2) We are highly pleased with

Dis. 9 ] BOOK TWELVE 703

you on account of your observing the vow of lifelong celibacy. May all be well with you !

(Therefore) receive your coveted boon from (Me,) the Ruler of all those who are capable of 
granting boons. (3)

BATA 
ft ot Sate seftferrega | atthe at ae war, wneeaT IX | 
Teanieat ag Sea AA ATS A Va Asawileaz: 1 & | 
AMG = Quagetenarany | gaat Ural Gen wile: GUTS Ae ARSEML | & I

The sage submitted : Your (own) exalted nature has been testified to by You, O Ruler 
(even) of Brahma, Siva and others (the adored of the gods), in that You have been directly 
perceived by us, O Dispeller of the agony of those that have taken refuge in You! This much 
of favour (shown by You) is enough (for us), O immortal Lord ! (4) Brahma (the unborn 
creator) and others have felt perfectly gratified (even) on obtaining a vision of Your glorious 
lotus-like feet (only) in their mind purified through (the practice of) Yoga (concentration). The 
selfsame Lord in You has come within the range of my senses. (What greater boon than this 
could | have ?) (5) Nevertheless, O Lord with eyes resembling the petals of a lotus ! | would 
have a vision of Your Maya, under the influence of which the world including the guardians 
of the spheres perceives diversity (in the form of this manifold creation) in the (one) Reality 
(viz., Yourself), O crest-jewel of those enjoying sacred renown ! (6)

Ud sald 
sdiististia: araqiion war yi aaa a wa Me acaismdian: | © | 
ama fed: mem wa &: | adaahamrayadiadcdag 1c 
ae adit a ek wasegead! wad ys famene Navara: |g | 
Sita continued: Extolled in these words and worshipped by the sage according to his 
wishes, O Saunaka ! the said almighty Lord replied, "So shall it be !" and withdrew to 
Badarikasrama smiling. (7) Thinking (every moment) of the same object (the promised 
vision of the Lord's Maya) and continuing in his own hermitage, Markandeya visualized Sri 
Hari in the (sacred) fire, the sun, the moon, water, earth, the air, ether and his own self, 
nay, everywhere (else) and worshipped Him with articles conceived by the mind. At times 
(however), when overwhelmed with an outburst of emotion, he forgot worshipping the 
Lord. (8-9) 
wae yas yaNade atl sade Gaal Hel Alaa Ifo! 
4a ques wacked aeleml BANG Ac: | 
sierast «89«—|- Aaeiistan: ward | Setitadema: 122 
ant aexdd adidas: 9 aad: MTAOAAaad: | 
: IQR

varia aed aur Acted we feferage

a Uh UwWlahat ead falar wer erraqieu

ergerttat TeaAthatiscerga atfaaseatar Sd: |

aqme oufadt wat feet =a ae G a a aftemfea: ieci 
wae Wh Aged mMoalisd: wai aelfiiierd arf wanes: ie 
micwlc Hate Hla eG Ta Wa HSfayguamifa areafefirentea: ec 
sqdraqdasion Meal «di CA adiquadete «fawyarnaaren: 12°!

One day, at eventide, O jewel among the Bhrgus ! while the sage was worshipping the

Lord on the bank of the river Puspabhadra, O Brahmana sage! a furious wind sprang up.(10) 
Following close upon the blast, that made a terrible noise, appeared frightful clouds attended 
with flashes of lightning, and poured all round volleys of rain as thick as the axle of a chariot, 
loudly rumbling. (11) Then there were seen the oceans in the four quarters with most terrible 
whirlpools, fearful crocodiles and a loud roar, engulfing the earth on all sides with their waves 
tossed by the fury of the storm. (12) The sage felt perturbed at heart and was dismayed to 
behold the fourfold creation (as consisting of mammals, oviparous creatures, the sweat-born 
and those sprouting from the soil) alongwith himself tormented inside as well as outside by 
waves that rose to the skies as well as by severe blasts and strokes of lightning, and the earth 
deluged with water. (13) While he was thus looking on, the boundless ocean—that looked 
terrible with its waves and with its waters tossed about by a violent wind, and was being 
flooded by the raining clouds—submerged the earth alongwith its Dwipas (broad divisions) 
and Varsas (subdivisions) and mountains. (14) The whole universe, comprising the earth 
and the aerial region and including heaven and the hosts of luminaries, was deluged 
alongwith the (four) quarters (and the entire living creation). The great sage Markandeya, 
who was the only living being left alive, drifted along like a stupid and blind creature tossing 
about his matted looks. (15) Oppressed with hunger and thirst, assailed by alligators and 
whales, beaten by storm and waves, enveloped in endless darkness and overcome with 
exhaustion, the sage, while drifting along, could not make out the directions, nor the sky and 
earth. (16) Now fallen into a great whirlpool, and now buffeted by waves, he was sometimes 
bitten by the aquatic creatures, themselves killing one another (in their attempt to seize 
him).(17) Now he fell a prey to grief and now to infatuation; now he experienced sorrow and 
at other times joy; now he fell a victim to fear and now he suffered death; while at other times 
he was afflicted with diseases and so on. (18) Millions upon millions of years rolled away in 
the eyes of the sage, (even) as he remained drifting along in that deluge, his judgment having 
been clouded by the enchanting potency of Lord Visnu.(19)

a walfad weer Gien: aeple fest: | ated «= east Hewat 120! 
Ihnen Wear dena aq Reiwad awigeh wad BAA aA: 1221 
Tela Wes Sata Ae GA Weary 22! 
Masteerca ara aqrasiteiatsan | fagarenwassionaddeneat «18 
uanTaieonarg Sealer, | Aastaterctteraear aA, 1X 
adage utr amas Ta frena fast vei cas fafera: 1241 
Rolling about in that deluge, the said Brahmana once beheld on an elevation of earth a

young (and tender) banyan tree adorned with leaves and fruits. (20) On a branch of the tree 
located in the north-east he saw a babe as well lying in a hollow leaf and swallowing up the

gates Oye encour Markandeya (the foremost of the Brahmanas) was amazed to 
behold the babe, which possessed the dark-green hue of a precious emeraled, had a 
beautiful lotus-like countenance, a conch-shaped neck, a broad chest. a shapely nose and 
charming eyebrows, and was graced with locks waving under the impact of its breaths. Its 
ears, shaped like the opening of a conch, were decked with the blossoms of pomegranate: 
its milk-like bright smiles were rendered rosy by the (crimson) lustre of its coral-hued lips The 
ends of its eyes were reddish like the interior of a lotus; its glances were enlivened witha smile 
that captivated one's heart; its deep navel throbbed alongwith the folds of its belly—shaped 
like a leat of the sacred fig-tree—that heaved with its breaths. The babe had placed its lotus- 
like foot into Its mouth, lifting it up with its hands, that had charming fingers, and was sucking

it. (21—25) 
weata aiitafteray «= get Seeorecrtfeietterra: | 
TEE ATRGT TTT: TS oUt Cee aL IRI 
waked afar unfa: eisai naret aenfear 
wee WAS Ae aM yMagedta fate: 1201 
@ Vedt waomizarm gor eas way: aT 
dt BM Ad: Wet Germ seteMmaviqna: 121 
Wala yaaa farsa aie A AMaecdaEew | 
aq. faewe aaerera dat fag wafeqramfani2e 
fered quad a at wat fom aq watqRad 
faa faugamafaaheaet afeicet aadeoatelt 1301 
de ufsen wmpfe wee ae a aavige war! 
adm ai daangetead fritfartisarshrataart 132 | 
AA da Mech dea Aaa fated ale! stsaeraicatas: OAM ASH, 1321 
Ma A WATE Aas Beat ARAMA: | SAT «AA: TEN AAerttarfahiat 1331 
Wag ad AeA Alea slHega: | fatenfs aonae ast Yad, fer: 13% 
sf stead Fee URASe Sedat sean Ae A AGHISeAT: 18 | 
At the (very) sight of the babe the fatigue of the sage altogether disappeared, the lotuses 
of his heart and eyes opened for (very) joy, the hair of his body stood on end and the sage 
headed towards the babe in order to make inquiries of it, though filled with awe at the sight 
of its wonderful form. (26) Meanwhile, (even) like a mosquito, Markandeya (a scion of Bhrgu) 
Entered into the body of the babe alongwith its breath. There (inside the belly of the babe) 
too he saw the universe in its entirety (systematically) arranged as before (the deluge) and 
felt astonished and perplexed. (27) He saw (there) the aerial region, heaven and earth, the 
hosts of luminaries, the mountains and seas, the broad divisions of the earth including their 
Subdivisions, the quarters, the gods and the demons, forests, countries and rivers, towns and 
mines, residences of peasants and farmers, stations of herdsmen, the (four) Varnas (grades 
. Of society) and Agramas (stages in life) as well as their functions; the five gross elements as 
Well as their products, Time with the various (divisions such as) Yugas and Kalpas conceived 
in it, nay, whatever else makes worldly life possible, in short, the whole universe, presented = 
as though real. (28-29) He (further) saw the Himalaya mountain, the same river Puspabhi Beast

his own hermitage (onits bank) and the sages

; oon »

dwelling there. (Even) while he was percelvil ¢ Es

4 CRE ae Fs 
age eee ie Me A 
oe? ae _ 
‘< es 
rn sat an, os a

i a 
~ f,

Be Rr Pr Br Br Be Be Be Be Ar BBY He BE Be Be Be Bee Be BEA Be Be BI Bie Bi Be Be Be Be Re BE Be Br Vi i Re Be Hr Br He Br He Fr We He Kr Br Br Ke Be He We Bs Br He Be Re Be Wr He Ke Br Peal 
inj‘ nnn nines snc. nnn enn n cer ee et ttt

(thus) the (whole) universe, he was thrown out of the belly of the babe through its breath and 
fell back, as is well-known, into the sea of deluge. (30) Perceiving there (once more) the 
banyan tree growing on an elevation of earth and the babe too lying in a hollow leaf, and 
gazed at (by the babe) with a sidelong glance accompanied by a smile full of the nectar of 
love, the sage, who was much too afflicted, proceeded to embrace the babe—who was no 
other than Lord Visnu, and had (already) entered his heart through (the door of) his eyes and 
taken His seat there. (81-32) That very moment the babe—who was the almighty Lord 
Himself, the Master of Yoga, Who dwells in the hearts of all— suddenly disappeared, andthe 
effort of the sage (to hug the babe) met the same fate as the undertaking of an unlucky 
person. (33) Following the Lord, O Brahmana sage! the banyan tree, the (deluge) water and 
the dissolution of the universe (also) disappeared in an instant from the sight of the sage, who 
stood in his hermitage as before. (34)

Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled "Markandeya witnesses 
(the Lord's) Maya," in Book Twelve of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita.

PIES

SID SQA Sea:

Discourse X

Lord Siva confers a boon on Markandeya

Yd sara 
a wanqude 9 anaufatiaqiand armada aor aati 2

suta began again : Realizing in this way the aforesaid glory of Yogamaya (creative 
energy) displayed by Lord Narayana, the sage Markandeya sought Him alone for protection 
(in the following words). (1)

Mhusy Sara 
Taiset#etye a soAMad eiaaaat faa qata weer 2 |

Markandeya submitted : | have resorted to the soles of Your feet, which grant 
security to those who seek them (for protection), O Hari ! under the influence of whose 
Maya (deluding potency), which assumes the (false) appearance of enlightenment, even. 
the learned fall a prey to delusion (in the shape of egotism, mistaking themselves to be 
wise). (2)

Ud sald

aa fayaend gan fefa adeqiesoa unam eat cael wrulda: 1 2 | 
sar aga diet faker aaaedi ceed way fas fyaefaarras x | 
fydessad — arma aavlai pderaae: mandate fafeet war & |

Sita continued : While journeying through the skies on (the back of) His bull with His 
Spouse (Goddess Uma), accompanied by His attendants, Lord Rudra (the god of destruction) 
saw the sage with his mind thus composed and collected. (3) Perceiving the sage in that

_ — — lll

Dis. 10°]: BOOK TWELVE - 707

cay a . aay i allows) to Lord Siva (who has His abode on Mount Kailasa ):— 
i can (as such) a mana, O Lord, whose body, senses and mind have been stilled and 
ee ionlées diate sea lly hestinaen to a sea whose waters and fishes have become 
ving passed. ; te 
Vali arethe Bestoweroffrilt aes (Pray,) manifest the fruit of his asceticism, since

noel oe a arta mettaterrad | skh ut anaft wera user 1 & 
tales _aeateerat ara TET ort fe ae ert yt aTETAAETA: |e | 
OS Lord replied : This Brahmana Sage would not have any blessing under 
any circumstance, not even final beatitude, inasmuch as he has attained supreme devotion 
to the immortal Lord, the Indweller of all hearts. (6) Even then we shall discourse with the 
saint, O Bhavani; for it is the greatest gain to meet a pious soul. (7) a

Yd Sag

SIA aqara War A Tat Ah: sa: aAdiaeraniie: adefearwi c 1

rarer Maas: 1A ae Bataan faata aie i

wate fire arrarar enfeartaqgrenmt arafaeattaaz: 1201

aera Rie oy afshageeren at SYS NMEA ATEHTL 1 Re |

: | AAAI SAS Alo aers: Te 12

faut ager wid faded ee fafa: | fee aa walt amafaat af: 1231

aa Sait cael aT alaaissna ek fteleede aa fara af: 12x

TAH Wa aad BN wear | MrMmedeNehreraadiae: 12u1

se Uae Gierma a fasti amram fedtent ate Mad BWI 126!

aa: fram ard waa wes Aiwa Ae AAs 1201 
| Sita went on : Having thus observed (to Parvati), the aforesaid Lord, the resort of the 
righteous, the Master of all sciences, the Ruler of all embodied souls, approached the 
sage. (8) Markandeya (however), who had all his mental faculties suspended, was 
conscious neither of his own body nor of the (outside) world and (as such) did not perceive 
(even) the advent of the very Sovereigns of the universe (Sankara and Parvati), the Inner 
Controllers of (all) creation. (9) Knowing his mental condition full well, the almighty Lord Siva 
(the Ruler of Kailasa) entered the cavity of his heart by virtue of His Yogamaya (wonderful 
divine power), (even) as the air enters an opening. (10) The sage felt amazed to perceive 
as having entered into his very being and flashed all of a sudden in his heart Lord Siva—a 
tall figure with three eyes and ten arms, wearing matted locks—reddish-brown like streaks 
Of lightning—and effulgent like the rising sun, wrapping a tiger's skin for His loin-cloth and 
carrying (in His hands) a rosary of Rudraksa beads, a Damart (a sort of small drum shaped 
like an hour-glass), a begging-bowl (made of skull), a sword and a bow with a trident, a club 
shaped like the foot of a bedstead and a shield—and, wondering what the vision was and 
whence, woke up from his trance. (11—13) Opening his eyes, Markandeya beheld Lord

Rudra, the one Preceptor of (all) the three worlds, arrived (in his hermitage) alongwith (His

Divine Spouse) Uma and His entourage, and saluted Him with his head bent low. (14) He

did worship to the Lord alongwith Uma and His attendants—by according them (a hearty) 
Welcome, offering seats, water to wash their feet and hands with, sandal paste and garlands, —

H ' os — MN tic \ pe y 4 ~d fe are 
and burning incense and lights—and submitted (as follows): s What (service) can taostOs = 
©u, O omnipresent Lord ! who are sated through realization of Your own blissfulnature;and

because, of whom the (whole) world feels satisfied ? (15-16) Hail to You, the all-propitious 
and all-tranquil Lord, the embodiment of Sattva, and (as such) the Delighter of all ! Hail to 
You, who are never frightful though assuming Rajas, and are never deluded though 
assuming Tamas! (17)

Yd Sara

Wd Wd: A Warieea aa a: iakas: waar swede ec 
Sita continued : Highly pleased, when extolled thus, the aforesaid Lord, the foremost 
of the gods and the resort of the righteous, heartily laughed, and with a cheerful mind replied

to the sage (as follows). (18) 
STAT TATA

at quig 3: HM ate aa wa: 1 sated ald aati vat aq faradsqay 128i 
SIGN: Alla: Ba Mast Udaaet: | HAA sreg fre: aaeleta: 1201 
Vell SHIM ota | ke A Wa Hal SA A Bela: 1221 
aa waeqst a feemuata aad areas sae aq ae aadtate 1221 
a wea dai a casataa: 1a Gegened gat aster: 1231 
MSU ATT Ase sara fase: area: 121 
HAM ale Al Asides a: | Beaters fq waraqoniefs: 1241

The glorious Lord said : Ask of Us a boon of your choice, since We three (viz., Brahma, 
Visnu and Myself) are Masters of those who are capable of granting boons. Our sight can 
never go in vain; it is through us that a mortal can attain immortality. (19) Not only the 
guardians of the spheres including (the denizens of) those spheres but Myself, the glorious 
Brahma and the almighty Sri Hari Himself salute, worship and wait upon Brahmanas who are 
pious (by nature), tranquil (free from envy etc.), devoid of attachment, yet affectionate 
towards (all) created beings, are exclusively devoted to Us and (as such) free from animosity, 
and look upon all with an equal eye. (20-21) They do not perceive the least difference 
between Me, Lord Visnu and Brahma (the birthless creator), nor between themselves and 
another living being; therefore, We resort to you. (22) Sacred places do not consist of holy 
waters (alone) nor do lifeless idols alone represent the gods. They (the sacred waters and 
lifeless idols) purify a man through a long process of time, whereas (saints like) you purify 
through mere sight. (23) We bow to the Brahmanas, who cherish our (verbal) manifestation 
in the form of the three Vedas through concentration of the mind, reflection, study and self- 
~ control. (24) By merely hearing about you or seeing (people like) you even great sinners and 
the lowest born too get purified; what wonder, then, that people should get purified by 
conversing with you and so on. (25)

Ud sag

sf 0 wae See ete ianfhattncrnaevho fae 126 1 
a fax ara fawnuitra: aizict yar! Rraarrqaeaedaaasredastat 1219 |

SGta took up the thread again : The sage did not feel sated while drinking in the words 
of Lord Siva (who wears the crescent as an ornament on His head), which were full of the 
secret of Dharma (virtue) and the (very) abode of nectar (as it were) to the ears. (26) Having 
been made to revolve for long by the Maya (deluding potency) of Lord Visnu, and subjected 
- to a severe trial, the sage was relieved of all his afflictions by the nectar-like words of Lord 
Siva and spoke to Him (as follows). (27)

— = SS = = - 
et ee ee eee ae eee

8 eS et CS SS Se cet ee

Dis. 10']. BOOK TWELVE: 709

We We We We We Re Be We We Be Hw 
we 8c Be BC HE SSRI AR SER Re BOR AR He a Brie tee Before trteeereewereeER eet We Me Ke He We He He He 
We ME SOW EE HRC OT EH

co a Tm WH a ag, SEAT | AERIAL, UH: ARMA: UAT Wa 133k 
ame Vise yoda arnfretor! wae wafer aay aa caf 13x

The sage submitted: Oh, this pastime of the almighty Lord is difficult to conceive for 
embodied creatures (like us), following which Rulers of the universe bow to and glorify those 
who deserve to be commanded (by Them) ! (28) In order to teach righteous conduct (to the 
people at large) those teachers of embodied beings as general rule not only practise such 
conduct (themselves) but also express approbation of and applaud it when practised (by 
others). (29) The glory of the almighty Lord (in You) is not (however) marred by such 
(exemplary) conduct—in the shape of those actions (such as bowing to us), which are (but) 
the operation of Your Maya (enchanting potency)—any more than the enchanting power of 
an enchanter by his conjuring tricks. (80) Hail to that almighty Lord (in You), who, having 
evolved the universe by His thought (alone) and (then) entered it in the form of the Jiva 
(individual soul), appears, like a dreaming man, as the doer through the (three) Gunas 
(modes of Prakrti)—which are the (real) agents—and who, though (appearing as) endowed 
with the three Gunas, is (yet) their Controller absolute and one without a second, and the 
Preceptor (of all) in the form of the Veda ! (31-32) What greater boon shall | ask (of You), O 
Perfect One, than Yourself, whose (very) sight is blessed (nay,) through whose sight man 
bids fair to get sated and become true of resolve ? (33) Nonetheless | ask one boon of You— 
who are not only self-sufficient (Yourself) but shower blessings (on Your devotees)—Viz., 
unfailing devotion to the almighty Lord (Visnu), and those devoted to Him, as well as to

Yourself. (34) 
qd sald 
suridtstigas yea gat PIT aA wawed: wd alftarad: 1341 
Srl wet walse wiatearelast | steacdde at: QUANTA Aa 13e I 
ah denies wer fat a fart! sere yet GeOTeeared t 1391 : 
Siita further said : Thus worshipped and glorified by the sage in sweet words, Lord Siva 
(the Destroyer of the universe), supported by His Consort too, addressed him (thus):—(35) 
“Full of Devotion as you are to Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception), O great sage, 
let all this desire (of yours) be fulfilled; let your fame endure till the end of the belt 
religious merit and immunity from old age and death be enjoyed by you and let knowledge

a izati led with dispassion and. 
relating to the past, present and future and Self-Realization coup an 
the teachevans ofa Bane fall to your lot, invested as you are with Brahmanical (spiritual)

Qlory." (86-37) ya sare

wi aa w Wa ware Fact seed wea GET IRG)

Wid, ciaefrstat Aare hare: | arena ott preter Herat 1k 
q watde Wat atid wieaRamaniad 
ana swe dat aad aatgredafadadixe 
Sit Stara ASM URASS Sleds sesRHs SAAISEATA: 1Q0]

Sita went on : Having thus granted boons to Markandeya, the three-eyed Lord 
withdrew, telling His Consort of the sage's deeds (in the form of austerities) as well as what 
had been experienced by him before. (38) Having realized the glory of Mahayoga (the Yoga 
of Jiana), Markandeya (the foremost of the scions of Bhrgu) for his part goes) about the world 
at will even now, exclusively devoted as he is to Sri Hari. (39) This story of the wise 
Markandeya, as well as the wonderful glory of the Lord's Maya as experienced by him has 
been narrated to you. (40) This (glory of the Lord's Maya, experienced by the sage 
Markandeya as extending over a period of seven Kalpas according to ancient tradition) was 
(as a matter of fact but) accidental (and a purely personal experience attributable to Divine 
Grace and not universal). Some (however), not knowing the appearance and disappearance 
of men (in the shape of evolution and dissolution) as (nothing but) the Maya of the Supreme 
Spirit, declare this experience as (no other than the ordinary process of evolution and 
dissolution) taking place from time without beginning and repeated (seven times at the end 
of every thousand revolutions of the four Yugas during the lifetime of Markandeya him- 
self).(41) Both he who duly narrates (to others) and he who attentively hears, O jewel among 
the Bhrgus ! this story (of Markandeya), recounted as aforesaid and enriched with the glory 
of Lord Visnu (who wields the wheel of Time in the shape of the discus in His hands), are rid

of transmigration, brought about by the latencies of Karma. (42)

Thus ends the tenth discourse in Book Twelve of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

= = > 
FISD OD

BIDcHIa SATA:

Discourse XI

The significance of the Lord's own limbs, attendants and weapons 
and a description of the retinue of the Sun-god (changing

every month in the course of a solar year)

Ae Sara 
aaa Ger Aad | ARI I AAA aM UMTadaala |e 
tial: uRaaiat mace fra: ad: | selaSTaeManed Heaaha set aa: 1 2 | 
da aia wa a feat ayaamiaa frarqem wet arnenetami 3 |

Saunaka submitted : Now | refer to the following point to you, the foremost among 
those Knowing many subjects, (since) you know the true meaning of the conclusions of all 
the scriptures dealing with the worship of deities, O (great) devotee of the Lord ! (1) May 
good betide you |! (Pray,) tell us—who are keen to know the course of active worship, 
through proficiency in which a mortal bids fair to attain immortality (in the shape of final 
beatitude)—how those well-versed in the Tantras maditate in the course of worship on the

Dis. 17 ] BOOK T

SSSSESARESSSS SUSAN RES ENS NUDE REReTSERREL Ee aL ro canarencess 
limbs, attendants, weapons and Ornamen 
fortune), who is absolute Consciousness 
as constituted. (2-3)

ts of Lord Visnu (the Lord of Sri, the goddess of 
, and of what principles do they conceive them

Ud sarq 
TPA WEt at fesyiteforetft | at: Skat Aensrvararark: vase: 1 
mrreMatierd: @ fran fae: SR 
aa & thet wi : | aN Fe, ater cA 
wa Y: Uret a: fart a1: | arf: qatsfarot ara ara: aauit fear: wat: 1 & I 
saat: «=| SATA WIRE: | Ages Gluten Wasa yet aa: 10 | 
CATES CUM Sa Valea Bay sa: | Nerf Yee wal AM: qeagqeet: 1 ¢ | 
Tara af Geet mae den fire: | qarmenan Tagen hae | et 
Suta resumed Bowing to (the feet of) my preceptors, | shall speak (to you all) about the 
glorious manifestations even of Lord Visnu (which are so difficult to comprehend and) which 
have been discussed at some length by Brahma (the lotus-born creator of the universe) and 
other teachers In the light of the Vedas and the Tantras. (4) The well-known cosmic egg is 
made up of nine fundamental principles, Maya (Prakrti) and (eight) others (viz., Mahat-tattva 
or the principle of cosmic intelligence, Sitra or the active aspect of Mahat-tattva, Anankara 
or the cosmic ego, and the five Tanmatras or subtle elements), as well as of the (sixteen) 
Vikaras (or modifications, viz., the mind, the ten Indriyas and the five gross elements). In that 
cosmic form as presided over by the Spirit appears the three worlds (viz., heaven, earth and 
the intervening space). (5) This as a matter of fact constitutes the Purusa (Cosmic) form of 
the Lord. The earth represents His feet; heaven the head; the mid-air region, His navel; the 
sun, His eyes; the air, His nostrils; the quarters, His ears; Prajapati (the god presiding over 
creation), His generative organ; Death constitutes the Lord's anus; the guardians of the 
spheres, His arms; the moon, His mind and Yama (the god of retribution), His eyebrows; Lajja 
(the goddess presiding over modesty), His upper and Lobha (Greed), His lower lip; 
moonlight, (the brightness of) His teeth; Maya (the deluding potency), His smile; the trees, 
the hair on the body of the infinite Lord and clouds, the locks on the head of the Supreme 
Person. (6é—8) Measured with reference to the disposition of the (various) spheres, the said 
Cosmic Person to actually bears the same proportion as this (mortal) man does when 
measured with reference to the disposition of his own limbs. (9)

alee VISA aaest: | AAU Sot Grated stacagral fay: 1201 
quai aaMereat AAR adi anes vit mega fad ATL ke 
fut arei art a lat were ate ue uted adelnmage ez! 
oa aefafya: | tarnfefree art | Uatfteteaet 1¢3t

ata qed we waist ad aat aatere § Yeeay 1x1 
et + aseacante au aaIAaL! Sloe ed: ale amt HAAagENT 12h 1 
sfeenfin arated Sen | aaah Apatelisrecry 1 8 st 
wuss saat da WER sre: |Uaal «Aad «Set «efter: 19191

The birthless Lord carries (on His Person) the (pure) consciousness of the Jiva, His own

iti iffusi lendour of the latter which

Atticla : tubha gem and itis the diffusive sp cn 
Slee Haber ie a His (right) eeaet as (the mark of) Srivatsa. (10) Carrying (on His 
actually wears of various Gunas (or modes of Prakrti) in the form of

P€rson) Hi Ava, consisting ; ae ONES es oe 
sis ) His own May : Ivan flowers); a golden piece of linen, consisting of the Vedasy a 
mala (a garland ot sy OO

(about His loins) and the (sacred) syllable OM (consisting of three parts 31+ 3+) in the triple 
sacred thread. The Lord wears (the philosophical systems of) Sankhya and Yoga as a pair 
of alligator-shaped ear-rings and the realm of Brahma (the highest functionary of this 
universe), promising fearlessness to all its inhabitants, as His diadem. (11-12) The 
Unmanifest (Primordial Matter) is the seat (couch), going by the name of Sesa (the serpent- 
god), which He remains nestled in; and Sattvaguna (the principle of harmony or goodness),

characterized by (the six divine) properties such as Dharma (righteousness) and Jnana 
(wisdom), (the other four being AiSwarya or universal dominion, Yasa or glory, Sri or 
affluence and Vairagya or dispassion, as well as by the divine potencies known by the names 
of Vimala, Utkarsini, Jhana, Kriya, Yoga, Prahvi, Satya, l$ana and Anugraha)—is spoken of 
as the lotus spread on this (seat). (13) He wields Prana or the vital air (the foremost of the 
five airs existing in the body under the names of Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and 
Samana)—accompanied by organic, mental and bodily strength— in the form of a mace 
(bearing the name of Kaumodaki); the principle of water, in the form of an excellent conch 
(Pancajanya by name); the principle of fire, as (the discus) Sudarsana; the principle of ether 
as a sword, clear as the sky; a shield consisting of Tamas (the principle of inertia and 
ignorance); a bow, made of horns, as representing Kala (the Time-Spirit) and a quiver 
consisting of Karma (the principle of activity). (14-15) Knowing persons declare the (ten 
cosmic) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action) to be His shafts, 
the (cosmic) mind (characterized by the power of action) to be His chariot, and the (five) 
Tanmatras (subtle elements) to be the exterior of the chariot; and He exhibits His service- 
ability (to His devotees in the shape of conferring boons on and assuring protection to them) 
through Mudras (positions of the hands such as Vara and Abhaya). (16) The spot where the 
deity is worshipped should be visualized as the orb of the sun; the ceremony of initiation (by 
a Guru) into a certain Mantra (sacred text) should be contemplated as the act of self- 
consecration (which makes one eligible for the worship of a particular deity) and the worship 
of the Lord should be concieved as the eradication of (all) one's sins. (17)

Wa Wiest GlelwAedsel| AH AMM WTA MS AAT IC! 
sida qf agus fe amredivani facade: quiet agi agit qeariee! 
Saat Wad st: ater ze: | faqedreragidtdied: aera: | 
TEASE BI: VUT Asforaren BAUM: 120 | 
aided: ga: UH: Gea: Wai sites sia we ydozelsteltad 1221 
a faanura: serait git afta: | arefxarererart ira Ufateara 122 1 
am ifautt wt agquiddmar afttaz: 1231 
Wielding (in one of His four hands) His six distinguishing attributes (viz., lordship, 
righteousness, renown, affluence, wisdom and dispassion each in its entirety (denoted by 
the term ‘Bhaga'*) in the form of a lotus carried for the sake of diversion, and thus justifying 
the name of Bhagavan, the Lord (also) maintains (by His side in the hands of two of His divine 
attendants) righteousness and renown (two of the aforesaid six attributes) as a chowrie and 
a fan (respectively). (18) He further bears (over His head) as an umbrella, O Brahmanas !

His (own divine) realm, viz., Vaikuntha, which has no fear from any quarter. The Vedat , with 
its three divisions (Rk, Yajus and Sama) figures (as His carrier) under the name of Garuda

* Qader woes eter age: fra: | aaa sa Tou wm sain 11 
_ t The Sruti says:—quuitsfa tecnifeaga far: |

Of cowherd women as well as by devotees

and supports Yajfia" (the institution of Sacrifice 
Hari's own inseparable energy itself appears a 
well-known Viswaksena, the chief of His atten

Beas He: aCalare Agama, detailing the procedure of His worship). The (eight) 
celebrated attributes of Sri Hari, Anima (the capacity to assu

His portals) as the eight me an atomic form) etc., stand 
(al p ; gnt porters, Nanda and others. (20) The Supreme Person (Lord 
Narayana) Himself, O Brahmana saqe. a

‘ . ge, IS spoken of as manifested in the four (adorable) 
forms of Vasudeva, Sankarsana, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. (21) The (same) Lord is 
(philosophically) contemplated upon under the names of Viswa, Taijasa, Prajfia and Turiya 
(respectively) when associated with the (four) states of (individual) consiousness, viz., 1— 
Wakefulness (in which the objects of sense are perceived through the senses), 2—the dream 
state (In which the mind alone—the sense par excellence—functions, the other senses 
remaining dormant), 3—the state of deep sleep (or complete forgetfulness marked by the 
latent impressions of the states of wakefulness and dream) and 4—the state of Self- 
Realization (in which the Self stands as the witness of all the three preceding states). (22) 
Distinguished by His (aforesaid) limbs, attendants (constituting His auxiliary limbs as it were) 
weapons and ornaments, (nay,) possessing His six distinguishing attributes (collectively 
denoted by the term “Bhaga") and appearing in the four (adorable) forms (Vasudeva and so 
on), the almighty Lord Sri Hari (Himself) assumes these four aspects (ViSwa etc.). (23)

fEsrRAN FUE Hea: aeR eMenahgui Aran a aa | 
Gata ata adieareramradat faqa sa Premera: 12x 
spat AMM 
Weare Wadhidasiyertadidsa: same Ue Ya 124!

O jewel among the twice-born ! the aforesaid Lord is the Source of the Vedas, self- 
effulgent and perfect in His own glory (all-blissful Self); yet He creates, preserves and 
destroys this (objective) universe by His own Maya (deluding potency consisting of the three 
Gunas) under differentnames (Brahma, Visnuand Siva respectively), though His conscious- 
ness remains uncircumscribed (thereby). Though spoken of (in the Sastras) as differentiated 
(in this sense), He is (really one inasmuch as He is) realized by His devotees as their own 
self. (24) "Friend of Arjuna, jewel among the Vrsnis, O glorious Krsna! who are fire (as itwere) 
to burn the whole race of Ksatriyas, that are proving hostile to pF ae 7 Se Oy cee 
O ndiminished, whose sanctitying glory |!

f cows), whose, prowess |S (ever) uU (like Narada), and whose names and praises are

auspicious to hear, (pray,) protect (us,) Your votaries.” (25) 
T ee mer sera FegeTeawrl| dled: Tad WAT Al Aq TWeetay_ 12S!

clean (through a bath etc.), repeats this 
lizes Brahma enshrined in the heart (of

) as the Supreme Person (Himself). (19) Sri 
S Goddess Sri (the goddess of fortune). The 
dants, embodies (in His person) the Tantras

He who, rising (early) in the morning and getting 
description of the Lord with his mind fixed on Him rea

all), by (merely) repeating it. (26) Sieh Sara

Saunaka submitted : As the divine Suka spoke to the listeniag Pariksit (the protege

agit o freq: |

" This is borne out by the Sruti when it says

" an Ou 
DUO bs nrc

of Lord Visnu), a different batch presided over by the Sun-god, consisting of seven* 
remains on duty month after month. (27) (Pray,) tell us, who are full of reverence, about 
the (said) entourage of Lord Sri Hari, appearing in the form of the Sun-god—in other words, 
the names and functions of those groups (of six pairs) combined with the deities presiding

HEB) sig 
over them. (28) +; aa sara 
srfadat «fami: adefeami ffiat oredatsa otehy aftadd 1291

un wa fe Mami ga sessing: | cddeirareqeiagetten: 130] 
cael eat: feat Hal SOT Hara: | seat Hotta ae Aaelissta Se: 1321 
TERY BR Wear aloetaRl cada oat = gergrearfteiot: 1321 
Brought into existence by the dateless Maya of Lord Visnu, the Inner Controller of (all) 
embodied souls, this (visible) sun, which keeps the world going on, courses through the 
spheres. (29) Though one without a second, the Sun-god—who is really the same as Sri 
Hari, the Soul and first Cause (of the worlds)—has been spoken of by the seers under diverse 
names inasmuch as Heis the source of all Vedic rites. (0) Because of His Maya (which has 
no beginning) Sri Hari has been called, O Brahmana sage, by nine names as time, place, 
activity, the doer, an‘instrument, duty, a sacred text, material substance (rice etc.), and the 
fruit (heaven etc.). (31) Assuming the form of Time (out of the aforesaid nine), in order to keep 
the world going on, the Lord (as the Sun-god) runs His course through the twelve months 
beginning from Caitra, alongwith His twelve different batches of attendants. (32)

Qidl mdwet team Wemigecaaqeta aq Ae i331 
STH Uselsaist: Weld: Unset i ane: Heady Aged BA Area lax 
faaista: uretaisa datent Aaa Bel: 1 tae sit Da Wea Arent 1341 
afast ae wn deren we iaeiaesa afd werent ia 
Sal fama: aiett Uemadentet: | wera Were aal add Aart 13191 
faq GAA SMH SAN «YY: | Sgree BgUIet AMA Aart 1321 
Wal wast ald: WA: Pefaatai gat Mans agar zat i3el 
wdad «gist: Usid: Adermaifag trata amerel arent ixol 
aay: seme 9 wadetetaezit | frepesaderg: wera wait 1x2 
a1: Cpsishstrect ses we: | ceanlen: gdfata: gerd aaeit 1x2 
el Alea: sacs fern weMdisa saie Fae STEN: 1¥3 | 
fama wt aadiss Peis feat aaa sslard aol xx

The Sun-god (under the name of Dhata), Krtasthali (the Apsara), Heti asuki 
(the Naga), Rathakrt (the Yaksa), Pulastya (the sage) am Tinea Pee ree iheee 
(seven) run the month of Caitra. (33) Aryama, Pufijikasthali, Praheti, Kacchanira, Athauja: 
Pulaha and Narada—these run the month of Vaisakha.t (34) Mitra, Menaka Pauruseya, 
Taksaka, Rathaswana, Atri and Haha—these run the month of Jestha. (35) Varuna, 
Rambha, Citraswana, Sukra, Sahajanya, Vasistha and HGhG—these run the month of

* The group of seven already referred to in Book Five consists of a pair each of sages, Gandharvas, Apsaras, Nagas: 
Yaksas, Raksasas, and the sun-god himself as the seventh—Vide V.xx.j. 18.

t The names of the sun-god, Apsara etc., in verse 34 et eq have been arranged in the order followed in verse 33-

Dis. 11 ] BOOK TWELVE 715

Asadha. (36) Indra, Pramloca, Varya, Elapatra, Srota, Angira and Viswavasu—these run the 
month of Sravana. (37) Vivaswan, Anumloca, Vyaghra, Sankhapala, Asarana, Bhrgu and 
Ugrasena—these run the month called Bhadrapada. (38) Pusa, Ghrtaci, Vata, Dhananjaya, 
Suruci, Gautama and Susena—these run the month.-of Magha. (39) Parjanya, Senajit, 
Varca, Airavata, Kratu, Bharadwaja and Viswa—these run the monthnamed Phalguna. (40) 
Again, Amsu, Urvasi, Vidyucchatru, Mahagankha, Tarksya, KaSyapa and Rtasena—these 
run the month of Margasirsa. (41) Bhaga, Purvacitti, Sphirja, Karkotaka, Urna, Ayu and 
Aristanemi—these run the month of Pausa. (42) Again, Twasta, Tilottama, Brahmapeta, 
Kambala, Satajit, Jamadagni and Dhrtarastra are the guardians of the month of Agwina. (43)

Visnu, Rambha, Makhapeta, Aswatara, Satyajit, Viswamitra and Suryavarca—these run the 
month of Kartika. (44)

TT wed fawinicere faa: ied weet weet RY A isu 
wera Arey eaisdt vein alam aaa wwe a aaaixet 
aanighiatergaa: = ULI Teele aha | qereaasaa: Ive 
| Sagara WA AMT Baal Weise: |aleaha wt ud asker acanfe: ive

aerarn: aearfir afpstantaisaen: | geisha aha wafa eater ive | 
wa @atahet swam «afte: | aed aed SIM Sl Mla: 14o |

Sa STEPTAd ASM USS Ged sesso Sieceyetrat aAenreaMSeae: 122 |

These constitute the glory of the Sun-god, who is none other than Lord Visnu. They take 
away the sin of those who remember them morning and evening both day after day. (45) 
Coursing round (the universe) all the twelve months (of a year) alongwith His six attendants 
(enumerated in the foregoing verses) the said Deity unquestionably awakens good sense 
in the mind of His votary both here and hereafter. (46) The sages (forming the entourage of 
the Sun-god) duly extol Him through hymns, of Samaveda, Rgveda and Yajurveda revealing 
His glory; the Gandharvas sing His praises, while the Apsaras dance before him. (47) The 
Nagas serve the purpose of keeping the parts of the chariot together; the Yaksas make his 
chariot ready for service, while the mighty Raksasas push the chariot from behind. (48) Sixty 
| thousand pure-minded Brahmana sages, (collectively) known as the Valakhilyas, walk 
| ahead facing the Sun-god (all the twelve months) and celebrate the Deity through laudatory 
| Mantras. (49) Dividing Himself (into twelve, each form presiding over the sun for one month),

the almighty Lord Sri Hari, who is without beginning or end, and is (therefore) birthless, 
protects the worlds as aforesaid in every Kalpa. (50)

eee

| 
| 
| Thus ends the eleventh discourse entitled "A description of the Sun-god 
(presiding under different names over the twelve months of a year) 
with His entourage" in Book Twelve of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samuhita.

GISERSEDS

Se bo Rik hee RRR Re eR Ree il ll el el el el el lL Me We Ke We We We We We We We We We We We Wee We We Be Wee ee ee eee ee eee eee Bee Be Re Be He We We We we 
eee eee eee

BY FSSA:

Ud sara 
am ama wed AR: HOTA aga | AVA Wena wl aad Gada! ez | 
Ue a: afd fam faetaiarar vakedad gest wot qeatfera 2 | 
3a Usifdd: Aa Adored |e: | ATAU eis Wa Arad it: 1 3 i 
WA A UW Wi Wd: Waa aA a aque skp faq x | 
Tat: PARA ard aA Aes anifeaqarendt ANTENA TI 
Sree «= Utero. «safe: ime eT MaTesy aitfara: 1 & |

SMTAINVaiehled: diel ANG: | aaah a at: srenfratsaa: 19 |

The (process of) ascent (to the higher regions of a departing soul) through Yogic 
concentration; the dialogue between Narada and (his father) Brahma (the birthless creator); 
an account of the Lord's descents in the order of sequence and (a description of) the cosmic 
evolution from Prakrti (Primordial Matter) from the (very) beginning. (7) (Here ends the theme 
of Book Two.)

fagtigadiare: eraaerateda: | UxToTefecrstatt Terese: | S| 
ad: Weptcten: ai: aq anfanis 21 ad AEMUSA AY feel ast: Geet ad: 1g | 
Rem Wort Wi: wee: | Ya seawissiaiewaaaa aw 1201 
seinem eerie al sidaiavena aq: wrest aq: 1221

ny

PU ee i a a

OT EGIL IR TRAE AAA RATATAT 
Wee A at STE wee aa educa Het yea: 1221 
aA | Tad: afer Wee: | eae dare: afer a eita 1231

The dialogue between Vidura and Uddhava and then between Vidura and Maitreya; an 
inquiry regarding the ( Bhagavata-) Purana; the dormantstate of the Supreme Person (during 
the period of Final Dissolution). (8) Then follows a description of the flowering of Prakrti (in 
the form of disturbance caused in the equilibrium of the three Gunas) and the coming into 
being of the seven Categories which are both of the nature of a cause and an effect (viz., of 
the Mahat-tattva into the cosmic ego and of the latter into the five Tanmatras or subtle 
elements) and the (gradual) crystallization of the (five) Tanmatras into the (five) gross 
elements and the eleven Indriyas (viz., the five senses of perception, the five organs of action 
and the mind, which are all of the nature of an effect only since they do not give rise to any 
further modification). Then ensues a description of the evolution of the cosmic egg, from 
which appears Brahma (the offspring of the Cosmic Person). (9) (Then) follows a description 
of Time in its subtle and gross states; the Sprouting of the fourteen worlds (in the form of a 
lotus from the navel of the Cosmic Person) and how Hiranyaksa was killed (by the Lord in 
the form of the divine Boar) in the course of His attempt to lift up the earth from (the bottom 
of) the ocean. (10) The evolution of the higher (heavenly and aerial), subhuman and 
subterranean(Asurika) orders of created beings and the appearance‘of Rudra (the god of 
destruction) and subsequently the division of Brahma in two halves, one constituting a male 
and the other a female, from which sprang up the Manu named Swayambhuva (because 
born of Brahma, the self-born) and Satarupa, the first and foremost pattern of womanhood. 
(Then) follows the description of the progeny (in the shape of nine daughters) of the revered 
wife (Devahtti) of the sage Kardama, a lord of creation. (11-12) The descent of the Supreme 
Spiritas Lord Kapila and the dialogue of Devahuti with Kapila, the embodiment of wisdom. (13) 
(Here ends the theme of Book Three.)

Bir tor nO RICCIFIEL § lee ahd usage: oreiqafea: 19x! 
Ae a dared: aad fem: i astedssakaqaswa wd AIYhI 
atrastayaroni fikagquaviag| Siig GM Udienheta: 1261

The progeny (through the nine daughters of Kardama) of the nine lords of creation (Marici 
and others); the destruction of the sacrificial performance undertaken by Daksa (the tenth 
lord of creation); the narrative of (the devotee) Dhruva and then of King Prthu; the dialogue 
between King Pracinabarhi and the (celestial) sage Narada and next follows the narrative 
of King Priyavrata, O Brahmanas ! Then follow the stories of Kings Nabhi, Rsabha and 
Bharata. (14-15) A description of the Dwipas (the nine broad divisions of the terrestrial 
Plane), Varsas (subdivisions of the Dwipas) and the oceans (dividing ing Dwipas) and Be 
of the (principal) mountains and rivers (forming part of the Dwipas); the peas of the 
Stellar sohere and the location of the (seven) subterranean worlds and the infernal eae 
(closely followed by the story of Ajamila, illustrating the means of averting descent into hell, 
in Book Six). (16) (Here ends the theme of Books Four and Five.)

CI wadkaaaaun a Grdia: | Ad VAIN TA TIGA: 1191 
aa wa fet was feafasn: | aaa SRT | AgIaRT Agia: 1221

as; the progeny of his daughters, from whose ~ eo

d demons, animals, the immobile creation (the ae 
follows an account, O Brahmana sages, Or

The descent of Daksa from the Pracet 
womb appeared the gods, human beings an 
Vegetable kingdom), birds and so on. (17) Then

the birth and fall of the demon Vrtra (son of Twasta, the architect of the gods) as well as of 
Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa (the two sons of Diti) and the narrative of the high-soulec 
Prahrada, the ruler of the Daityas. (18) (This sums up the contents of Books Six and Seven.)

Tate |e FATTO Wearaa famndafarrea: 1221 
ant gradi ai amd ad wea: ieienat = ageqaeal == fede 120 | 
ares WUstaaqhida! Saalepsta Ag: AQAA Agia: 1221 
Sear «| ANITA eae MEM MGA: 1RRVI 
Glert as Tala: HHI a ella: | Gea A ARM: AW: WNT A 12d 
Ta Ades dha fHfeasaei fagakert saat A asa: 2x1 
Te wnasa F:arewt ya:itee aaa wade FT 1ek 
aera Wea Al aardesq7e Taldaisqentictd: 12E | 
Aconnected accountof the (fourteen) Manvantaras (divisions of a Kalpa, each presided over 
by a separate Manu); the deliverance of the king of elephants; the descents of Lord Visnu, the 
Ruler of the universe, in the form of the divine Tortoise, Lord Dhanvantari, the divine Fish, the 
divine Dwarf, Hayagriva (who bore the head of a horse); and others, one in each Manvantara; 
the churning of the ocean of milk for the sake of nectar by the denizens of heaven (both gods and 
demons) is likewise told. (19-20) the great war between the gods and the demons; a description 
of the genealogy of kings; the birth of King Ikswaku and his genealogy; the narrative of the high- 
minded Sudyumna. (21) In this connection is told the story of (Sudyumna having been transformed 
into) lla as well as the narrative of Tara (wife of the sage Brhaspati); an account of the solar | 
dynasty; the story of kings such as Sasada and Nrga etc.; the narrative of Sukanya (daughter of 
Saryati) as well as the stories of kings Saryati and the wise Kakutstha as also of Khatwanga and 
Mandhata, the sage Saubhari and King Sagara. (22-23) The narrative, which eradicates sin, of 
Lord SriRama, the Rulerof (the kingdom of) Kosala; how King Nimi cast off his body and the origin 
of the line of the Janakas. (24) How Lord Parasurama, the foremost of the scions of Bhrgu, swept 
the Ksatriya race off the earth; the stories of King Purdrava (the son of IIa), the first of the lunar 
line, as well as of Yayati and (his father) Nahusa. (25) The stories of King Bharata, the son of 
Dusyanta, as well as of Santanu and his son (Bhisma) and then is delineated the posterity of 
Yadu, the eldest son of Yayati. (26) (Here ends the theme of Books Eight and Nine.)

aaa Wa HOTA widlat: | agqeaye Wa adl ass Aer 121 
qa aaivaarier 9 aifidrgqies: | udarqaa:arM «= Siemeteted ~=—s fara: 1201 
qmada feet aha: | Ama AEM: Worse A ars: 1221 
Tart @ ufaret aera: uftada: 1 art UcaAereler aA aVTL | Bo | 
Ada ¢ Hae GA Tslsaqdt Ad: | Weel age fast arama 132 
Master A Wea ATT | aide Hore sift: wet a Uiay 1321 
Medea 4 dedeshea Aiea: | spd Usd Ne Wael: 1331 
asa facms ugieled dd: immpnauHada aA at ae: 13x 
Wate Gt: UG: aden: iaqea frat agama afer 
PSA Bat Bor FEST: 1341

eae ae ee Fae erro Frag 136 | 
dea AIA: AMSA! Serva wot qs wae feat gF: 1201

Dis. 12] | | BOOK TWELVE TNS,

___ It was In this line that the almighty Lord of the universe took His descent under the name of 
SriKrsna. His appearance in the house of Vasudeva and then how He was brought up in Gokula. (27) 
Here are recounted the (many) exploits of that Enemy of the Asuras—which are as a matter of 
fact) endless (in number as well as In extent)—how He (even) as a babe drank away the (very) 
life of the demoness Putana alongwith the milk of her breasts and upturned a cart (and destroyed 
the demon Utkaca who had entered the cart in a disembodied State). (28) How (the demon) 
Trnavarta (who appeared in the form ofa whirlwind) was crushed to death as well as the death 
of (the demons) Baka and Vatsa (who remained disguised as a heron anda calf respectively) and 
the destruction of Dnenuka (who had assumed the guise of a donkey) alongwith his kindred and 
thatof Pralamba (who came disguised as acowherd boy). (29) Deliverance of the cowherds from 
a forest conflagration that came rushing from all sides: subjugation of the serpent Kaliya and the 
rescue of Nanda (the Lord's own father) from (the grip of) aboa-constrictor. (30) Howthe maidens 
(of Vraja) observed a sacred vow (of bathing in the Yamuna in winter and worshipping Goddess 
Katyayani on its sandy bank for a month in order to scoure the Lord for their husband), inthe course 
of which the immortal Lord was pleased with their observances (and conferred on thema boon); 
the Lord's grace on the wives of certain Brahmanas engaged in a sacrifice and the remorse of 
the Brahmanas (for their failure to recognize the Lord and pay their homage to Him). (31) The 
uplifting of Mount Govardhana (in order to save Vraja from the fury of Indra, who sent devastating 
showers with intent to submerge the tract of Vraja) and how later on (on recognizing His divinity) 
Indra (the rain-god) and the cow of plenty worshipped the Lord and bathed Him (with milk); His 
pastimes with the damsels (of Vraja) through (many) nights. (32) The destruction of the evil-minded 
(Yaksa) Sankhacuda (who carried away a number of damsels in the midst of their pastimes with 
the Lord), as well as of (the demons) Arista and Kesi (that had assumed the disguise of a bull and 
a horse respectively); Akrura's visit (to Vraja to take Sri Krsna and Balarama to Mathura under 
Karmsa's invitation) and the subsequent departure of Balarama and Sri Krsna (for Mathura). (33) 
The wailing of the women of Vraja (over their separation from Sri Krsna) and then how the two 
(divine) Brothers saw Mathura andkilled (atthe bow-sacrifice) the elephant (Kuvalayapida) as well 
as (the wrestlers) Mustika and Cantira and (finally) Kamsa (the wicked king of Mathura himself) 
and others (his eight brothers). (4) How He brought back the dead son of His teacher Sandipani 
and the good offices that were rendered to the Yadava clan by Sri Krsna while staying at Mathura 
accompanied by Uddhava and Balarama, O Brahmana sages ! (35) Extermination of the me 
led by Jarasandha (Karhsa's father-in-law and ally) many (seventeen) times; and how the Lo 
Caused the destruction of the king of Yavanas (through Mucukunda) and founded he ed) 
KuSasthali (Dwaraka). (86) How Sri Hari brought a Panrijata (a celestial pe, seth { 
council-chamber named) Sudharma from paradise (the realm of the go Ss) a

Rukmini (the princess of Vidarbha) after crushing the enemies in battle. (37) How, when Lord Siva

(the god of destruction and the protector of Banasura) began to yawn in battle (when assailed by

the Lordwi astra du | 
conseatent on the caste of His grandson, Aniruddha, at the as of ae beatipe cee: 
lopped off the arms of Banasura (thus left unprotected) and, having mat i ; pe cates 
araka (the ruler of Pragjyotisapura in Assam), took away (and teat Sie ine cae 
and odd) maidens (detained in his palace by the demon). (38) A esc ee ei) 
Might and destruction of King Sigupala, Paundraka and Salva, 0 ) Ee ‘hat brd’s eldeersons 
aS Well as of Dwivida (amonkey) and the demons Sambara (who stole away } 
fadyumna, as soon as born, from the very lying-I 
ethers and how the Lord set (the city of) Vale 
urden, making the sons of Pandu His instruments. (

ringtheinvasion of Sonitapura, the capital of Banasura, by the Lord -

n-chamber), Pitha, Mura, Paficajana and — a 
on fire and (further) relieved the earths = oa 
-40) (Here ends the theme of Book Ten. eae

eae at 
~ an 
sala ste ae

Wc Re Re Re Re Wr Re We Re Re Be Be He Sr Mee We ee Meee ee Ree ee Ree eee Re NEM We Be Me ee Wee We We He We He We We We We We We We We We He We We We Be We We Ke Be Ke He Ke Be He we 
Pi titties nn nn nn cc ccc a ccc ccc caeacacaaaaaaaaaaaamaaaaa acacia

fasenam@esit GER: «= AHOM AlsgqqW W Aalel alqeael alg: ive!

aiaian dae sket adfafuta: iad Adak aerated: 1s

eas ast Wns: ladda sea sufufefaen aemivat

Sea Uwe ei: | SIRaTSIUTaAWNAIchvea ay Aha | 
Heqediaae: Gaal BW: Sxl

sf ake fessist ausisetueta a:icieraaneatio attdarte ada: iui

(In Book Eleven we are told) how the destruction of His own race was brought about (by 
the Lord) under the pretext of the Brahmanas' curse, and the wonderful dialogue between 
Uddhava and Sri Krsna (Son of Vasudeva), in which has been taught as a matter of fact the 
entire (range of) Self-Knowledge as also the final conclusion about the duties of the various 
Varnas and ASramas given and later on is told the story of the Lord's concealing His mortal 
semblance by dint of His own Yogic power. (41-42) The characteristics of the (four) Yugas 
and the conduct (of people) conforming to them, and the perversity of men in the Kali age, 
as well as the fourfold Pralaya (Dissolution) and the threefold creation (viz., Sattvika, 
Rajasika and Tamasika). (43) How the wise and saintly King Pariksit (the favoured of Lord 
Visnu) cast off his body; classification of the Vedas into (so many) Sakhas (branches or 
schools); the holy narrative of the sage Markandeya; the disposition of the limbs and 
weapons etc., of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person) and the entourage of the Sun-god, the 
Soul of the universe (during the twelve months of a year). (44) In this way has been stated 
(by me) in this discourse, O jewel among the Brahmanas ! whatever | was asked by you and 
something more (too). (And what is more valuable) the exploits of the (various) Avataras, 
which are nothing but Their pastimes, have (also) been narrated in all their bearing. (45)

Ufid: Fafedtsd: erat at feat gai eA aA sea «| Adare x 
asian «Maar: «Saat te iif 
Sfasassisfat Cs sft et a se@efsuftrarfaam: ix 
We fret Gada A mead Ae Waele: | 
aa Ue get AR eT TVG I< 
qa TH tet wd wa ada warael Agata 
qa 89 -_ Menlagneant UTC (GC IIS TCHaAATISa*ilaa 1xe | 
41 dd aaisaue ede waft sia aféfadi 
dq wigid 3 q gadiad saree fe aeatsac: i401 
a athaami saaedga afeattestnnagaati | 
Aaeade aatsisat apvata mara qofa area: 1421 
Tenaytaded A Wad wWaas frei 
Sd: Ut: waewsiat a ata wd aemqnai4?i 
aa: fama Ufa: aa aU sTAraAa:Aaes | 
srferegtct: sierureasrarioraarastaumfatstet: 143 | 
tawyid: qpeueniaan: fates wi ait a 
waa whee wah at a fanfare ius!

_ Uttering at the top of his voice the formula "ea 74:"— 'Hail to Sri Hari !' (even) involuntarily 
(without any conscious effort on his part) when fallen (in a well etc.), stumbled (while ascending 
a staircase), afflicted or after sneezing a man is absolved from all sin. (46) Entering the mind 
of men (even) while His name or praise is being loudly chanted or when His glory is heard of 
(by them), the infinite Lord, the wise declare, puts an end to all their misfortune in the same way 
as the sun dispels darkness anda tempestuous gale disperses the clouds.(47) They are indeed 
false and ignoble utterances and contain stories of the unrighteous, of which Lord Visnu (who 
is above sense-perception) does not form a theme. That utterance alone (on the other hand) 
is true, that alone huzza ! is blessed, that alone is sacred and is the fountainhead of divine 
excellences, (nay,) that alone is pleasant, that alone gives newer and newer delight, that alone 
is a perennial source of great rejoicing to the mind, and (finally) thatis the only means of drying 
up the ocean of grief of men, through which the glory of Lord Visnu (of sacred renown) is 
constantly sung. (48-49) That speech which, though full of figurative expressions, never utters 
the praises of Sri Hari—that are capable of sanctifying the (whole) world—is the delight of 
voluptuous men (who wallow in the pleasures of sense like crows, that feed upon the dirty 
leavings of food). It is never resorted to by the swan-like wise men; for pure-minded saints take 
delight only where the (immortal) Lord Visnu is sung. (50) On the other hand, that composition 
(alone) which, though faulty in diction; consists of verses each of which contains the names of 
the immortal Lord, bearing the impress of His glory, wipes out the sins of the people; itis.such 
composition that pious men (love to) hear, sing and repeat (to an audience). (51) That wisdom 
too which is free from blemish in that it is a direct means to the attainment of Liberation does 
not adorn one's soul so much if it is destitute of devotion to (the immortal) Lord Sri Hari. How, 
then, can action which has not been consecrated to God, no matter if it is of the noblest type, 
heighten the beauty of the soul, rooted as it is in sorrow at every stage (both while It is being 
performed and when it yields its fruit). (652) The great pains taken over discharging the duties 
pertaining to one's Varna (grade in society) and ASrama (stage in life), austerities and learning 
etc., culminate only in glory and prosperity. Through the utterance and hearing etc., of the 
praises of Sri Hari (however) is secured unceasing remembrance of the lotus-feet of that 
Spouse of Sri (the goddess of fortune). (53) Ceaseless thought of the lotus-like feet of Si Krsna 
puts an end to all evils and increases tranquillity (of the mind), enhances purity of the inte ect, 
Stimulates devotion to the Supreme Spirit and promotes spiritual So ae coupled tt 
Self-Realization and dispassion. (54) Oh, you are highly blessed, eae s Ee nes 
Brahmanas! in that, having installed in your pate oe Nee ee : i ae a eA 
(As such) has no other object of adoration, an ; 
worship bie full of ceaseless Devotion (as you are) ! (55) |amalso blessed in that Hee ait

i iti e nature of the Supreme Spirit (contained In 
reminded (by you) of the exposition of the tru ; Sl Suka (the great seer) in the 
urana), which | listened to the other day from the lips o1 Jka ina Lene 
d to it, while King Pariksit sat (on the ba 
assembly of eminent sages, who also listene ;

a ow srrerfiret MIVeTORUTETAEM: | GTA SPLATT A: 146 
BeraMaesal A AWaAeIaM, Aad | WSeAAAT Wade AaAAATdeht 14S 1 
UERt ugat a gaat adieat|

, 7 
» y a 
> 
‘a> ~ 
=. od ~ 
~ mY ee ~~ < a 
« ‘dl . 3 
a , . < ca se iad 4 
oe x \ 4 e = 
; =a s a * 
: | , ‘ 4 Ss tit se — a. wt 
F 2 . a f halt ~ age - “4, v 
. n 2 ee 
ee 
es © , ~ a = 
<eig 7. = > 
at i o.. 3 - ~ 
uy a ~

Ber Br Re Br Br Be Be Br Be AEA AE Br Be Be Br Be Br BL BT AT BT BT BE BE BY Br Br Be Br Be REY Br Br AY BB ee BY Be Br Be Br BY Bee Be BY Be Be By Br Bi We We Be We We We Wi Br Be Br eRe Ligeia? 
a a CO ———————__——_—————e,

Saat daa: fag: feed saat For: | aeoha SHUM: Yad aa Hira 1G I 
Rea Sale ara fesitseftengferad | MeHeaM FHeAM: Ta Heras AHH 1G | 
Uudiedmaenta =| Nae fa IRD TAM A dae UA AIT IGRI 
MISHA Nat UsaeAaerL aa Frferafeed a Ys: Vesalel UTA 1G

In this way has been recounted to you, O Brahmana sages, the glory—that is capable of 
uprooting all evil—of Lord Vasudeva, whose great exploits are worth narrating. (57) He who 
repeats this Purana (to others) everyday with an undivided mind (say,) for three hours or (for 
that matter even) for a second and (in the same way) he who listens to it repeatedly with 
reverence purifies his very soul. (58) Listening to it on the twelfth or eleventh day of either 
fortnight of a lunar month, one enjoys along life; while he who reads it devoutly while remaining 
without food is thereby rid of (all) sin. (69) Reading this compilation with a calm and collected 
mind at Puskara, Mathura or Dwaraka while abstaining from food, one is rid of fear (of 
rebirth). (60) (Pleased) as a result of chanting this Purana, gods, sages, Siddhas,manes, 
Manus andkings confer desired boons on the man repeating or listening to it. (61) ABrahmana 
who reads this Purana attains the same reward which he gets by studying (all the three Vedas, ) 
Roveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda, viz., streams of honey, streams of ghee and streams of 
milk (i.e., all kinds of blessings). (62) Having devoutly studied this collection of verses in the 
form of a Purana, a member of the twice-born classes attains to that highest goal which has 
as a matter of fact been extolled by the Lord (on many an occasion in the past). (63) Having 
studied this Purana a Brahmana bids fair to attain true insight (into the truth); a Ksatriya, 
sovereignty over the (whole) earth with the oceans for its girdle; a Vaisya, the position of 
Kubera (the lord of treasures); while a Sidra is absolved from (all) sins. (64)

alonedednionishae edad aA wad waver 
% gd Genameteqh: uftufedsqae amerag: 164! 
ASST RS BIeCOMO ISTO RIC EHC:

Sadat at: a WMATA ASS ATA 
Wad seemed AoeNwWd AA: Aalaaa 1G 
Sri Hari, the Ruler of all, who is capable of destroying the (entire) mass of impurities of the

Kali age, is not certainly sung elsewhere so frequently. In this work, however, that Lord 
appearing in all forms stands celebrated at every step through relevant episodes. (65) | bow 
to that birthless and infinite Lord Visnu, the (true) principle of consciousness, whose own 
potencies (in the form of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas) are responsible for the appearance, 
continuance and dissolution of the universe and whose glorification is hardly known (even) to 
the lords of spheres like Brahma (the birthless creator), Indra and Lord Siva ! (66) Hail to the 
eternal Lord, the foremost of (all) the gods, whose true nature consists of absolute consciousness: 
and who has evolved in His own Self—through the instrumentality of His nine potencies (in the 
shape of Prakrti, Purusa, the Mahat-tattva, Ahankara and the five Tanmatras), strengthened . 
by Himself—an abode (for Himself) in the form of the inanimate and animate creation. (67)

GAG Arad TSA A a SAA fst orate oH SANA aA 
Sa eT aeracia guot aahaegisae Area Ads 121 
Slt SAPP ad Ae TS Seda Seay SeakHMAreay A sleaiseara: 122! 
| bow to the (celebrated) sage Suka the son of Vyasa, whose mind is (ever) full in

Dis. 13 BOOK TWELVE | 723

(the realization of) his own blissful character and who has thereby abandoned the thought 
of another (the notion of diversity), nevertheless whose firmness was shaken by the 
charming stories of the invincible Lord (Visnu) and who graciously dilated upon the 
Bhagavata-Purana connected with Him, which reveals the (highest) truth, and (as such) 
wiping out the suffering of all. (68)

Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled "A Synopsis of (all) the twelve 
Skandhas," in Book Twelve of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita.

hot PT HS 
PITS

SID AAR SeATA:

Discourse XIll

The extent of the eighteen Puranas and the glory of the Bhagavata 
Ud sald ,

aq sal aeursesded: ata feet: wade : Uguamaaractitara ft Aen: |

AMAA get AA Uk S AR Tard A fae: Qugquron sara asl AA: 1k |

Us WaararatihnNaatHwgeaaet: HAsthditad: Aaa: Ad a: |

ANH OIadtaae AAAI AaadAdkesd stesferatenta fasmerft 1 2 |

Sita began again : Hail to the glorious Lord, whom Brahma (the creator), Varuna (the god

presiding over the waters), Indra (the chief of gods), Rudra (the god of destruction), the Maruts 
( the wind-gods) extol through heavenly hymns; whom the chanters of the Samaveda glorify 
by means of the Vedas including the Angas or branches of knowledge auxilary to the study of 
the Vedas (viz., phonetics, grammar prosody, astronomy, etymology and Kalpa or the branch 
of knowledge prescribing the ritual and giving rules for ceremonial and sacrificial acts), their 
analysis into word marking their sequence and the Upanisads; whom the Yogis perceive with 
their mind fixed on Him through meditation; yet whose whole truth neither the hosts of gods nor 
of the demons are able to know ! (1) May the (incoming and outgoing breaths of the almighty 
Lord assuming the form of the divine Tortoise—who felt sleepy as a result of His being 
scratched (and thereby soothed) by the ends of the rocks (forming part) of the colossal Mount 
Mandara revalving on His back (while the ocean was being conjointly churned by the gods and 
the demons for the sake of nectar)—protect you ! Responding to-the subtle impetus 
Communicated by those breaths in the guise of the flow-tide and ebb-tide, the constant rise and 
fall of the waters of the ocean know no rest till now ! (2)

Pe RUMIES ECO ICSEST IC pec od ARMA |e aA Alelead wees Fated | 3 1 
we areagett ut usiaais aisidaerd aalfagradidefa ann x | 
Sst osttarmad «ane «6 ussfaarfa: | aIehUs Aa ae A CIS AC & | 
Uda feet ume used aiaenst sadad fegderela 1 <1 
aaletarta ANIeHanTaAaeaeHA | SAS Vel AM Veh AM Sat aifeieray 1 © 1 
an ayeend are aq Uqea | Ualafagratant = sens welt gq!

» J

oe

© aw 
“ee

4 £ t

zg & ~ 
* Be ae a 4 - S 
rm EA s »

er. e a2

<

*. a A ns, ye 
i eet 2 
. ae 
. = ar

|

a4 hed 
{ ‘ 
a 
+

— = 
oe) “2a ae 
am '--. r . i = 
| {> 
- << « ins 
< a ee, == * _<, i“ 
“ns caw oe D > rn, ae 
ee Ce ee :

a 
~% os ge 
> ‘See

- - > s 
~ cf 
m oo) . »~ 
“— a 2. ww 
ba ‘ ee ee — £ 
Z " . ; ° . 
Gil 2 Ee 
om ee - , ~< ~ 
> ae —, bau s ” al “ 
re > Sa ; 4 4 ie? ” 
£ * f, et _ an 
— o

Se Wad ya sem =afiasa ferme vasa weve aati 1201 
sTeeaTa aay, AAR ATH | Shee AAT ATA ra, 188 
Madera Ae AIM HAA aaafadta «dias «= hardensahsay 1221

The Bhagavata-Purana was graciously revealed by the almighty Lord for the first time to 
Brahma (the creator), seated on the lotus sprung from His navel and afraid of transmigration 
(and hence earned the title of "Bhagavata").(10) Ithas been enriched at the beginning, in the 
middie and at the end with legends illustrating the glory of Dispassiom and has been 
delighting the righteous as well as the gods with its nectar-like stories describing the 
pastimes of Lord Sri Hari. (11) It has for its theme that one reality without a second—which 
is the sum and substance of all the Upanisads (which are the culmination of the Vedas) and 
has been characterized as the oneness of Brahma (the Absolute) and the (individual) soul— 
and has detachment of the Spirit from Matter as its only object. (12)

Sige «= aieiarent «| enfeteeaaa cafe at amrad a arr aeat TL 1k | 
Usd Maat UMN Adal Whisaad sad Matestatad we 12x 
Waaerdanr fe Sarradteard | saa ARIA isla: ware 
Pa AM Tel cased aM amar aa wy: quote aa ies 
aaron dat aaet Gat Heit Wada: 1am Waa sitrerrad fen: 1201 
saetad quan agar fa afer unaeemeae A Wa Ut wMHead | 
oA AMT AHeled THI cepoa ferro ferereovay sera AAT: 1 NCI 
He who, on the full moon of (the month of) Bhadrapada (roughly corresponding to August 
of the English calendar) gifts (a copy of) the Bhagavata, placed on a throne of gold, attains the 
highest goal (after death). (13) The other Puranas spread their lustre in an assemblage of the 
righteous (only) so long as the great and glorious Bhagavata is not directly visible. (14) The 
glorious Bhagavata is surely considered to be the cream of the Upanisads. A man sated with 
its nectarine flavour will not find delight anywhere else. (15) It occupies the same (pride of)

place among the Puranas as the holy Ganga among the rivers, Visnu (the immortal Lord) 
among the gods, and Lord Siva (the Source of all blessings) among the votaries of Lord

Sisal AINA Wasa HrMevaderss fans faaitnagd aa a atte 1291 
Ta «6a Sagas fata se HOM SA aeag qyaa 120! 
ais are wea seeftidarades ato faeqanqqediee! 
wa va at vn: Wedkta Wadi da Hey eas Alaa Al Ad: WAT 1R2Wl

aaa ttt ae Aa ToT esa aa ah a 123! 
ofa siteemrad Feel censearseseSel TRAE Aiea slesreHsl FAleaseara: 1231

We meditate on that pure, taintless, immortal and highest Reality which is untouched by 
sorrow and by which (manifested in the form of Lord Narayana) was graciously brought to 
light at the beginning of creation this matchless lamp of wisdom to Brahma (the creator) and 
as Brahma to (the celestial sage) Narada, as Narada to the sage Krsna (Vedavyasa) and as 
the latter to the sage Suka (the prince among the Yogis) and in the form of Suka, to King 
Pariksit (the favoured of the Lord). (19) Hail to the celebrated Lord Vasudeva, the Witness 
(of all), who (for the first time) taught this Purana out of grace to Brahma, who was keen to 
get liberated. (20) Hail to the sage Suka, that prince amang the Yogis, the revealer of 
Brahma, who redeemed King Pariksit (the favoured of Lord Visnu), bitten by the serpent in 
the form of (fear of) rebirth. (21) (Pray,),so ordain, O Ruler of the gods ! that devotion to Your 
feet may sprout (in my heart) in every birth (that | may have to take); for You are our protector, 
O Lord ! (22) | salute Sri Hari (the Dispeller of all fears and agony), the Supreme Lord, the 
loud chanting of whose Names is the (most efficacious and easiest) way to wipe out all sin 
and respectful salutation to whom alleviates (all) suffering. (23)

Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book Twelve of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita, 
composed by the sage Vedavyasa and consisting

of eighteen thousand Slokas. 
PDT IOS

PI IRE EID

1318 Sri Ramacaritamanasa

(With Hindi Text Transliteration

& English Translation)

Srimad Valmiki Ramayana

(With Sanskrit Text and English

Translation) Set of 2 volumes

565 | Text and English Translation) Set

Srimad Bhagavadgita

Sadhaka-Sanjivani

(By Swami Ramsukhdas)

(English Commentary)

Set of 2 Volumes

457 Srimad Bhagavadgita Tattva-

Vivecani (By Jayadayal Goyandka)

- Detailed Commentary

455 Bhagavadgita (With Sanskrit

Text and English Translation) 
Pocket size

534 ~«4, +, (Bound)

1223 Bhagavadgita (Roman Gita) 
(With Sanskrit Text Transliteration 
and English Translation)

456 SriRamacaritamanasa (With 
Hindi Text and English Translation) 
1528 Hanuman Calisa

453

(Roman) (Pocket Size) 
1491 Mohana _ (Story with the Picture ) 
1492 Rama Lala ( ,, 5 iG)

+By Jayadayal Goyandka }—

477 Gems of Truth [ Vol. J] 
478 ee [ Vol. II] 
480 Instructive Eleven Stories

1285 Moral Stories

1284 Some Ideal Characters of Ramayana 
1245 Some Exemplary Characters

: of the Mah

_ website : www.gitapress.org

[Some of Our English Publicat

_ 620 The Divine Name and Its Practice

lions” 
1125 Five Divine Abodes

520 Secret of Jnanayoga

Sy) ee are 5», Premayoga

Sy 2s dita » Karmayoga

523 , 42» Bhaktiyoga 
1501 Real Love

= By Hanuman Prasad Poddar-F

484 Look Beyond the Veil 
622 How to Attain Eternal Happiness? 
485 Path to Divinity

By Swami Ramsukhdas -—

1470 For Salvation of Mankind 
619 Ease in God-realization 
487 Gita Madhurya 
472 How to Lead A Household Life 
634 God is Everything 
552 Way to Attain the Supreme Bliss

1391 The Bhagavadgita 
( Sansknit Text and English 
Translation) Pocket Size 
1411 Gita Roman (Sansknit text, 
Transliteration & English 
Translation) Book Size 
1407 The Drops of Nectar 
(By Swami Ramsukhdas) 
1406 Gita Madhurya 
(By Swami Ramsukhdas) 
1438 Discovery of Truth 
and Immortality 
(By Swami Ramsukhdas) 
1413 Allis God 
(By Swami Ramsukhdas) 
1414 The Story of Mira Bai 
(Bankey Behari)

e-mail : booksales @gitapress.org |

“Our Publications, Kalyan and Kalyana-Kalpataru available at :

Gorakhpur — 273005 Gita Press—P.O. Gita Press © (0551) 2334721; 2331250; Fax 2336997 
website:www.gitapress.org / e-mail:booksales @ gitapress.org

Delhi — 110006 2609, Nai Sarak ® (011) 23269678; Fax 23259140 
Kolkata — 700007 Gobind Bhavan-Karyalaya, 151, Mahatma Gandhi Road

e-mail : gobindbhawan @ gitapress.org ©(033) 22686894; Fax 22680251 
Mumbai — 400002 282, Samaldas Gandhi Marg (Princess Street)

Near Marine Lines Station © (022) 22030717 
Kanpur — 208001 24/55, Birhana Road © (0512) 2352351; Fax 2352351 
Patna — 800004 Ashok Rajpath, Opposite Women’s Hospital © (0612) 2903933 | 
Ranchi — 834001 Cart Sarai Road, Upper Bazar © (0651) 2210685 | 
Surat — 395001 Vaibhav Apartment, Opposite Nutan Niwas, Bhatar Road

e-mail : suratdukan @ gitapress.org © (0261) 2237362, 2238065 
Indore — 452001 G-5, Shree Vardhan, 4 R.N.T. Marg © (0731) 2526516, 2511977 
Jalgaon — 425001 7, Bhim Singh Market, Near Railway Station © (0257) 2226393;

Fax (0257) 2220320

Hyderabad — 500095 #£=41, 4-4-1; Dilshad Plaza, Sultan Bazar © (040) 24758311 
Nagpur — 440002 Shriji Kripa Complex, 851, New Etawari Road © (0712) 2734354 
Cuttack — 753009 Bhartiya Towers, Badam Badi © (0671) 2335481 
Raipur — 492009 Mittal Complex, Ganjpara Telghani Chowk © (0771) 4034430 
Varanasi — 221001 59/9, Nichibag © (0542) 2413551 
Haridwar — 249401 Sabjimandi, Motibazar © (01334) 222657 
Rishikesh — 249304 Gita Bhawan, P.O.-Swargashram © (0135) 2430122,

e-mail : gitabhawan @gitapress.org 2432792 
Coimbatore — 641018 Gita Press Mansion, 8/1M, Racecourse © (0422) 3202521 
Bangalore — 560027 #15, 4th ‘E’ Cross, K.S. Garden,

Lalbagh Road © (080) 22955190, 32408124

SEltelesitiicee Delhi (Platform No. 12); New Delhi (No. 16); Hazarat Nizamuddin [Delhi] 
(No. 4-5); Kota [Rajasthan] (No. 1); Bikaner (No. 1); Gorakhpur (No. 1); Kanpur (No. 1); Lucknow 
[N.E. Railway]; Varanasi (No. 4-5); Mughal Sarai (No. 3-4); Haridwar (No. 1); Patna (Main 
Entrance); Ranchi (No.1); Dhanbad (No. 2-3); Muzaffarpur (No. 1); Samastipur (No. 2); Howrah 
(No.5 & 18 Both); Kolkata (No. 1); Sealdah Main (No.8); Asansol (No.5); Cuttack (No. 1); Bhubaneshwar 
(No. 1); Ahmedabad (No. 2-3); Rajkot (No. 1); Jamnagar (No. 1); Bharuch (No. 4-5); Indore (No. 5); 
Vadodara (No. 4-5); Aurangabad [Maharashtra] (No. 1); Secunderabad [A.P] (No. 1); Guwahati 
(No. 1); Kharagpur (No. 1-2); Raipur [Chhattisgarh] (No. 1); Bangalore (No. 1); Yesvantpur (No. 6); 
Sri Satya Sai Prashanti Nilayam [South Central Railway] (No. 1) and 1.S.B.T. (Delhi)

Retail Counters

Churu — 331001 Rishikul-Brahmacharyashram, 
Purani Sarak; © (01562) 252674 
Rishikesh — 249192 Muni Ki Reti

No. 57 to 60, I Floor, K.N.Road(Murshidabad) J

Tirupati — 517504 Shop No. 56, T.T.D. Mini Shopping 
Complex, Tirumalai Hills | aa 
Berhampore — 742101 Municipal Market Complex, Block-B, Stall ——

Faron <e:

~

Oe es f

or 
* « 
a * 
< 
i Vr eS, 
% _ - ad 
¥ f 
iad

7 
7 a

ll Hie CMON facili ht oie,

*

et \~V

Fi

+ . 
7

=)

: GPPN 565

a

som Woe wes

on

567