Skip to main content
 
Texts
 
Video
 
Audio
 
Software
 
Images
Sign up for free
Log in
About Blog Events Projects Help Donate  Contact Jobs Volunteer
Full text of "Shrimad Bhagavata Mahapurana English Of C. L. Goswami, M. A Shastri Part 1 Gita Press Gorakhpur"
See other formats
ei . 
= edie ge Lot eee 


—<e 
ee een eeen S — s 


Sr , ee oP 


anskrit=rext and En glish= a= Fransia ition). 


ww we ower eee 


= ASS ON 


—insiia Piet a ee ee See eS ah siecian 


= ee ss 


pee Ti. s reighe ons ~~ £ me ter Se. 


TS asnas ies! i a a a 
EI ak Rolie Sati Sc 


—.. ne Serer Raed wee — marine wes 
—— ee, . ee 


——Eo - - : ; 7 ashatainrwe wews thea’ 


See 


— 
4 ot eee ed. Te 











melt 





Eleventh Reprint 2010 4,000 
Total 44,000 


~ Price : Rs. 150 — 
: (One Hundred and Fifty Rupees only) 


ISBN 81-293-0155-5 


Printed & Published by : 
Gita Press, Gorakhpur—273005 (INDIA) 


‘(a unit of Gobind Bhavan-Karyalaya, Kolkata) 


Phone - (0551) 2334721, 2331250; Fax : (0551) 2336997 
e-mail : booksales@gitapress.org website : www.gitapress.org 


[564 ] 


Cig OU aaa el 


Contents 


. 2 7 Sri mae 5 nagavala-NManennive E : 





Number of Discourses 
1.A Dialogue between Narada and Bhakti (in a living form) ..........:ccccsseccceessecesesceseeceesseseese 1 
2.A Dialogue between the Kumaras and Narada ............:cccccsccccccessseseesseceesccesscceccecceceececess 8 
3. Cessation of Bhakti's Suffering )®...:...c.cc.csscccsssesceecsuscccceeesteeeeteste tee eaten nt Ene ee 15 
4.Redemption of a Brahmana (Atmadeva) ...........:csssscceeecssssccesccesencccesccecsencccessaceesncaecensees 22 
5. How Gokarna attained final beatitude (alongwith others) ............ wostesecodteesstvecustaeee ce earaeeee 29 
6. The plocedtre of hearing Srimad Bhagavata (in a week) detailed ...........:::csccecsceseeeeeee 37 


Srimad anagevele Mahapurana 





1.Saunaka and other sages interrogate the famous Sita (UgraSrava) ...........ccceecceseceseceees 1 


2.Glory of the Lord's narrative and of Devotion to HiM..............sscseccsescesseesesseesteensenseeeesenes 4 
3. The Lord's Avataras or Descents into the world Of Matter ..................ccscsscccescseccessccsceeeees 7 
4.A sense of frustration OvertakeS VEdaVYAaSA ............ccseccsescecnsecnsccescenscecseccussecncccanccenscenes 11 
5. Glory of singing the Lord's praises and an account of Devarsi Narada’s previous 

lifS ....pscccsercccncccncnansesussendiocccascausctececedece ieccctecuctscstcuee oiteut Soveeine estate cae Caton Ree naa aoe nee 14 
6. The rest of the story of Narada’s previouS DIP ...............c.cceecceeccsecssccnccnscensccsecsscosccnscecees 19 
7.Aswatthama assassinates Draupadi's sons and Arjuna in his turn curbs A 

HIS Pride ........cevecsaccenccccacectecuvnweccsdcs sete tote tae ceeenere aaees Go eee Nea D ee ets ean ne ane IS ean ne Sie 22 
8. The Lord delivers Pariksit in the womb andis extolled by Kunti; Yudhisthira gives 

Way tO: OVOP wis coszecescc sca uencenscdesstaccavecesactesscnusscctesstveccesteesusdesieecudcecnr. conteon tessa ta cearreemenaeeteres 27 
9. Yudhisthira and others call on Bhisma and the latter drops his mortal coil, 

Extolling Sri: Krsna .c.-ce-cciesecsccontvascuscenacduabeetnonse, scecencto toe enon Sent Lene ne eee 32 
10) Sri Krsma's Departure to: DW&rakaysctrccstecsesrecceccneceevestctteerereecsteseaceravarcensarea:aeeeeneeeneeenatee 37 
11.Right royal reception of Sri Krsma at DWaraka ............cccsccccsscsseecsesscascosssececsecaeeeceacscenseaees 41 
12. Birth:of. ParikSit 25 si056 Riess, .ectti cat sesakcecncrsnceadecuscsceccotecccanatestocsestecduccsssouenctteadceuccteena beeen eieens 45 
13. Departure of Dhrtarastra and his wife Gandhan, for the forest at the instance 

Of VIGUIa i... iccic. ances ccc ca cnctaedncldvadscdsatdesecseeiesacewcsdeosecun dee detdenaeeneeeas cate ookk ce cree Renan 49 
14.King-Yudhisthira grows apprehensive at the sight of evil omens and Arjuna 

returns from: DWArAaka \....5..ccscc..cccascdeeecavcenceuxaccuscneceubocuecceaeosscscanduesteceeus ckates tacieea=eeenaaamenem . 55 
15.Stricken with grief at their separation from Sri Krsna, the Pandavas instal 

Pariksit on the throne of Hastinapura and ascend to heaven.................ccccsesssesenccensaneees 59 
16.Conquest of the world by king Pariksit and the dialogue between Dharma 

(the god of piety) and Mother Earth ...............sccccssccssscsceseccsstecensescnsscssscssasenenceneaceenscesaasens 65 
17:King’Pariksit:SubGueS: Kalli eicces 225705. ccaccacsncaccecesccsssenusteesesnesnsceectsaddeucds dsuntecetscceesseemteeeeane 69 
18. The youthful sage Srngi utters an imprecation against KING ParikSit .............ccccssseeeseesenes — 74 








19. Pariksit takes a vow of fasting till death and Suka pays a ViSit to HIM .............-+sseseeereesees 79 
1. The process of meditation and the cosmic form of the Lord GESCTIDE .............seeeeeeeereees 85 


2.Concentration on the gross and subtle forms of the Lord and the 
two types of Mukti (Liberation), viz., Kramamukti or gradual Liberation 


and Sadyomukti or immediate LiDErAation .............sssseseseeessessseesseeeseeenteseseneenseeeesesensnes 89 
3. Worship of different deities for the gratification of various desires 

and the superiority Of Devotion to the LOI.............:sccsessssessessssereeeecesssnneeeeeetsensnanaenersess 95 
4. The king asks a question about the creation of the universe and the 

sage Suka COMMEN ES NiS GISCOUISE ............eecceeeesseeerceeseeeseseseeesneeesseeesneersceesenenerneete ns 98 
5.A description of the COSMOS ..............:.csseeessesseessseeeeesneeecteeeeseneneesecenceeaeaeasneeeeeaaansasseseeanens 101 
6. Glories of the COSMIC BeING ................cssssecceseccseseccesercnsscceeecceseccenscseessenseencsenscesssesseeseasees 105 
7. The stories of the Lord's sportful GESCENTS ..................sceceseecceeeceececentcceeecnseonseeessesenenconsens 110 
8. King Pariksit asks various questions of the sage Ska yee ee ere a aa 119 
9. Brahma beholds the divine Abode of the Lord and is taught by Him 

the text of the Bhagavata, consisting of four couplets OMly ...............eeeecceesseeeeeeceeeeeeeeees 122 

10. The ten characteristic features of the Bhagavata 127 





1. Meeting of Uddhava and Vidura 133 
2.Uddhava recounts the childish sports Of the LOI ..................ccecccsecsecceeceecencceecnsoesenseeceees 139 
SADC HSURVE VOM ne HeOrGiS OUICIZOXDIONS -cre-cscsseccscccasscacccceccscccdcccccccsecesccccccccccrccccccsvcnccses 143 
4.As directed by Uddhava, Vidura calls on the sage Maitreya .................:ccsccseccceceeecensceeees 146 
5. The sage Maitreya describes the process of creation in reply to Vidura's 
CTE TOWN acacbosntercornosece CELLO PERCED CEL DODALDOO EEOC BP PRESSE eo 150 
beAppearancelolthe:COSMIGIBOC yresesscstessatesteinscceseetactes ccs ca cccterccecccucccsersecenccnesecccvecsees 156 
WAV ICUITANSIGUIGSHOMS Benaoscnceasce cacscdeases steer aoa oe SIS Tau va eae aT te Ta ee oan av ane 160 
SSB ARMA SHAMS tAtiOn) pessoas teste te: see eaten eee rene es Seee coe tee rs coerce cavasselelescalcclocaeaneconcecaanes 164 
SIESTA MINI ALC KAO SHENG HS ON CA eee te ss aes uae sd sls sUascdedecadecvoseveecuadesecv eevee! 169 
10: Deseniption of the tenfold creation ........:--ccccccoconconsossnccceccccscscccceseccessececsccccccececcecccccececceces 174 
11.Divisions of Time such as Manvantara and SO ON ...........ssssssessseecssscecsecccccececccccsceeeceees se 178 
BZA SMUD CANOMIONCLOATION pose meeeetteneee ne ron tse ne ee 182 
13. The Lord's Descent as the Divine Boar ...........:..:::ccsssescecesscscecsescccesesssesscccesseccecessenencsuecs 188 
Bb eI TISUCSOLSCE PUN ON Nera esetne sae r m e occecececeecececeeees 194 
15.Sanaka and his three brothers pronounce a curse against Jaya and 
SATU renner cur tie PEPCEr LOE PE SEPP EO 200 
16. The fall of Jaya and Vijaya from Vaikuntha .............cscsccsecsssesecscssescececseeseccececeesecccceeeeeeees 207 
17.Birth of Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa and the latter's conquest of 
IN BM OUMOUANLONS irene sean ee enn eee ne) Te. 211 
18. Encounter of the Divine Boar with Hiranyaksa .............:.ccccccsssssseceessccsececccesececcccceceececcces 215 
SSsDeath ofisiAnyaksatersss cee eaters erent et ES So 218 
20. The various species of living beings created by Brahma, ........220...cceccecccccoeececcessecccccceceee. 222 


21. The sage Kardama practises austere penance and the Lord confers a boon 


[3] 





22. The sage Kardama accepts the hand of DevahUtt ............::c:ccsccscescesececseccesteserecersensseess 233 
23. Amorous pastimes of Kardama and Devahiiti .................ssseseeeeeeececccecceeccceececeeeccersenseeneees 237 
24.Descent of Lord Kapilar :.. cvssisaccc.ccéccsacedieddeicesaccucoascocustectnaveSWocees sedessecentodee tea eee 243 
25.Lord Kapila expatiates on the glory of Devotion in response to the query 
Of Mother: Devah ot oo... oo ecacccvscccsccscasecccsecsccdscsncecedocecsdoceceuseceocnccdsteteeatecee eerie ae 247 
26.The process of evolution of the Mahat-tattva and other fundamental 
PIINGIPIOS core vice ieecisetecteDésccesanccssuseecvcecodeccealecscndedesteusedies oat heen 252 
27.How to attain Liberation through the differentiation of Matter 
and! Spirit’? 2... OR Sel A ee eee 259 
28. The process of the eightfold Yoga .............ccccccceccsssssssssccssscccsecesssssscsscscccccccsccssccessecseseseess 262 
29. True meaning of devotion and the glory Of Time ................sssssseseessssccssssnccssccesssseceeseeeseces 267 
30. Downfall of men attached to their Dody, NOUSE CLC. ............cccceceececccecscscsressssseseceececseeceeess 271 
31. The stages of growth of &2 NUMAN EMDIYVO ..............cesececccccceesecccccesssccececcesceeceecesceceeeeeceeees 274 
32.Destiny of the souls departing from this world by the "Bright Path", 
the "Dark Path" and so on, and the superiority of Bhaktiyoga ...................cessecceseeceseeeeeees 280 
284 
1. The Progeny of Swayambhuva Manu's Daughters ..................ceecceecceeceecceecencceeeseneceneeeces 288 
2. IIl-feeling between Lord Siva and Daksa .........ccccccsscssscesscesscesscssceseeceecccseseceeenseecsecesseeneees 294 
3. Sati insists on joining the sacrificial festival at herfathérs sen eee 298 
4.Sati burns herself with the fire Of YOGA ..............0.ccssccescceseccseccseccncccescnsccncceeseessonssensececsoses 301 
5. Virabhadra wrecks Daksa's Sacrifice and DENEAMS NIM ................ceeeceeeceecceecessccasscenscecees 306 
6. Brahma and the other gods proceed to Kailasa and appease Lord SiValn. eee 309 
7.Completion of Daksa'S Sa@crifiCe .....................cccccseccoonscecccnsccecccscceccececcecesccccsccacececenssasanes 315 
8. Dhruva's departure for the WOOSG ..............:csssssccesessccccesecececececcosscscaneescuaccesansesccceceeasesenees 323 
9. Dhruva returns home after receiving a boon from the LOM ...................:sceesceecsnccesenesaceees 331 
10.Uttama's death at the hands of the Yaksas and Dhruva’s encounter 
WITT TOI ooo soc nn cece ee rot soccer eco ecnne dotiok See ecettae cot auuatuses cnvecaecentraptntna aeNeac auc eccn tea cece teaet sanneaennee 338 
11.Swayambhuva Manu intervenes and persuades Dhruva to cease 
FIQKIUING Meccere cases sc ccccectnce cocecccntenseestee -se seen tannens satatn artnet nana taint ties Wenswen maak ears n dt etaearennatts teers 341 
412.Kubera confers a boon on Dhruva, who ascends to the abode of Lord Visnu ................ 345 
13. Dhruva's posterity and the narrative Of King Ana .................:::sssscccccsssssseseneeeeccceneecenseenes 350 
 14.The Story Of King VOM .-.-cccsscsccsascessssonscs-fectacde-cabsstecs Sneniae ax espn atte ano, pe eee 355 
15.Descent and coronation Of KING PIthu.................ceecesecesseccneeecencceeccnsecsecasceceeeensccnscennesouses 359 
16.Glorification of king Prthu by the Dards..................-sseccceesscceecseseescnseeeceeceeeneeecensseseeenseessnans 362 
17.King Prthu gets angry with Earth and the latter extols NiM.....................ssssssesseceeeeenseneees 365 
18.King Prthu milks Goddess Earth in the form Of @ COW .............ccccccccessesnsnseceeceeseesnneeereesees 369 
19.King Prthu performs a hundred NOrse-SaCrifiCes ................ssccscccccecceccccceceeseccceceessnesansnane® 372 
20.Lord Visnu manifests Himself in the sacrificial hall of king Prthu................sscssseseceseeeeees 376 
21.King Prthu's teaching to his SUbjeCES ...........sssscscscscsnsecsceesessesessesesesecacecceceeneaceceesseneneeaeaces 381 
22. The sage Sanaka and his three brothers impart instruction to king Prthu ....................... 386 
23.King Prthu practises asceticism and departs for the other World .....................cccceeeeeneeeees 393 








[4] 
24. The hymn sung by Lord Siva (and taught to the Pracetas) «...........-.sssssesssereresetetetetetetees 397 
25. Introductory part of the parable Of PUAMjAMNA) ........--..s2seeserseeseesseestetteetetseettsrettrecettsecences 405 
26. Purafijana goes a hunting to the forest and the queen gets angry with him................. 410 
27.Raid of Candavega against the capital of Purafjana and the story 
Of KAIAKANYA «......c.csccececececcscsssssecossscenescscsccssscsccosacscssessnevacscsscscessonestsacorsccssseresceaseceeaseceecs 413 
28.Purafjana is reborn aS a woman and attains liberation through the 
teaching of his friend, AVijhata .............esesseesesseseesereesstesseeeeneeseeseessenennenaeaceseennereceneases 416 
29. The Dialogue between king Pracinabarhi and the sage Narada (continued) .................. 421 
30.Bhagavan Visnu confers a boon on the Pracetas, who then return to 
their city and marry the foster-daughter Of the tre@S...........sssseeseseseeeeseeeteseeteeeetceesssees 430 
31. The story of the Pracetas 435 
1. The story Of Priyavrata ...........:ccsssscsssseesssseeeesseceesseeceesneeeeensaeeeeessnsnaaceseesesensesaaaececeeeeesess 439 
SATA COMIITEC HANGIN Cnrctieeeeeentemernennreeaet acne = voccccccvccsccsscecccesecescescestcsqacseccacescesaeeceetoss 445 
3. The descent of Lord RSabh a ...................sssesscccceesccccccesssssecececcceenseeeceeesscsececsseenasnscsocenscees 448 
4.The sovereignty Of RSaDha................ssssscscccessssscesceseesessnssccecececccccceeecceeesssescssrseseeeeseseess 451 
5.Lord Rsabhadeva instructs His sons and Himself takes to the life of 
an ascetic who has shaken off worldly feeling And ODIiGatiON ................ccceeeeeceeeeeeeeeeereres 454 
6.Lord Rsabha quits His DOGY........................-ccsseececconseccccscecccsccacsccasscsccnssccascccnscoesccnsssonscess 460 
WAMULIGISIOLY Ola ilalallal escessceseesteeesetaaeenseseatreacsesacdecssvrtccstccracstststcccestscucecncossccessssesccssccacssasss 463 
8. Bharata conceives an infatuation for a fawn and is reborn AS @ C@ET...............seeeeeereeeenee 465 
9. Bharata reborn for a second time in a Brahmana family .................cssecesecseccnscceseeeeeeeoeses 469 
10. The meeting of Jadabharata with King RANUGANA| .............. eeseessceeceecceeccescecceccnceerereeseeee 473 
id eBharata’S Teaching TOKING RANUGAMNA...2.......0..cccccecoccnscaccnvccccccescccceccnscrcascncosccsccsncosascaness 478 
12. Bharata answers the query Of RANUGANa ................cccseceecesccssccecceecencceececccncescesceacesceeaneaes 481 
13.Bharata allegorically represents this state of worldly existence as a 
forest and the doubts of Rahtigana get reSOlved ..............ccccccssssssscececscecsssccececeeeseseeseeceues 484 
14. Jadabharata elucidated the meaning Of the AllEGOry ................:ssscccccscsecececsseceeeseeseesceeeees 488 
15.An account of Priyavrata's posterity CONTINUE ..................ccceesseeseeeeeccceeesecceceeseeceuesececuess 494 
Bf O=A OCSCHPUOMM Ole LLeStIbeliWVOM) Crests sa trtceces.0csaccccscasccccsecccccsscacccosssccccsseccévscecesececscacsees 496 
17.An account of the descent of the holy Ganga and a song of praise to 
Lord Sankarsana by the divine Sartkara...........c::cccccccsssscccssscsscescessececececcesseeecesescetceeseees 500 
18.A description of (the various Varsas) of the terrestrial globe continued ..................00006+- 504 
19. The description of JambOUdwipa Conclude ...............csccceccccessssssssssscscoccccccccccecccccccceceeeees 511 
20.A description of the other six Dwipas and the mountain-range 
CANSOMEOKAIOK Ges sreceeten serie cns eee oeseneans etyanctcceatn vate ean Sewer nS eTES OLS. chs covavencecaenennes 516 
21.A description of the stellar sphere as well as of the chariot of the sun-god 
VgVe (i 13 GYM OVE (2 tt eee nee ye Eri po eh PLETED TLE CEPRE EP PDD CE CORE 523 
22. The relative position of the planets and their MOVEMENES .......-cccccccccccccccccsececceeseceeeceeceece 527 
23. The disposition of the stellar sphere represented in the form of a dolphin .................-+-.. 531 
24.The position of Rahu etc., and the limits of the heavenlike subterranean 
ONES Pear eetec neem ame ee ae meena NC enka eee B Edn t 5a az F<. <ssagi'sacesosteoranceeeeee 533 
25.A supplement to the description of the subterranean SyStemM ...........-2::0-sssseeccececsesseeeerece 538 


26.A description of the infernal reQions ...............ssssssscccsccossesceccarsssessccccocsecescoccesecoceececcoseeeccs 541 





_ 1. The introductory part of the story of Ajamila .........cccccccseccecseecececessecesceessecscecseseecscecesaees 549 


2.The messengers of Lord Visnu expound the Bhagavata Dharma (the 

cult of Devotion) and Ajamila ascends to the Lord's supreme Abode .........-..:cesecceereeeee 556 
3.A dialogue between Yama (the god of retribution) and his MeSSENGETS ............--ecceeeeee 561 
4.Daksa extols the Lord, who appears in person before HiM ........:0:cccsssecceccceeeeeeeessneceecenees 566 
5. Narada subjected to an execration (by DakSa).........:cssscccssssssssscesscecssetecesseeessntecesnsecenaees 573 
6. The posterity of Daksa through his Sixty CAUGHTtEIS .............ccsecccssscesesssscecereceesssesreeeeeese 578 
7.Deserted by the sage Brhaspati, the gods choose Viswartpa for their 

PFOCODlON, 00. cussiectaes cdaedeteecececcescdeccdacecsccacdeesoues ToD aece see nee soo aT oT En 582 
8.The text of the (holy) Narayana-Kavaca (a prayer invoking the 

protection of Lord Narayana) taught (to Indra) .................sccccessscessssseeeeccccesscceesesssesceeeees 586 


9.Indra slays ViSwartpa; and routed by the demon Vrtra (the younger 
brother of ViSswartpa), the gods call on the sage Dadhici at the 





instance of the. Ord)... 2222s. era a ran cece Hea Can ONTOS CCRT TTT 592 
10.An account of the conflict between Indra and Vrtrai ................eccseceeceecceeceeccecceeceecesceeesecees 600 
T:1- Virtra'sS teaching to ING a ricsctk.ccc-cncccccnccsccesecsdenccoesencaceccsscosconcuce coostereeredersustannmataacnnaseananmeses 603 
12 TNe GEMOn Vitra Sal cic... 5. cus cecuccccsscteccecdsccstecc vevev tess osveeecveteseac cesta esnencnesdusstsentennenacedens 607 
13: INAKA'S VICIONY. «5s cccccecu cc... csccssccsvcsesceccecdesscucsesscdccoutececces duesconeibenenctee narenceas sacnccdads can eaneneEneee 610 
14. The Lament of Citraketu ............:cesseceeee vagcaducnanddebecs’ casei datanctt ee 614 
15<Citraketu, CONSONE 0.0... coc. seks cadcnandeccsbccnvacscecteccseseoeteees eeet ere oe aan eet ae enna nga tnaan tana edenaneantanee 620 
16. Citraketu realizes (his oneness with) the Supreme Spirit ..................scsccesceensensceseccnseecens 622 
17.Citraketu cursed (by GoddeSS Parvati) ...............ssccssccsseceseccnecccescneccecscescesccessesscaccusseeesans 630 
18.An account of the birth of the Maruts (the forty-nine Wind-GOdS) .................sssscccnseeeseeeees 634 

641 
1.A dialogue between Narada and Yudhisthira; the story of Jaya and Vijaya .................... 646 
2.Hiranyakasipu rids his mother (Diti) of her grief (caused by the death of 

his younger brother, HiramyAkSa)..............ccccsccsesesssesscnsnsscccnccercccceccecenccecceccasaccnscrsesscceeanes 651 

3.HiranyakaSsipu asks a number of boons (of Brahma, who is pleased 

with his austeritieS) oa. canicaniiccccesscevceccdecccnsstenssnccetsceussteuessecersesduccesscceaesauctteecenctuanesaueetaas 657 | 

4.Hiranyakasipu's atrocities and Prahrada's virtues recounted .....................2ssssesseeeeseeeeeees 661 
5. HiranyakaSipu attempts the life Of Prahrada................ccsceeeccsssseceecceneccecencessnssnsancceseseceres 666 
6. Prahrada's teaching to the CEMON DOYS ...............ccsseceseccnsecccecscnccceccanccescnsconscescesaesccnccess 672 
7.(Prahrada's) teaching to the Daityas' SOMS ................ccccccsssscccecesssssneceeececesssnsnenecceeesnnsneees 675 
8.Lord Nrsimha extolled on the death of the demon king (at His hands)..........................2- 681. 
9.A Eulogy of the Lord (by Prahrada) «0.0... ccccececcecesssensncccuceecoecccescceeeceseeeeeeeeeeserancoese® 689 
10.(The story of) the conquest Of TTiPUra ............s sce ccessteceecssenseceseesnsnsccesceceseesnnsnecsetecenens 698 
14 Aniinauiry, intosnightiCONGuCtie sc :.cccccccccerceccceanssseescestucencantcsecqcnesuanaceess= ae atea===ns aueeen Semennana 705 
42. An inquiry into right CONGUCT (CONTINUE) ............ccecccececeeeenceeceerteneeceseeeceeceecccaccancaececeaeeness 710 


13.The course of conduct prescribed for a Samnyasi and a dialogue | 
* between an Avadhilta and Prahrada ..........ccscecssecesssssssesssesesescscaeecsenscecescareceesrecareeeceanes 714 








14.An inquiry into right CONdUCT (CONTINUCT) ...............seesseereesessreetetentnseeseetttttteneneneneettctseoaes 719 
15.An inquiry into right conduct (CONCIUGE) .............2.sesesssessseeeeeeeseeeseeessseesneeenaeeeetaneateneees 723 
Book Eight 
4. The ManvantaraS GESCTIDE ..............ccssecccesseecescecceneceeecceseceseccenscessscaceeeeceesanecoeseneseneeans 735 
2. The lord of elephants is caught in the grip Of AN AlliQAatOF ..............seceeeereesseesreseseeetseeesees 739 
3.The leader of the elephants extols the Lord and is rescued from the 

GANGEFOUS SitUAtiON ..............sccecscessesecesesceeeeserseeeesseseeesesnessecsecseeecenersassasssteseseseceseesaeenseens 743 

4. Deliverance of the lord of the elephant .................:cccsesceeesseeecsseecseseeeeeeseeeeeeeeeeensceeeceaans 748 
5. The gods resort to Brahma and the latter glorifies the LOI ............ssseesseseeereeeneeteeeees 751 
6. Transportation of Mount Mandara (to serve as a churn-staff for stirring 

the OCEAN Of Milk) ...............sseeseeeeceecececeeecececesceeceencececeneeececseesececesenccersuseccesnauesausesceuoussssses 758 

7.The gods and demons proceed to churn the ocean and Lord Siva drinks 

the poison appearing Out OF it ................:ccceceecesesssneeeccceceeeeenestensennceenscescecsesseseseceeeeresaaenees 762 

8.The manifestation (in a personal form) of the Lord's (own) enchanting 

DOLEMNCY .......ceceeeeesessssnseccccecececsscssesccsncnsnsnnnceccnsceccecccecssseccesscecsesecanenssesssesssssescesoesessssesseeens 768 

9.Appearing in the form of Mohini (an enchanting damsel), the Lord deals . 

OUeMe Clase ONG HMC OOS messseccateresertececetresccatsccrecsccsrecccsscccscccsccoceccsccnacccescceccescosscnscsecscce 772 
10. Outbreak of hostilities between the gods and the ASUTIAS .................:csscssecssceeeeereeceecsenees 775 
11.Conclusion of the conflict between the gods and the GEMONS ...................cecseeseceeseeeceeces 781 
SEMI A TELE TELE COT DYCO TAL ECOL CH ESS car hc cal care ie we Ll salaveone 785 
13.An account of the (concluding eight) Manvantaras. .................ccceccssecsecsccnscsecsecnscecansaeeees 790 
14.Functions of a Manu and other functionaries holding office in his 

PACHITUIMIS LT AU OM eseareesere teresa acces coc ccccctonecontenoriccusccoccecshnacscoscccduccccseccdecccscsescvcccsccccecccescesccsns 794 
pos CONGUeSTIOINGAVEMIDY: Baliviccs-coosecccacteccsssececcecosssseccccccvsccescocsdlecccscasccescdrccascccccvcccctacccetane 795 
16. The procedure of (observing the vow of ) Payovrata disclosed to Aditi................e000scc000 799 
17. The Lord manifests Himself before Aditi and grants her desired DOON.................+ssssssses 805 
18. The Lord appears as the divine Dwarf and visits the sacrificial performance 

01] SEN) crereenomnen en SERCO) ASS LE CREEEREED So OPDCLED | CoCo EEE EP Eee ee 808 
19.The Lord asks three paces of land of Bali, who gives his word; while 

Sukra remonstrates with him AGAINSTISICOULSC lees werntes vt ag cecteccs tance se Sev cctvocsccoressceccexseseose 812 
20.A vision of the Cosmic Body (of the Lord) ...........::.ccssccesccesscccesccecesccessccecestccccescccesssaccecees 817 
AE SS EULA ONS teense serene eee eene ec meen ne a a loesoeeddeedeceusetls 821 
22.A dialogue between king Bali and Lord Vamana Ne ee erescsscsiesessase., B24 
23. Freed from bondage, Bali enters the region Of Sutala...............cc:::cccssscccosscccesecsccecesseeceeee 829 
24. The story of the descent of the divine Fish recounted ......:....ccccccccsecesecccccecesecccccceceesececese 832 


PIS RES AS 





——— XO Oe 


SID WAASAT: 
The Glory of Srimad Bhagavata-Mahapurana 


(Extracted from the Padma-Purana) 


Discourse | 
A Dialogue between Narada and Bhakti (in a living form) 


Afaerranaa fagraraifeeda | ararafaarna «sites «aa A 1 2 I 
We sing the glory of Sri Krsna, who is all truth, all consciousness and all bliss, who is 
responsible for the creation, sustenance and destruction of the universe, and who puts an 


end to the threefold agony (viz ., 1— that having its origin in one’s own body or mind; 2— that 
inflicted by other creatures and 3—that having its source in natural calamities). (1) 


a veasranquaadaned  garaat facet sige | 
wid aaadar aaistrest adyeqd yfraratsta 121 
When Vedavyasa (who was born in an island) saw his son (Suka) going away all alone 
with the intention of leading the life of a recluse, even though the latter had not yet been 
invested with the sacred thread and (accordingly) had no occasion to perform any secular 
Or religious duties, the sage felt distressed at (the thought of) his separation from the latter 
and called out ."Hullo, my son!" (At that time) it was the trees that responded on his behalf, 
filled as they were by his presence. | bow to that (juvenile) sage (Suka), who (being one with 
the Universal Spirit) has access to the hearts of all created beings. (2) 
St  yauriiaafiar vem warqacaraagare: attest «1 3 
Bowing to Stta of exalted wisdom, seated in Naimisaranya Saunaka, who was Clever at 
enjoying the flavour of the nectar-like stories connected with the Lord, said (as follows):—(3) 


Beh SATA | 
BAMA aedaalleqaaaay \ gare maakt Aa quia x | 
afeamaeerna fadat ada verti arenes aera: fad aa & | 
se UR awel wal Sasa va: | seisHrdel qela Bert fee aTAUTL! & | 
Mat UA: West A Wei qwnynt Wiest  agaleari © | 
fraatteda ae wlameqi saaia ge: Sat agus atitgewi ¢ | 


Saunaka submitted: O Sita, possessing (as you do) the splendour of millions of suns 
capable of completely dispelling the darkness of ignorance, (kindly) narrate (to us) the best 


part of the Lord's stories, which may prove as nectar to my ears. (4) How does the great 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 1 


Ge Pe Se Me He Re Me Be GEE Me Me Me Re RR Re MERE RE Re RENE RED Re Re BE TE ERE BERe BeWee eeRe Be EH BH Ce Pe We Re Ke Re Re Kee Pee Ke Be Me Ge Ke Ke Kee ee He He See Be He We ec Wr We Be We He Me We Hr 





power of discernment— (which is) obtained through Devotion, spiritual enlightenment and 
dispassion— grow and how are delusion and infatuation got rid of by the devotees of Lord 
Visnu? (5) In this terrible age of Kali living beings (men) have mostly acquired a diabolical 
nature. What is the royal road to their purification, assailed as they are by (the fivefold) 
afflictions (in the form of nescience, egotism, likes, dislikes and fear of death) ? (6) (Pray, ) 
point out (to us) now thé means which may ever prove to be the best of (all) expedients 

conducive to blessedness, the most purifying of (all) purifying agencies and which may lead 
fo the attainment of Sri Krsna. (7) Thé Cintamani (a gem reputed to be capable of granting 

all one's desires) can provide (only) worldly enjoyment and the (wish-yielding) tree of the 
gods, the riches of heaven. A (worthy) preceptor (however), when pleased, is capable of 
granting the title to attain Vaikuntha (the realm of Visnu), hard to win (even) for the Yogis.(8) 


Yd Sara 
3ifa: slaw faa a aal afer faard a1 adfearatreara GARVAARIMAA | et 
Tena ad HAOddsedHtidce astern Wadd A iol 
HIGA STAM AAAutiareda | Seta Bra hot HoT Aa Vet 
werent feist 3A fai war vaaqud al wad BATIR2E! 
Wife Bat ah ana dem anil gqaesi wea ear Warm !23 1 
We Adie Ad Madgsiet: A: | Haga woe Fekaa gerftrariext 
wa fafaad wa gen wat soteaami soem ad ad sitarraagaz 24 
H al H HU Glen H Hla: H Alerter seri fede det casera Zire 
samieis fag a et a Head steered amt quonafy eur ie! 


Sita replied : Saunaka! surely there is love in your heart (for the Lord) and therefore 
after (due) deliberation | shall disclose that which is the essence of all established 
conclusions. (Nay,) | shall tell you that which is capable of dispelling the fear of 
transmigration, is prone to swell the tide of Devotion and conducive to the gratification 
of Sri Krsna (Pray,) hear it attentively. (9-10) The (holy) scripture known by the name of 
Srimad Bhagavata was expound in ( this age of) Kali by fhe sage Suka with the object of 
completely destroying the fear of being caught in the jaws of the serpent of Time. (11) 
There is no means other than this conducive to the purification of the mind. One gets (to 
hear) Srimad Bhagavata (only) when there is virtue earned in (one's) past lives.(12) When 
the sage Suka had taken his seat in the assembly of sages in order to give his exposition 
(of the holy scripture) to (the royal sage) Pariksit, the gods arrived there ina body actually 
holding a pitcher full of nectar. (13) Bowing to Sri Suka the gods, who are all skilled in 
accomplishing their end, submitted, “Accepting this nectar (brought by us, pray,) vouchsafe 
to us In exchange the nectar of your discourse. (14) When this barter is made, let the 
celestial beverage be quaffed by the king (Pariksit), while we shall all drink deep of the 
nectar in the shape of Srimad Bhagavata." (15) "The beverage of the gods and an 
exposition of this holy scripture bear no comparison with each other in this world any more 
than a piece of glass and a precious gem can be likened to each other." Thinking thus, Sri 
Suka (to whom the knowledge of Brahma stood revealed) laughed away the gods on that 
occasion: so the tradition goes. (16) Knowing them to be anything but devotees, he did not 


confer on them the nectar in the shape of an exposition of the holy scripture. (Thus) the 
story of Srimad Bhagavata is a rarity even for the gods.(17) ae 





Dis. 1] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 3: 


Ve Pe Ve He He He Re He F : ; 
it Be We He Se We Me He Be Re Ve Re Hee Ve RCM Ge We He Re Ae HERE RE RR Re Re Re MEHR HE AC RH We Ve Be Re Be Be We Be Re Be Me Ke Me Re We We Be We Be MCW Be He Ge Me Me Te Ke Me We Me Ne Ke Me Ke 





Tat Ala cent Stet oT erenie fafera: | weal Tet Tea aE: 1221 
era stat Wao sé wediaer safer: aa fae wei aa: 1281 
RR wa ye wad ell UedeaUE AqVoHECAHA 1201 
amet at aden anew: ga skh aera amt: 1221 
arent TAMA PTAA | ere: te | ATA: 1221 


In the former days even Brahma (the creator) was astonished to witness Pariksit's 
emancipation that way (as a result of hearing an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata). In the 
Satyaloka (his own realm) Brahma (the birthless god) set up a balance and weighed (on it) 
the various courses of spiritual discipline. (18) (And lo!) all others proved (too) small while 
this one (Srimad Bhagavata) proved superior in point of weight. All the hosts of seers 
experienced great wonder on that occasion. (19) They came to regard the holy book of 
Srimad Bhagavata as an embodiment of the Lord (Himself) in the Kali age and capable of 
conferring the reward of speedy access to Vaikuntha (the divine realm of Lord Visnu) by 
(merely) being read or heard. (20) And heard (from beginning to end) in a week's time, it 
definitely bestows emancipation. Formerly it was made the subject of a discourse to Narada 
by the kind-hearted sages Sanaka and others. (21) Though the story of Srimad Bhagavata 
had (already) been heard by Narada (the celestial sage) through his relationship with 
Brahma,the procedure of hearing it in a week's time was disclosed to him by the (above- 


mentioned) sons of Brahma. (22) 
Ride Sara 
waenegrea  aAneenfere ai fafa qa: sift: Watt: Ha a: Ge 1231 


Saunaka said : How did Narada, who is above (all) worldly controversies and does 
not remain fixed at one place develop a taste for hearing the procedure of listening to 
the Story of Srimad Bhagavata and where did he meet them ( Sanaka and his three 
brothers) ? (23) 





Yd Sara 
aa a aidiaenta wna HedH| Yet AA Acikh te: ret faa a ex 
una fe faanerat aa wAAISHeT: | aasa AAA aA ANGINA! 


Sita resumed : Here shall | narrate to you an episode connected with Devotion, which 


was related to me in private by Sri Suka (himself), accounting me his (devoted) disciple. (24) 
Once uponatime, itis said, the (above -named) foursinless sages arrived in Badarikasrama 
for the sake of Satsanga (fellowship with saints). There they came across Narada. (25) 


PART He: 
at sRTS: Hid wariaka Wed GA HAMM dag zal 
sent qrafenisia wafer ae SA: idee qaqa atfeadt aq aU, 121 


The sons of Brahma said: O self-realized saint ! why have you pulled a long face? How 
is it that you are afflicted with worry? Where are you proceeding to in haste and where have 
you come from? (26) You appear lost at this motmentike aman whos wealth is gone. This 
is (however) not becoming of you,who have given up all attachments. (Please) point out the 
reason. (27) 








4 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 1: 


WEEE HERRERA RoR RR EO TRA RR RRR eee BeBe We Ke We We Ke Me Ke Be Be He He He He Be He He We We We We We We We We We We We Re Re We We We We 





ARG sad 

até qd yfeeat ar Sal Bahasa | yeRt A Wart a areal Mara aa 1221 

ahaa peat osike aqeermivaniag dete wa ged: 1X81 

aad | gated 6 padded aforrerifam = ete aTfeTATEAT Rol 

aei aa qa: ald aa cd a faadisqasiton silat amen: pewiiior: 132 

Wa: Qed WeNrar Wed: | waUshed: Gat facnt: Gael: 1321 

aeuisya Te ae alec: | Hafan wise a HeHAA 133 | 

SC Re CCICI CMEC SOUICC OIC CCI: MS 1 i lA ER 

a ant aa fal al a A Alena A: | SfeadaMente Ae AAA WHLIZ4! 

seer saad: fragen faenea: | ee: aero: asad Hentag 1261 
Narada submitted : Knowing the earth to be the best of all (spheres) as a matter of fact 
| came here, and visited Puskara and Prayaga, Kasi and Godavari (Nasika), Haridwara, 
Kuruksetra, Srirangam and Setubandha (Rameswaram). Though wandering hither and 
thither in these and other places of pilgrimage, | found nowhere such a joy as would cause 
Satisfaction to my mind. This earth stands assailed at present by the age of Kali, the helpmate 
of unrighteousness. (28—30) Thereis no truthfulness, askesis, purity (of body and mind) and 
compassion, nor there is liberality (to the poor). The people are wretched and engaged (only) 
in filling their bellies. They make false statements.(31) They are indeed slow, extremely dull- 





witted, of poor luck and afflicted. Those who pose as saints are constantly engaged in 
Preaching false doctrines. Those who have (apparently) renounced the world are rich in 
worldly possessions and have become family men. (32) Women rule the house. Brothers 
of one's wife are the (only) counsellors. Out of greed people sell their daughters. There are 
(frequent) quarrels between husband and wife. (33) Hermitages, places of pilgrimage and 
rivers are controlled by foreigners and temples here have been destroyed in large numbers 
by those wicked people. (34) There is no Yogi, nor one who has attained perfection, no 
enlightened soul and no man performing righteous deeds. All spiritual discipline stands 
consumed by the wild fire of Kaliyuga. (35) In this age of Kali people (at large) take to (the 
vocation of ) selling food-grains, Brahmanas sell (the knowledge of) the Vedas and women 
make their living by prostitution.(36) 


Wa Wee hed wdereitel at demoat aa cier ROL 1301 
ead Fa qs Fadl AAA: | Wat qo dev aa favo Raaamat i3cl 
Get st ufadt oe f:weededt i qaesh wale wad a aa: Ut: 1381 
caica Titer wat fet aq:idtaam aaeifetermn gee: vol 
Gol aie: aise aldara aefrene | At eet Athearn aren fergen ase: 1X2 | 


Observing the evils of Kaliyuga as aforesaid while touring round the earth, | (at last) 
reached the bank of the Yamuna, the scene of the pastimes of Sri Krsna.(37) There | saw 
a wonderful phenomenon; (pray,) hear of it, O great sages ! A young woman was (found) 
sitting there distressed at heart. (88) Two old men were lying unconscious by her side 
breathing hard. The young woman was nursing them; she tried (sometimes) to bring them to 








Dis. 1 ] 


We Fe Be We He He Ke We He Ve Ke He We Me $e Ke Ke We Ke eRe He Re Hr He er 
4 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 5 


Br Be We Be Bt We Ke We He Be Ke Ke Se He Me Ke Be Ke He He Ne He Me ee Be He He Re Me Be AERC Ae Be Be Ne He eRe Ae BORE Re Me he Re RCAC He HRT 





consciousness and (at other times) wept before them.(39) She looked all around in search 
of the Lord (the protector of her body). She was being fanned and admonished by hundreds 
of women again and again. (40) Seeing this from a distance,| for my part went near her out of 
Curiosity. The girl rose to see me and, agitated in mind, spoke (to me) in the following words. (41) 


MATA 
at Wt: aet aot fag afar aeaietd aa cles uadereaet aa ix 
wen wa ae graanhasfaedtt i aar wet wdalt vadt agit dal 1x31 
The girl said : Hullo, stay a while, O pious soul ! and put an end to my worry too. Your 
(very) sight is the best means of completely driving | away the sins of the world. (42) My grief 


will be assuaged to a great extent by your admonition. Then (alone) does your sight fall to 
one's lot when there is greatluck.(43) ~ Te 





Mg Sara 
calfal @ caiferit Stn ares: er: UaIereet: | ae Aa Use SI SAA HRI Ive 


Narada said: Whoare you? Howare these two men related to you? who are these lotus- 
eyed girls (standing beside you)? Point out in detail the cause of your misery, O worshipful 


“lady ! (44) 

MATA | 
até ube <a sat a aaa adie sea ait Ive 
Tg: akada Aes art: iat aa A da: Aaa: Fue ive 
Sei Ul Aad afadead aMleati al A fadaree al acl Tanlas ivy 


The girl replied : | am known by the name of Bhakti (Devotion). These two are regarded 
as my sons. They are Jana (spiritual enlightenment) and Vairagya (dispassion) by name 
and have become worn out by the process of time. (45) These girls, again, are the rivers 
Gangaand others, gathered together (in living forms) for doing service tome. Yethappiness 
does not come to me, even though | am waited upon by celestial damsels. (46) Now hear 
you my story with an attentive mind, O sage rich in askesis ! My tale is a long one too; (yet) 
hear it and give me (some) solace. (47) 


sum fae ae aig wuieh Tal wfacfanene Wk Solat wat 1xc 

da aoa: wftedieet| qere fat aa Gat ae Wade xe! 

qaat Wt: wma adda gaettuitisne gait wassen { APM Iho! 

sit a afar gat & feead: sei se wt URewr facet mad AAT uel 

Mea aad aa saa a:fiaat | até ¢ dau Heng qalant ga: 1&2] 

sat aealitaatet sa: fermined wot ait deol aanrfafa 143 

ama: ala area fasafasamar | ae aie stat aot art fa Wad 14s 
Such as!am, | was bornin the Dravida country and attained maturity in Karnataka. | was 
respected here and therein Maharastra and attained a ripe age in Gujarat. (48) Mutilated by 


heretics due to the arrival of the fearfulage of Kali, and continuing in the state for a longtime, 
Tgrewweak and developed sluggishness alongwith my two sons.(49) Reaching Vrndavana, 


Nees 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 4 


We Fe Se He Ue He Se Re Re Re Me Be Re RR Ke Ree eMC Re Re BRE Pe GRE RB Be We Rr We BO Re Wr eA HH aT AY Pr Be We Be We We Re We ee we Be Me ee Be we We Be Be We we We Se He Fe He We We We He We We Ke He we we 


however. | stand refreshed as it were and endowed with extreme comeliness. | have now 
3 ———— ——— pleat aS Smee 


become quite young (again) acquiring a most lovable exterior. (50) These two sons of mine 


lying here are, however, experiencing (great) agony due to exhaustion. Leaving this place, 


| am (now) proceeding to another place. (51) My sons have attained old age: | am afflicted 
Though their mother, why should | be young and wherefore should my 


with this agony. vne 
sons be old ? (52) Although we three live together, why stands this incongruity ? The 
natural thing is that the mother should be old and the sons young. (53) With a mind seized 
with wonder | deplore myself. Kindly declare, O sage, what may be the cause of this, O 
repository of Yoga ! (54) 








ARG Sa 
Weare 860 aka SS Aaa a faecal Het |fe: at a Hier 14h 


Narada replied: With the eye of intuition | perceive in my mind all this misery of yours 
(as well as its cause), O sinless one ! You should not give way to despondency.Sri Hari will 
bring you happiness. (55) 
Yd Sa 


AVANT AAA AAAS AAA: 14S | 


Sita continued : Having come to know the reality ina moment, Narada (the great sage) 
spoke as follows. (56) ney 


Mg Sa 
Toate ae Bist cen: aie: iat GA: aera anrarteuia aio! 


Wa «Saad «86 Medgendenthiur: | se at fadiefa seeia ware: | 
aa ef q at estar a ei: afvedtseranr 14¢1 


wear «| -AAMNat,  RTI ae ae SHU Ae AY aead 1481 
qt arate ad: Ales aisha Usata | safarcrarinesisicat frat 1 G01 
qa wage deo Fae qed aa whefeait aa a ee 
samt eeeTaA sa «Wea: | feafsrererqete «86 Wafetaaisaval: 1621 


_ Narada said : Listen attentively,O young woman! The presentis the terrible age of Kali. 
Righteous conduct, the path of Yoga (union with God) and austerities have disappeared 
under its influence. (57) Practising roguery and evil deeds people are turning out to be (so 
many) replicas of the demon Agha (whose story appears in Srimad Bhagavata X. xii). In this 
age (of Kali) righteous men remain dejected andthe unrighteous feel overjoyed indeed . That 
clever man alone who maintains firmness in this age is learned and wise. (58) Year after year 
this earth IS gradually becoming a burden for Lord Sesa (the serpent-god). It is not worth 
looking at or (even) touching ( with one's feet). No sign of good luck is to be seen (anywhere) 
either. (59) Nobody even perceives you with your sonsat present. Neglected by menblinded 
with love for pleasures, you stand enfeebled_ (60) Due to contact with Vrndavana you have 
become young and fresh again. Deserving of praise therefore is Vrndavana, where Bhakti 
dances (with joy). (61) These two (sons of yours, however) are not able to shake off their 
old age due to lack of men having demand for them here. Their deep slumber here is believed 
to have been brought about by the partial gratification of their self ( through their contact with: 
the Lord). (62) 2 Oe he or e 7 


Dis. 1 1 rn : re es a 
Dae cae ean teas SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 7 


CR ReR HeHe He 
We We Ke He Ke eH BeBe BeBe Be He we Be Re Ke eH Me Mee Ke Ke Ke Ke He Re Ke Ke He Ke Ge ME HE Re Be Be eC RE Re Re RRC MERA ARE REACH BORE 


Thea 
cee UNifaT TaN Nhat wala: wes: isgGa q aot ade: ga wa wErL Ea | 
ceo efturererd: © qeritaat | gti 2 card fisher rarer Afaareaenl 1x 


Bhakti Said > How was the impious Kali actually given an abode (here)? and the age of 
Kali having set in, how did the Valuable essence of all substances disappear? (63) How is 








—_—_= Se eee 


(all this) unrighteousness too tolerated by the all-gracious Sri Hari ? (Pra i 
ee SS Ssiless (00 10! gracious. y,) resolve this 
doubt of mine. | feel gratified by your words. (64) 





Rg SU 
ag Ysa ate Waa: sect wel ad agents X wd Hans a afters gu! 
Aal Ysral Wa aA Maal WUE Ta: | afearenferrara: aaaeaeten: 1&1 
eet feared wa daaswt va: 1a Wat unuildisd URE sa RUG G01 
Gre Akt ae a ata aafeertiace wud Weasel aalaatdar 1gcl 
Werte cies apt anacdar fawn: enfidar aiosiat Ta a 1ge! 


Narada said : Since | have been questioned by you, O young lady! listen with love, | shall 
tell you everything, O blessed one! and your faint- heartedness will disappear. (65) From the 
(very) day Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) left this earth and ascended to His own 
realm, the age of Kali, which balks all spiritual endeavours, set in. (66) Seen by the king 
(Pariksit) in the course of his conquest of the (four) quarters, the_spirit of the Kali age (ina 
living form) like a wretch sought the king for protection. The king, who like a black bee took 
the essence of things, thought within himself, "He (certainly) does not deserve to be killed 
by me; (for) in the Kali age one fully secures through the (mere) chanting of the names and 
glory of SriKrsna (the Ruler even of Brahmaand Lord Siva) the fruit which cannot be attained 

“farough askesis, concentration of mind or (even) through deep meditation. (67-68) Therefore 
perceiving the Kali age to be valuable in (this) one respect, though devoid of substance (in 
all other senses), Pariksit (the protege of Lord Visnu) with a view to securing the happiness 
(blessedness) of those born in Kali allowed the spirit of it to stay. (69) 


pantera: addt fefdisei vet: dieren yat ctr ae 1901 
fauinadtt ami a wR TA sal aria Hoes Hera Ad: 1021 
areata teat set: 1astt festa disiq dtefarcetd Ta: 11921 
HITMAN AG NAM Hperada: laste fisfa aah aasaneddl We: 1031 
TARA MESNISUSHSA, LIAS ANITA AH N98 
afer mea Tra AfeMt gal Greed cal Sea Aral Woy! - 
a fe aeraat Sa AACA! Ua Sead Mal aa: Wer Wer 9G! 
ad qT great fe ada Her Gaur sie Weilena: ded fene fee: io! 
Due to the practice of evil deeds the substance has disappeared from everything in the 
present age. Like the_husk devoid of grain (all) things on earth stand divested of their 


substance. Out of greed for food-grains the story of the Lord is repeated by Brahmanas in 
every home and to all and sundry; hence the value of the story is gone. (70-71) Even those 


perpetrating most cruel deeds of various kinds and unbelieving men and savages have taken 
a 








8 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 2 


We Re Re Re he Re Re RE RRR HOR BR He KORE RE Re He HEHE By BL Fe HEE HE we Ve We We He We Wee Meee He 
a 4r 





up their abode in places of pilgrimage; hence the value of sacred Doe ee e 
those whose mind is agitated with passion, anger Excessive greed an = uae te 
have (outwardly) taken to an ascetic life, hence the value of askesis Is gone. ‘ Ne : mt 

of control over the mind, greed and hypocrisy and due to people embracing neretic coe trines 
and abstaining from the study of sacred books, the fruit of Dhyanayoga (the iss oe of 
meditation) has (also) disappeared. (74) The learned (Panditas) for their part indulge in 
sexual commerce with their wives like buffaloes. They are expert in procreating children and 
are not (at all) clever in achieving Liberation. (75) Devotion to Lord Visnu, owns the 
traditions of a particular.sect, is nowhere to be seen. In this way the substance ol tl ings has 
disappeared everywhere. (76) Such, however, is the spirit of the times ( we are living in), as 
a matter of fact . Who (else) is to be blamed for it ? That is why the lotus-eyed Lord (Visnu) 








toterates (all) this, though abiding (so) close to us (in our very heart). (77) 
a eee 


Yd Sara 
st det wal fae cei ami afeed ad ya: gaat ae ate ive 


Suta went on : struck with great wonder to hear this admonition of Narada, Bhakti spoke 
the following words once more. Listen to them, O Saunaka ! (78) 


heard 
aa a fe asf wares aaa: arent att ole adfafgnt a8! 
Walt Sit At AA Hata AaACaANch chaos Wiha | 
qauenta Aidt Achar Yalsd Ahoaeaa Aga Adie idol 
Sit ATA SAAS AA SMACASeA AfHAReSAPTA AA WAASeAa: II 2 Ih 
Bhakti said :You are indeed blessed, O celestial sage ! You have come (here) through 
my good luck. The sight of pious souls is the best means of accomplishing everything in this 
world. (79) | bow to you, son of Brahma, the recipientof all blessings, treasuring whose single 


teaching Prahrada (son of Kayadh@) was able in this world to conquer Maya, and by whose 
grace the celebrated prince Dhruva too attained an everlasting abode. (80) 








Thus ends the first discourse entitled "The Meeting of Bhakti with Narada" 
forming part of the “Glory of Srimad Bhagavata" in the Uttara- 
Khanda of the ? glorious Padma-Purana. 


GTR SIS 


AA fadtarsear: 
Discourse Il 
A Dialogue between the Kumaras and Narada 
Iq Sad 
qa Sere ae set ferangd ae sige ex sti aiftrerft 1 21 
aad a ufo a BARA | feo Magra: a qe: waa a: 1-2 | 
4g She: fer ce Gad srordisfiren | esse wa aft arayega 1 3 | 


Dis. 2 ] £2 


We Ve He Ge Se He Me Me Me We Me See Me Me He Oe ROW, He OMe We He Me Xr 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 


® 
fe We We we We Hee We MeOH We Me We EM, He Me Me Me He Bee Re he ee we ME we He Me Me ME Re HOME Me Me Me Re Re Me Me Hee Me Hee Me Me Me Me ME Ye He 






weet = stecktrat «= aftratereat | met q ahaet wfstararaeaehuit i x 
git Pig fag: agai wi wast gi ummeira: gall perareuns & 4 
aaa a YS fe Hectia Benet | al dalssqHO Aa UTA TG 
sgipd aT ag wealswpeitear | ahh ai eat qe saaurecarfaat | © | 
Ue VA KNOT agus GA wa alist umfaderas seed aa HAL! c 


Narada began again : In vain do you vex yourself, O young woman ! Oh, why should you 
be so afflicted with worry ? Think of the lotus-feet of SriKrsna and your misery will be gone.(1) 
The celebrated Sri Krsna, by whom Draupadi was saved from the tyranny of the Kauravas, 
(nay,) by whom the pretty girls of Vraja were made the recipients of (special) favours, has 
gone nowhere. (2) You, Bhakti, as a matter of fact, are ever dearer to the Lord than His own 
life. Invoked by you indeed, the Lord goes even to the houses of the low. (3) Inthe three Yugas 

_commencing from Satya (viz., Satya Yuga, Treta and Dvapara) spiritual enlightenment and 
dispassion were the means to achieve redemption (of the soul). In Kali, however, Bhakti 
alone effects unity with Brahma.(4) Concluding thus, they say, the Lord (who Is all Spirit), 
the embodiment of supreme bliss and consciousness, evolved you, the embodiment of 
Truth, as a charming girl, the beloved of Sri Krsna. (5) Joining your palms (as a token of 
Se you once asked Him, "What shall | do ?" SriKrsna then commanded you, "Look 
after My devotees !" (6) This was accepted by you as a matter of fact and Sri Hari felt (highly) 
gratified at that time and conferred on you, on the said occasion,as a_maid-servant Mukti 
(Liberation) as well as these two, Jfiana and Vairagya (as your sons). (7) In your real form 
you look after the devotees in Vaikuntha; (while) a shadow-form has been assumed by you 
to take care of the devotees on earth. (8) 


ahs ae farkh a ae Fa aa Yai qaicgevard eed fe! ¢ | 
wot Af: aa MAT Unavemauifedt | alga WaT BW Agus yta AT ko! 
aa aaa ada afmoeaia aa al uiipa aaa a ure wera wart 1221 
suena: wet Ul gal adh Gat dal cena frat yer agora farce 1221 
aie Mae: aise aM ae aaa | dieteat wrafaens We We SA St 1831 
STUMPS UAC MIMI Tal AE Stele Sle al A Nada 1ex1 
aehangs a sitet viata aenfae 1 ufeatst aera fda permracy ie! 
aati fa aaahe: ader Saefautia a aah aie wasameqda: 1261 
4 da a feared at carat argqusta ari ahamster eet A syNaT 1 V1 
= qufad aaa a waa ado aie aead Vee SATO aA Alaa: 1g 
sot waraeat set Siifefe stad | set afte: et afar goon: ge: fra: 1ke 
ahha! 2 a a dieha weal gale quam: ga vefafram: 1201 
as SSR OE 1S) AHMToMEtea «Alena 1221 
Taking Mukti, Jfiana and Vairagya with you, you came down to the earth. From Krtayuga 
- down to the end of Dvapara you stayed here with great joy.(9) Afflicted with the malady of 


false doctrines (however) Mukti underwent decay in Kaliyuga and under your direction she 
returned to Vaikuntha soon. (10) Yet, even when thought of by you, she comes to this very 








10 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 2 


ie Ge We Se We te Gr Be re Oe Ge Ve Pe Pe We We We Se ee Re RR RR RRR NRCS CE WERE RR RR RR RRR RT RT Re Me HRC TERE Re Ke He ERE HEATHEN Be eH Se MN He ea Ne He See He ae He 





region and goes back again; while these (JAana and Vairagya) have been kept by you by your 
Own Side treating them as your sons. (11) Through neglect in Kaliyuga both your sons have 
become sluggish and old. Nevertheless cease you worrying; (in the meantime) | am taxing 
my brain about a remedy. (12) There is no age like Kali, O lady with a. charming countenance | 
In this Yuga | shall establish you in every house and In every individual. (13) lf | fail to 
propagate you in the world throwing into the background (all) other cults and placing above 
“all grand celebrations (connected with Devotion), | am no longer a servant of Sri Hari. (14) 
Even though sinners, men who will be endowed with you in this age of Kali will attain (after 
death) the abode of Sri Krsna, which is free from (all) fear. (15) Those pure-bodied souls in 
whose mind constantly abides Devotion in the form of love (for the Lord) do not see (the face 
of ) Yama (the god of punishment) even in a dream. (16) Neither the spirit of a departed soul 
nor a fiend nor an ogre nor a demon has got the power (even) to touch those whose mind 
is enriched-with Devotion. (17) Sri Hari can be won neither by means of austerities nor 
through ( the study of) the Vedas, nor through spiritual enlightenment nor even through 
righteous action; He can be won only through Devotion. The cowherdesses (of Vraja) bear 
testimony to this. (18) Fondness for Devotion is in fact engendered in the mind of men after 
‘thousands of lives. In Kaliyuga, in the age of Kali, Bhakti Se conane: as a result of Bhakti 
SriKrsna (reveals Himself and) stands at our (very) door. (19) Those who are hostile to Bhakti 
_suffer in all the three worlds. In the past the sage Durvasa, who reproached a devotee ( in the 
person of King Ambarisa ) came to grief. (20) Have done with (the observance of) sacred vows. 
Have done with (undertaking pilgrimages to) sacred Places. Have done with spiritual. 
disciplines. Have done with sacrificial performances and have done with discourses on spiritual 
enlightenment. Bhakti alone is capable of conferring Liberation. (21)  =—(<‘«;C~*™;*# 


Ud Saray 
git Aneta «merce Pera midatgufedgm ane alaqasdt i221 


Suta resumed : Hearing thus of her own glory as ascertained by Narada, Bhakti got 
enriched with the fulness of all her limbs and spoke to him as follows. (22) 


THeara 
Se ane vasa sitet ule faetia meafeteqents fet wrenta adder 1231 
SUA aa AN Agen eta AVN uAasdat ale adt alera Alera 12x11 
Bhakti said : O Narada, you are (really) blessed. Your devotion to me is 3 unflinching. | shall 
ever abide in your heart and shall never forsake you. (23) My agony has been dispelled by you 
ina moment, Compassionate as you are,O pious soul ! Consciousness, however, has not yet 
returned to my sons; therefore (pray) awaken them, bring them back to consciousness. (24) 
Yd Sod 
we aa: Waleed prev ANG Ud: aaa =o aT fad 1 RU 
Wa dara quit zeqqH: ARE | A Meera Bits Yt ara NeqeqarL 126 | 
aeee eae sy Titrsdede: | eat det aa wHeifaethedt sent 1291 
Wace Ft  Beaadti aaaaiedt wa: WHnsAASa 2c 1 
aera at Prieta ya: erameavn i aafifiemed ona: fir freed WAR a 12e1 
ae fa ad aft qed a nea faa Were aaa arta 1301 


* For the Story of King Ambarisa see discourses IV and V of Book Nine of Srimad Bhagavata. 


Dis. 2 ] AD] ; = aoe 
ae Me We He Fe Me MC Te Me Me Me Ree Hee He Ne ae ae Xe esinane MAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 1 1 


We 90 Ke We Ke We Fe He 
BEBE M FEM HEME MEK Re MERE RE Ke He Re Re Me Me ee He He Me Me He ee RE He Hee EMC HEH Me eR He Me He Me Me ee 









rave Mean at flaernfifa i sera: anertsd ufsearht a dara: 1321 
pial ard aa a RAR lat Haifteraa area: ByWsT: 1321 
: Bt ater aha qaenrtat: | rer eronehn: aad: | raeata 133 | 
eaariast: UE at faymiane feed oa 3e ara aaqisx 


Suta_continued : Narada was filled with compassion to hear the appeal of Bhakti, and 
_began to rouse them, pressing them with his fingers. (25) Taking his mouth near their ears 
he shouted | clearly as follows :—"O Jfiana, wake up at once ! O Vairagya, wake up !" (26) 
Being roused again and again on that occasion by him through the chanting of Vedic and 
Upanishadic texts, recitations of the Gita and so on, they rose some-how with (great) 
exertion.(27) Full of languor as they were, both began to yawn and could not open their eyes 
to see. Their hair had grown white like (the down of ) a heron and their limbs (reduced to a 
bare skeleton) looked like pieces of dry wood. (28) The moment he_perceived them 
emaciated by hunger and inclined to fall asleep again, the sage (Narada) | felt worried and 
said to himself, "What should be done by me (now)? (29) Oh, how can their sleepiness and 
old age, which is (even) more formidable, disappear?" Pondering thus, O Saunaka (a scion 
of Bhrgu)! he (Narada) put himself in mind of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows). (30) 
Presently a voice was heard from the heavens saying : "O sage, do not feel dejected. This 
effort of yours will prove fruitful no doubt. (31) For this, however, O celestial sage! perform 
you duly a righteous act. Saints who are the holiest of the holy will point out to you that 
act.(32) When that noble act is performed, their old age including their sleep will 
disappear ina moment and Bhakti will spread all round." (33) The voice from the heavens 
to this effect was clearly and perceptibly heard by all. Narada was struck with wonder and 
said. "What it means is not understood." (34) / 


ARG Saad 
aTaqaissmigrarvarta mera fFreafta fe at aad are at Gre Aadat: 1341 
@ viata dae wet aed Be da fe sedel aah aaa 1361 


Narada said : The voice from the sky too has spoken in a mysterious way.| wonder what 
may be the act which will have to be performed in order that the object of these two may be 
accomplished! (35) Where will those saints be (found) and how will they_impart the 
knowledge of that practice ? What should be done by me atthe present moment as enjoined 


by the voice from the heavens? (36) 
qd Sarat 
aq gata dene friat anet ata: i diet diet fatten gaan after 1301 
qd: gaa aa: fafatafaa areadi stared cer sragiaftia art 
FalyaRAMa J ferardted Wemfarat: 1321 
latent | Hediceraa  faaatas: | dqderderesy Tharatsfaarferay 139 | 
ahaa  aAlefasferch aati saat Amnisaiia Ul cHvissas: ixol 
afr area wa a waa d adiaema werd amftatiie are: vel 
WARM: Writes saa 1S t , 


Siita went on : Leaving both there, the sage Narada departed (thence) going forth from 
—_—_—_—s— ——_—_—e * 





12 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 2 


0 Or Or Se Oe Ge Me eRe WOME He Re ROR He Re Re Me HERG HET TH vee te ae ae Re RR RR RAR A A RAR RR MR HE REE MER Se BE ERE ESET ge We te Me Me Ne Me Ne Oe Me Ve or He We a 
’ vr We A v ‘ : ; 





one sacred place to another and making inquiries of the great sages on the way (about the 
virtuous act hinted at by the voice from the heavens). (37) The story was heard by all; no 
Conclusive reply was (however) given (by any). Some declared the malady as incurable; 
while others said the remedy was difficult to ascertain. Still others, on the other hand, 
remained mute: while some (evaded the issue and ) slipped past (thinking it imprudent to 
hazard a statement). (38) A tumultuous uproar, causing wonder (to all) rose in (all) the three 
"worlds.People whispered from ear to ear: "When the trio consisting of Bhakti, Jhana and 
Vairagya did riot rise (even) though awakened through the chanting of the Vedas and 
Upanisads and recitations from the Gita, there is no other remedy. (39-40) How can that 
which is not personally known as a matter of fact even to Narada be pointed out by ordinary 
human beings here (on earth) ?" (41) In this way by the hosts of seers questioned ( on this 
point) the remedy was declared after (due) deliberation as difficult to make out. (42) 
aaa: asa  aaiiaqara:iaasam ait ded paisa: is31 
aes ON: «= Gee tae! alfleqdanmrandard aaa: sx 1 
Tormented with anxiety, Narada thereupon came forthwith to Badarikasrama. (There) he 
said to himself, "I shall practise askesis here !" and made up his mind to gain that object. (43) 
Meanwhile Narada (the foremost of sages) saw in front of him the great sages Sanaka and 
his three brothers, shining like millions of suns, and spoke to them (as follows) : (44) 


Mg Sa 
Set YR Mah: GTAISHaC| HARI gad ale Hat Hear aaah ix 
Wad aba: At Geet Aad: Used:  Yaorafa  yaot: ive 
wa | Aachen 8«©=—s aftantdada: | Siena: «= HeTATAcHilfea: Iviot 
ae: aroma fe fat aat qa aa:iam: aieaates wa gers aed 1<cl 
aa yA_A gat ee: ui yet frafadt wel aca: at wat ive 
ae We aa alt wade sued aden afa da cam: ito! 
SRR dik AMT wet dass” afer iue 
Tear | Aa Ie Adauga rer: 1421 


Narada submitted-: O juvenile sages! my meeting has taken place with you through 
great good luck. (Pray) have compassion on me and tell me quickly what | should do. (45) 
You are all (great) Yogis, highly learned and wise. Though looking five years of age each, 
you are older than the oldest.(46) Having your permanent abode in Vaikuntha you remain 
constantly engaged in chanting the names and glories of Sri Hari. Drunk with the charm of 
(ane eee See ie ae oa pastimes, you subsist on such stories alone. (47) "Sri Hari 

; viour !" this formula ever plays on your lips as a matter of fact: old age 
as directed by K ala (the Time-Spirit) does not eises four (48) At the ae Be raciionol 
your eyebrows in the days gone by Jaya and Vijaya, porters of Sri Hari, sank down at once 
to the earth and it was by your grace that they rose back to Vaikuntha. (49) Oh, your sight 
at this juncture has been secured through (great) good luck. Favour must be done by your 
gracious eee me, wretched as | am. (50) (Pray) tell me what may be the spiritual 
practice that was hinted at by the voice from the heavens and how It should be gone through 
(by me). (Kindly) describe it in detail. How can satisfaction be caused to Bhakti, JAana and 


Vairagya and in what manner can they be lovingly and diliaent! i f 
society ? (51-52) gly gently established in all grades 0 





Dis. 2] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 13 


Br Br Br Br Br Kr Br Be He Kr Be Fe He Hr Br Hr 
Be Br Br Ke Hr Hr Rr Re He Hr Br Hr Rr Br Br BeBe Be Re Ge Be Be Ge Re Re Be He Ke Re Ke Re Ke Be Re MRE Re ERE RE BERT RRR RE ROR ERE RE BER EME Rt RR RE RR He RR Re 





PART HY: 
Mm tat ge tat at fea amegisae: quaeisa ada ud wa fe iual 
stat ARG ease fmm firtafin: eer siterenererarrauiatasent: 1uy 
at fet a amet vaeeingahtfi ued qe wh: SRNAT eT 144! 
maaieeat wie We: wedi: | rere Yo aa wa: SHOEI: 1461 
aGUSMAH: TM: TT wel fe addi qeiase yes: wal wada waa 14! 
wert ca Pes ata gq aquidgem swe feta: sae: uct 


The Kumaras said : Do not worry, O celestial sage ! Make your mind happy. There is 
already in actual existence an easy way to do this. (53) Oh, blessed you are, O Narada, who 
are the crest-jewel of those who have turned away from the pleasures of sense. You have 
always been the guide of the devotees of Sri Krsna and the illuminator of Bhaktiyoga. (54) 
Itshould be regarded as no matter of wonder for you, who are making (such) incessant efforts 
in the cause of Devotion. It is (but) proper on the part of a servant of Sri Krsna to make 
constant endeavour to establish Bhakti on a sound footing.(55) Many a course of discipline 
has been brought to light by Rsis in this world, but they all involve exertion and mostly confer 
the fruit of Swarga (heavenly bliss). (56) As for the path leading to Vaikuntha (the everlasting 
and all-blissful realm of Lord Visnu), it yet remains hidden. It is generally through good luck 
(alone) that a person promulgating that course of discipline is found. (57) The righteous 
practice which was hinted at to you the other day by a voice from the heaven is, however, 

described today. (Please) listen with a composed and cheerful mind. (58) 


FTAA ATR STAM RAA | ANAM A q Hafan: 1481 
Gadgaal Fa Was: Ba ge: | stead: a g Ma: Benfels: 1601 
akpgtarnot daaaot ae Aecdl area gat: as qa amdfaera ice 
sea fe ufseta siteraqdead: | mecte sa ad faesecle qat sa 1g! 
Weare ove: sata she ofr ad: met citer ica 


Sacrificial performances conducted by means of material substances (consigned to the 
sacred fire), those consisting austerities, those in the form of concentration of the mind and 
others consisting of knowledge acquired through a study ofthe Vedas, they are (all) symbolic 
of action leading to heaven alone. (59) Indeed Jhana-Yajna (sacrifice in the form of 
Knowledge) has been recognized by the wise as a symbol of righteous action (action leading 
to Liberation). That JAana-Yajna is the reading of Srimad Bhagavata, and that has been 
extolled by Suka and others. (60) By its (very) chanting great strength will be derived by 
Bhakti, Jana and Vairagya. The suffering of JNana and Vairagya will disappear and 
happiness will be Tegained by Bhakti. (61) All these evils of Kali will surely disappear at the 
(very) chanting of Srimad Bhagavata, even as wolves take to flight at the (very) roar of a 
lion.(62) Then Bhakti, that yields the milk of love, accompanied by Jnana and Vairagya, will 
dance in every heart and in every home. (63) 

AMG Sard 


Aedes oo witaras: «Self aiearferrmot «= alefersferes «eT 1x 











a 
a 
i 
; 


‘pe ee ee + oa 


14 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 2 


Sewer ae RRR RR RE ROR KORE ROR Me Re Re Re RCC MEME REE BE ESE BE Be Re He we We ae ae He 






MA MTadioandeH at Seer | aepearg @ aatel: ales Ble Us Ud 14 
fecd de ea qTandsnlaeatar: | faerat AA del: RUMAH: 15 | 


5 : i, Jha iragya did not wake up (even) 
Narada submitted _: When the trio of Bhakti, Jnana and Vairagya 7 
when roused_by means of chanting the texts from the Vedas and the Upanisads and 


recitations from the Gita, how will they get up on a reading of Srimad Bhagavata; (for) inthe 


stories of Srimad Bhagavata,as a matter of fact, is found the substance of the Vedas (alone) 
running through every couplet, nay, through every (single) word. (64-65) (Pray) resolve you 
this doubt ( of mine), since your sight never goes in vain. No delay should be made by you 
in this matter, fond as you are of those who have sought you for protection. (66) 


PARI Ha: 
Sache aniera arradt ser ae aa iit Yara hereia: 19 | 
siden Waa A Elaa aMia wa: Mg: we frat: 181 
ant gat fed atid wrertancatigast fe agei cami wae 1 
dqurafa wert wea ere fair garage a at fer det APTA HeT 190 | 
Se UMMad AA GI Aaah Akela VITA Tenis 198 | 
aerdaagera ower ste adktiaitmat ara AMAA loz 
dal Sal UT Shh wd-selHantadd! adasauneen rate aera: 1931 
da a fae: Sa ad: saat wai stared set ane faa lox! 


The Kumaras replied: The story of Srimad Bhagavata has emanated from the essence 
of the Vedas and the Upanisads. Having an existence apartfrom them and representing their 
(very) fruit (as it were), it appears to be the very best. (67) The vital juice circulating in a tree, 
for example, permeates it from its root to its very top; it cannot be tasted (in that state). The 
Same juice (however), when separated in (the form of ) a fruit, captivates the mind of the 
whole world. (68) To take another illustration, the ghee existing (in a latent form) in milk is 
not capable of being tasted (as such); but the same ghee,when separated, enhances the 


Selight (even) of the gods. (69) Sugar too (in the form of sap) permeates the sugar-cane from 


the middle to both its ends, but tastes sweeter when separated (from the cane and 
condensed ). The same is the case with the story of the Bhagavata. (70) This Purananames 

Bhagavata", which is on a par with the Vedas, has been revealed (by the sage Vedavyasa) 
for stabilizing Bhakti, JAana and Vairagya. (71) Formerly, when ( the said) Vyasa— though 
well-versed in Veda and Vedanta (the Upanisads), and even though he had composed-the 
Gita—began to sink in the ocean of infatuation, full of remorse as he was, (this) Srimad 
Bhagavata, which (originally) consisted of four couplets (only), was taught (to him) by you 
on that occasion. By listening to it (the aforesaid) Vyasa was immediately rid_of (all) 
obstruction. (72-73) Why should there be any surprise to you at this, prompted by which you 


put questions to us? Srimad Bhagavata should (accordingly) be recited to them (Jhana and 
Vairagya) inasmuch as it is capable of driving away (all) grief and sorrow. (74) 





welt a fares Ga: stererrfer Wag: Meanted ar | 
PreeReeiicateat: ae ai CC 





De dl aires aywee SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 15 


cme 
Cw Re eM We Me eRe Me we He Be eRe He Re ewe Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re ee Me Re Re ee ee HR Re RR eRe Me Me Me Re Re eM Me Me Re He Hee A He 





Wee gereahie aa a awl ueat act at 
siMedpderersaram fer if ade fae: 1196 | 

ofa so Sees saa PAAR! aM fEtaiseATA: 121 
Narada submitted : O great sages, who are solely engaged in drinking the story, (of 
Srimad Bhagavata), sung with all his (thousand) mouths by Lord Sesa (the serpent-god)! | 
have sought refuge in you in order that you may diffuse the light of (divine) love—you, whose 
Sa, sight eradicates at once (all) evils evils and brings happiness to those tormented by the wild. 
fire of rons sorrows. (75) When due to rise of the tide of fortune accumulated in the course 
of many (past) lives a man actually secures the ‘fellowship of saints, it is then alone that 


wisdom dawns (on him) dispersing the darkness of infatuation and pride occasioned through 
the agency of ignorance. (76) 


Thus ends the second discourse entitled "A Dialogue between the Kumaras 
and Narada", forming part of the "Glory of Srimad Bhagavata" 
in the Uttara-Khanda of the glorious Padma-Purana. 





at 
PII SESS 


BM Talalseare: 


Discourse Ill 
Cessation of Bhakti's Suffering 


ING Sava 

Wea asker wWnatansvae wegen wroeast Wadd: | eg | 

SA cal Wa aa: We dgreraitel ate Bawa amet saat: | 2 | 

featead: sren sittertadt weriat fafa adett ane gaat: 1 2 | 
Narada submitted : With the object of stabilizing Bhakti, Jnana and Vairagya | shall now 
zealously perform a Jnana-Yajna (Sacrifice for the dissemination of Knowledge) illumined 
by areading of Srimad Bhagavata (the script scripture expounded by the sage Suka). (1) The place 
where this sacrifice should be performed by me may now (kindly) be pointed out (to me). The 
glory of Srimad Bhagavata may (also) be stated by you, masters of the Veda.(2) Inhow many 


days should a reading of Srimad Bhagavata be heard and what procedure should be adopted 
in it: (pray) tell me that on this occasion. (3) 


PART HZ: 
soy ane aearmt fara fadietingarada q{ deta! x | 
AMR taeeeadd | AMdeedieet 86 - Aenea & | 
Wace AUIS | Tetastamt at dale a fere_i & | 
Wea «aA MS | eee OT a Maret 1 I 
we fide da wusivincami dat a Wer Afnerartert | ¢ 1 
aq umtadt atat at watch Asi HUglet UNiHva dior aeurad! < | 


16 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 3 


eRe RRR RR RR Re ROR RR HR Re RRR KOR, Ke He ROR He Me Re He 


Be Re 8 Se COR Re Re Re ORE RE Re ROR RR ROR ORR ROR RR BRE RR NERO RRR RRR RR BER REM Re Be HER ITNT 


The Kumaras replied: Listen, O Narada! We shall tell you (all) this, humble and discreet 
as you are. Near Haridwara (the 2 gateway of the holy Ganga, so-called because It enters the 
plains here) on the river bank is a place known by the name of Ananda. (4) It is inhabited by 
numerous hosts of Rsis and frequented by gods and Siddhas (who are endowed with mystic 
powers by their very birth). (Nay,) it is crowded with various trees and creepers and 
overspread with fresh and soft sands. (5) The place is charming (to look at) and situated in 
a sequester rea. Itis (ever) charged with the sweet odour of golden lotuses. Animosity 
(towards one another) does not abide in the mind of living beings dwelling near that place. (6) 
A Jiana-Yajnia may be commenced there by you without taking any (special) pains (over it) 
and (you will find that) the reading of Srimad Bhagavata there will be full of unprecedented 
charm. (7) Bhakti too will appear there (in person) placing in the forefront the aforesaid pair 
(viz., Jfiana and Vairagya), always lying before her devoid of (all) strength and with a body 
worn out with age. (8) Bhakti and her two sons must reach there where a reading of Srimad 
Bhagavata is going on. (Nay) the said trio gets rejuvenated as it were on hearing the words 
of the story. (9) 3 














Yd sara 
Wate HANI ARCH PA Adige BATA: HMA Aa: 1kol 
Gel Gate A A dal Rlotecisaad| yet aclh aA weleth ata AIL 
shhamaadqearra TAME: | TaAISAAT: Ta Te A A AGA: 122 
ICI EEOC EES Thera Renfatadasead | 


adsat aon: aeqaen: welfare At: 1 ev! 
addi A ais Walter: Bqda: | aaraqquonta wegrrenfor dessa: 1241 
Teen: URdett Yenleaia wai earfor a fea: aal cueniaath aie 
eat age eareldeal: | Tear Adres: walea Aa! 201 


Suta resumed : Having spoken thus, the aforesaid Kumaras with Narada went thence 
together to that bank of the (holy) Ganga impatient to enjoy the story of Srimad Bhagavata.(10) 
As they reached the bank there rose at once an uproar in the terrestrial region and the realm 
of the gods as well as in Satyaloka (the realm of Brahma, the creator). (11) All those who 
were keen to enjoy the taste of the Lord's stories, and first of all the votaries of Lord Visnu 
came running to drink the nectar-like story of Srimad Bhagavata. (12) The sages Bhrgu, 
Vasistha and Cyavana, Gautama, Medhatithi, Devala, Devarata and Parasgurama, even so 
Viswamitra (the son of Gadhi), Sakala, Markandeya (the son of Mrkandu), Lord Dattatreya 
and Pippalada, Vyasa and (his father) Parasara, both masters of Yoga, Chayasuka and all 
the hosts of sages, the foremost of whom were Jajali and Jahnu, arrived alongwith their 
wives,-accompanied by their sons and pupils and full of excessive longing (to listen to the 
Story). (13-14) So came there the Upanisads and the Vedas, Mantras and Tantras, the 
seventeen Puranas and the six Sastras (systems of philosophy), rivers such as the Ganga, 
Puskara and the other lakes, holy places, all the (four) quarters, as well as Dandaka and the 
other forests (all) in a living form. (15-16) Mountains etc., as well as gods, Gandharvas and 


demons went there. The Sage Bhrgu persuaded and brought there (even) those who did not 
come because of their importance. (17) 





Dis. 3 ] 


He Oe We He Fe We We We He He He Wee Me We We Fe re Hr 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 17 


BeBe Be We Me He Re We MER Be Re Re WERE He Re He REM RE Me REE RE ROR ROR ROWE RE RE ERE REM ROR RE MERE RE RERE ROM KOR NORE TRE He Me Me Me He He Me He He 





qa ARTS TEAL Har ahem: Aas: Here: 1ec1 
corns feral =nfeat serafior: | qe fear a aah ane: fies: 1¢¢1 
Taam  oaferonredea fala: 1 aduhedsar dale feats: 1201 
WeRledl AW: Wee: Weetia al guiommgarat aa: AAW 1221 
faa ware feat eanraan: | meagan aatet ware 1221 


Invited with due ceremony by Narada to expound Srimad Bhagavata and greeted by all, 
the Kumaras (the sage Sanaka and his three brothers), who are devoted to Sri Krsna, now 
occupied the excellent seat offered to them. (18) The votaries of Lord Visnu and those who 
have recoiled from worldly enjoyments, recluses and celibates sat in the van and in front of 
them (all) sat Narada. (19) On one side sat the hosts of seers. On another side sat the 
denizens of heaven (gods and others). On a different side sat the Vedas and Upanisads. On 

one side sat (the deities presiding over) the Tirthas (sacred places), while on another sat the 
ladies. (20) Shouts of glory, shouts of greetings and blasts of conchs were heard. There was 
a tremendous shower of red powder, flowers and parched grains of paddy. (21) Many a 
leader of the gods mounted his aerial cars,and covered all those assembled (there) with 
flowers of the wish-yielding tree. (22) 


qd sara 
Wa Wafedg siaeraqe alaemagt Gs Ae eles 1231 


Sita continued : When they were (all) seated as aforesaid and had concentrated their 


eee eee 


mind, the Kumaras began to describe in clear terms the glory of Srimad Bhagavata to the 
high-souled Narada (as follows): (23) 


PART Haq: 
aq a aqudasenfiadfeat antes: | aa sau yf: ede fered 12x! 
Gal Aa Al Aan siasmadt Hai ae: Rava ekisd Aaa 124! 
Wesslesrarean Bleaeeetarnd: | utfarsndare: A AMTad A ALE! 
TARAS «WAASHIAA: GAL! AaewUita Aer YHAMAHA AUT 1291 
fe addeft: ara: qailss wee: 1 te Aad Bet Yee Tile 121 
am wade fret vale aaytideye dished fe aaat amare iee! 
aaa «= aaa | AIA Hot Alera SSaitey 1301 
aaa  eshafaaaha adler: | aan sad aa siitertad At: 1321 
@ Tet A Wa Grail Went A WAM | ArwMaHawaa4ns Hed Adal AddLi32! 


The Kumaras said : We now (proceed to) tell you the glory of Srimad Bhagavata (the 
scripture expounded by the sage Suka), through the mere hearing of which Liberation is 
Secured within one's palm (as it were). (24) One should constantly attend and constantly 


listen, to an.exposition of Srimad Bhagavata, through the hearing of which Sri Hari takes up 
- His abode in one's heart. (25) This work consists of eighteen thousand Slokas andis divided 


into twelve Skandhas (Books) and it is in the form of a dialogue between king Pariksit and 
Sri Suka. (Do) hear the story of the said Bhagavata. (26) A man revolves on this whirligig of 
transmigration through ignorance only so long as the story of Srimad Bhagavata does not 





18 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 3 


ge We Oe We We We Me Me We Me Ae Re ee ee Bee He 


enter his ear even for a moment. (27) What will be gained through the hearing of many 
scriptures and Puranas, which will (only) create confusion (in one's mind) ? The Bhagavata- 
Sastra alone proclaims loudly its capacity to grant Liberation. (28) That house itself in which 
Srimad Bhagavata is read everyday is actually converted into a sacred place and drives 
away the sins of those dwelling in it. (29) Thousands of Aswamedha Yajnas and hundreds 
of Vajapeya sacrifices cannot compare (in their efficacy even) with one-sixteenth ofareading 
of Srimad Bhagavata. (30) Sins persistin this body, Osages richin asceticism, (only) SO long 
as the story of the glorious Bhagavata is not duly heard by men. (31) In point of efficacy 
neither the (holy) Ganga nor Gaya nor Kasi nor Puskara nor Prayaga can bear comparison 
with a reading of Srimad Bhagavata. (32) 


salar saleae a fal amanda ive wqeda adkofa ai wea 1331 
aadenat ow wea wumda aiadl wumad aa gamat wa Wlavi. 
Bese Sa wie: dai: | Meuse a qiMsiestt aa 134! 
qe A aaayT YSN wa DIVAN awa: We yarwMa ged 1361 
aZX UUtTad wea araadastai waatend wd asad AM ara: 1301 
Solna aalHale al Usertad a a:iftt yanamia wstgaraeat: 3c! 
Sh Utad Aa ad a ehfaaaqi qed aa saat aad ase! 
sree q@ ada Bad AcHakaarey | Meat aga agus mifacish serfs ixot 
eatedt  adewra adit Al GUA We Ged G Wiewud AAT Ise 


lf you seek the highest destiny, read even yourself daily one half of (even) a quarter of a 
verse of Srimad Bhagavata. (33) (The sacred syllable) OM (the seed of Veda) and the (holy) 
Gayatri (the Mother of Veda), as also the Purusa-Sukta (a hymn consisting of sixteen Mantras 
sacred to the Cosmic Person and figuring with alittle variation in all the Vedas), the three Vedas 
(Rk, Sama and Yajus) and so also Srimad Bhagavata as wellas the twelve-syllabled Mantra( 3 
7A Mad atdeara), the sun-god (appearing in twelve forms, severally presiding over the twelve 
months of the Hindu calendar), Prayaga, Kala (the Time-Spirit) represented by a twelve 
month, nay, the Brahmanas and Agnihotra (the daily offering of oblations —chiefly consisting 
of milk, oil and sour gruel considered as incumbent on every householder of the twice-born 
_ Classes in the former days), the cow and even so the twelfth of every lunar month,also the 
(holy) basil plant and the vernal season (consisting of the two months, Caitra and Vaigakha, 
roughly corresponding to March and April of the English calendar) as well as Lord Visnu (the 
Supreme Person)—no distinction in reality is recognized by the wise among these. (34—36) 
The sins committed in crores of lives by the man who intelligently reads the whole of the 
scripture known by the name of Srimad Bhagavata without a pause get rooted out: there is 
no doubt aboutit. (37) Again, he who reads one half or (even) one quarter of averse of Srimad 
Bhagavata everyday secures the (combined) fruit of a Rajasuya and an ASwamedha 
Sacrifice. (38) Srimad Bhagavata read everyday, contemplation practised on Sri Hari, the 
watering of the Tulasi plant and service rendered to cows are equal (in value). (39) Lord Sri 
Krsna (the Protector of cows) out of love grants an abode in Vaikuntha itself to him by whom 
is heard at the time of his death even a sentence from Srimad Bhagavata. (40) Nay, the man 


who gifts a copy of it placed on a seat of gold to a votary of Lord Visnu decidedly attains 
absorption into Sri Krsna. (41) 


Dis. 3 ] 


Fe Fe Ge eM He eee Me Me Me He OMe Me Me Me He He He He Me He He He He 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 19 


We Ve We Ve We Me Me ee Ree Me ee ee Me Eee Me Re ee eC Me Ne Me Me Hee ee We He ee Me Me ee we ee Re ee He Me Be ee Me 





ara at yea fafa faena sear a dia! 

asIead Tae ad cat ated fae era site: ast 1s?! 
Mtecsat Frifedt: @ ¢ anal aa at aenneeed a feafart 
fee ad at aged yf saecdd acta fafa aaqmerpen: 1x2! 

The fool by whom even a little of the story of Srimad Bhagavata is not drunk with a 
concentrated mind during his whole lifetime has alas ! spent his life like a pariah or a donkey 
in vain and (only) proved instrumental in causing pangs of childbirth to his mother. (42) That 
fellow of sinful deeds by whom not even a few words of Srimad Bhagavata (consisting of a 
discourse of Sri Suka to Pariksit) have (ever) been heard is depicted as a living corpse. 


Leaders of the community of gods in heaven speak (of such a man ) like this: “Fie upon such 
a man, who is on a level with the beasts and a veritable burden on earth !" (43) 


gqeva ma wh siemadsaialertaqen gata ¢ owe ix 
wt aaa ete, stent at saad: 1 feat fant aka adar stant Aas! 
aaa sereador adel saul wa! SteraedieHet Steal faataisa BewigaT 1¥E | 
Tmigkeasa frame amidat mdaaaqageyaul aAaixel 
Mgt: AA Peat Ara Alas achenidcs Benedt Alewavl HAW Ixcl 
THAIS wage: Mal Heats AMEX AA Ixe1 
Gene Aled aga a arma aaleai sare aa Oaesaur LI 40! 
Uaiesia Ware: Aaa wsife waciaacea wif steedtetfrd fe asifa 142! 
arrest dae wera «Asif fH sat ass qe t % asifa asia 1421 


An exposition of Srimad Bhagavata is certainly rare in the world. In fact (an opportunity 
to hear) it can be had only through merit percolated through crores of lives. (44) Therefore, 
O wise one, O storehouse of Yoga, this should be heard with diligence. There is no restriction 
regarding the (number of) days in the course of which it is to be heard. The hearing of itis 
commendedatall times.(45) The hearing of it is advised at all times side by side with the vows 
of truthfulness and continence. This being impracticable (however) in Kaliyuga, the specific 
rules promulgated by Sri Suka in this behalf should (accordingly) be known. (46) Since it is 
not possible in the age of Kali to control the vagaries of the mind, to observe rules of conduct 
(strictly) and to remain consecrated to a sacred purpose (for a long period of time), it is 
considered advisable to hear (the whole of) itin the course of a week.(47) That (very) reward 
which is attained by listening to it with reverence everyday during (the month of ) Magha has 
been ascribed by Sri Sukadeva to the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata in a week's time. (48) 
The (complete) hearing of Srimad Bhagavata in a week has been commended due to lack 
of control over the mind and prevalence of diseases as well as because the span of life of 
man has been shortened and also because a number of evils are rampantin the Kali age. (49) 
One bids fair to attain with ease, through the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata in a week, that 
fruit in its entirety which cannot be attained through askesis nor through concentration of 
mind nor again through Samadhi (complete absorption of the mind in the Universal Spirit). (50) 
The seven days' hearing of Srimad Bhagavata is superior to a sacrificial performance; it is 
(even) superior to fasting. Itis far superior to askesis and is ever superior to (a visit to) sacred 
places. (51) It is superior to Yoga; (nay) it Is superior (even) to meditation and spiritual 





20 > SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 3 


We Fe we Sr Se ee We He Re He Se deat We Oe Gee ERE REAR AAA AAA RA RARE LAA RARE LAER R SER BEATE IE SEIT SE SE AE ay Wr ay Fe We We 





enlightenment. What shall we say of its superiority ? Oh, the wonder of it is that it is superior 
to everything (else) ! (52) 
sacs Sara 


aisyitacid mae Walesa fee ara! 
aa wurmad wor wd pat artfaqieqand 143! 

Saunaka submitted : This story told by you is (really) wonderful. (But) how has the 
Bhagavata-Purana, revealing as it does the true nature of Lord Narayana (the cause even 
of Brahma, a master of Yoga), proved efficacious at the present moment as a means to final 
beatitude, superseding (all other) disciplines such as spiritual enlightenment ? (53) 

Yd sald 
Fel HUN ei Aaa BUS TYME: | Valet UTA aes 14s 
Suta replied : When Sri Krsna was ready to ascend to His own (divine) realm, leaving 


this earth, Uddhava, even after hearing (His teaching contained in) Book Eleven of Srimad 
Bhagavata, addressed the following words to Him: (54) 


SEI SAAT 

a dq aeta Mee amet fara ai afd aedt fad at Aat Tears 144 

SMS ios Weaeshd wt: Get: ldeaea ase aera ar i4gt 

ql Rad Mtett HAAaI SA A qead AM Ad: HAGGIE 1491 

3d: Ua eal Hal Uhades A AT! Alas ayo sre PreHnista fra: 1c 

agar a am: wa Mera gael Pero asada: feafafgara 14! 
Uddhava said : Having accomplished the object of Your devotees, O Krsna (the 
Protector of cows) ! You are going away. There is (however) great anxiety in my mind. (Pray) 
give ear to it and make me happy. (55) The terrible Kaliyuga is imminent. Wicked people 
will appear again. When sheerly due to their fellowship even the virtuous develop ferocity, 
whom will this earth, bearing a (heavy) burden (in the shape of sinners on her bosom), resort 
to in the form of a cow ? No protector other than You, O lotus-eyed One! is in sight. (56-57) 
Therefore, taking compassion on the virtuous, O Love of (Your) devotees, (pray) do not go. 
It is for the sake of (Your) devotees that You have appeared in a qualified (personal) form, 


though formless and all consciousness. (58) How will those devotees live on earth, when 
separated from You? There is (great) hardship in worshipping God without attributes. Here 


ponder a little (again). (59) 
saedds: Aa 8 wrMesfrdaght: | uMdeaaata fe fae aaft a igo! 
Salt ase 8 8anTadseeM| fritera sfapisa § sitaerraaotat 162 | 
wa arg afd: saan ada wt: | Aaaregaurrsrestaraaafsrht IGQI 
aera wa eeisaite Hii aes frp aet aisaiita: 1631 
q warkeactabaarasaneara Alarmed fe met adfsadiita: 16x! 
run sere arear saef Agen | set Mea wage: Wares: Nada: 1641 


Hearing this submission of Uddhava on the holy site of Prabhasa, Sri Hari ithi 
. ; ri thought (within 
- Himself): “What should be done by Me for sustaining My devotees ?"(60) The fer eee 


Dis. 3 ] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 21 


Be We Be We We Ke We Fe We Fe 


eRe Bee Re He Mee Ke Ke eRe RE Me eRe Hee REMC KE HERE MRE BERR RE RE HERE REMEBER HEHEHE HE Re HE RCRCHE AE LCR ME ME RERCREACRENE RE BCRE RE REAERE He BACHE MEM 





all his glory and energy into the Bhagavata and disappeared in the ocean of Srimad 
Bhagavata. (61) This constitutes, therefore, a visible verbal manifestation of Sri Hari. It 
drives away (all) one's sins by being waited upon, heard, read or seen. (62) Therefore, 
hearing it In a week has been recognized as superior to all ( other disciplines); (nay) in 
Kaliyuga It has been declaredtobe the (only) righteous course excelling (all) other disciplines.(63) 
Indeed this is the righteous course prescribedin the Kali age for washing away allagony, poverty, 
misfortune and sin as well as for the conquest of passion and anger. (64) Otherwise the Maya 
of Lord Visnu is most difficult to get rid of even for the gods. How (then) can it be set aside 
by men? Hence (with the object of getting over this Maya too) the course of hearing Srimad 
Bhagavata in a week has been commended. (65) 


Ud sald 
wt wmesauteert seman saat: amar 
sista 6a «Oger Ci. 
Wie: Ot dt aeut wear Sdeecr aerssfeadia 
sip mee eR amt Aaft arm edad ice 
aw ama warradsdyat qaredat cay: ae: | 
ea Stast maar ae aiff ached: 16! 
oa FAN aa dent werd feof 
wa fe: a aan Para arear feame Aa ise 
Sita went on: While the great virtue of hearing Srimad Bhagavata in a week's times was 
thus being promulgated by the sages (Sanaka and his three brothers), a great marvel took 
place in that assembly at that time. It is (presently) being narrated (to you). Listen you to it, 
O Saunaka ! (66) Bhakti, which is identical with love (for God), appeared (in a living form) all 
of a sudden, taking (with her) her aforesaid sons (Jana and Vairagya) resorted to their youth 
and repeating the names of Sri Krsna! Govinda! Hari! Murari! Lord! allin the vocative. (67) Those 
present in that assembly saw the aforesaid arrived (there) clad in a most lovely attire and 
adorned with jewels in the form of truths contained in Srimad Bhagavata. They (all) began 
to speculate as to how she had come and how entered the assembly in the midst of 
sages.(68) The juvenile sages (Sanaka and his three brothers) then made the (following) 


observation:— "She has just emerged out of the substance of the story of Srimad Bhagavata." 
Hearing these words, she alongwith her sons humbly spoke to the sage Sanatkumara (as 


follows): (69) 


waa 8pm | | UST || alesrErie HUA | 
wr a fasrcam gad men ge at frefat aio 


Bhakti submitted : Almost dead in Kaliyuga, | have been reinvigorated by you and your 
brothers this very day, having been fed with the nectar-like story of Srimad Bhagavata. (Pray) 
tell me now as to where! should stay, O sons of Brahma ! (Thereupon) they addressed the 


following words to her : (70) 


ae Tifarqerarehat Weert WARTS 
a «a =a fsa ata feat aera ive 





22. SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 3 _ [Dis. 4 
We Pete Or Se Se He Gee Re We Pe Me Re Pe ERE R AME REAR DARE EHR ER GRE EGER BE REMEBER. ME REG Me HEHEHE Me SE BE HERE Be HE IESE SEE SESE SE BE SE 9 He We A Be 
adistt ae: afest st wat a8 A arr: sash ols | 
wa 40 caiaestr = aimee? «= Frau Gharafad 1192 | 


"Vou bestow on the devotees a form similar to that of Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows). 
You are the only sustainer of love (for the Lord) and put an end to the disease of 
transmigration. (Therefore) taking recourse to extreme firmness, dwell you as such 
incessantly in the minds of votaries of Lord Visnu. (71) Though prevailing over the (whole) 
world, these evils born of Kaliyuga either will not be able to cast their eyes on you there." Even 
while she was thus being directed by them, Bhakti instantly took up her abode in the mind 
of the devotees of Sri Hari. (72) 


aeoyarmea fears aan Faas ee dat sitetdtinter | 
sfata fete aderdt faera sfaarfe ef det afpgatarg: 1193 1 
guisa a fanfic afenaad senna yfa arradttere | 
asia «SUA Parl sae pwr: ox 
sft STI SaLENS SATA AiHenetrads A elas: | 3 I 





Though destitute, they are (really) blessed in all the (three) worlds, in whose heart abides 
exclusive devotion to Sri Hari. It is for this reason that, bound with the chord of Devotion, 
Sri Hari too dwells in their heart, completely renouncing His own (divine) realm. (73) More than 
this what shall we say with regard to the glory of the aforesaid scripture bearing the name 
of Bhagavata, the (very) embodiment of Brahma ? On its being expounded with full 
dependence on it, the praiseworthy exponent as well as the man listening to its exposition 
both attain equality with Sri Krsna ! Have done (therefore) with other righteous courses. (74) 


Thus ends the third discourse entitled "Cessation of Bhakti's Agony", forming 
part of the “Glory of Srimad Bhagavata" contained in the 
Uttara-Khanda of the glorious Padma-Purana. 


RESET SCTE S 
PITS E EES Sle) 


AA Aqaisear: 


Discourse IV 
Redemption of a Brahmana (Atmadeva) 


Ud sary 
a awmafady ger wkecelfea| froth unter waar WRI: |e | 
are Raa: didarat dalet:| cisimermefeniesadqepuse: | 2 | 
fragofedsienkyqaa fartistd: | qlicaaacravar @itaretafad: 1 3 | 
Waray Wie: | snfaes est geen a1 x | 
agente a a awa zgaeu: i aaa A yeedur dfiea: 1 & | 
ql Sestaral «= taueteet i quingrqies «yg: ages & | 
TATA Selec: | Sgt A eae Al aerate | 9 | 


Dis. 4] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 23 


We Be We We He Ke Be Be We Be Ke We We Be Ke We Be Pe He We Ge Pe We Ke We He Hr Be Ke Br Be Be Hr Ge We Ge Ke Ke Hr Gr Ke Ke Be Ke Ve Hr We He Be Ke He He He He Me He Hr Br Ve He Br Kr We Be Be Hr He Ke Be Ke Be Be Ke Ge He He He He He Ke BCH 





Suta began again : Now perceiving extraordinary devotion in the mind of His devotees, 
the Lord, whois (so) fond of His devotees, entered the sinless hearts of His (aforementioned) 
devotees, leaving His own realm. He had a garland of sylvan flowers (about His neck), was 
dark-brown as a (rainy) cloud, was clad in yellow (silk of exquisite texture), stole the mind of 
all (by His extreme comeliness of form), was resplendent with a (shining) girdle and was 
adorned with a brilliant diadem and (alligator-shaped) ear-rings. He stood in a lovely pose 
with His body slanting at three places, and was decked with the charming Kaustubha (a 
diamond-like gem hanging on His breast). He possessed the grace of millions of cupids and 
was daubed with heavenly sandal-paste, was an embodiment of supreme bliss and 
consciousness, most charming (in aspect), and held a flute (against His lips). (1—4) The 
denizens of Vaikuntha as well as those like Uddhava who are devoted to Lord Visnu (here) 
were present there under disguised character with the object of listening to the story. (5) 
Then (on the appearance of the Lord) shouts of "Glory, Glory (to the Lord)!"and blasts of 
conchs were repeatedly heard; there was an unusual abundance of joy and showers of red 
powder and flowers (from above). (6) Those present in that assembly forgot (all about) their 
body, dwelling and (even) their own self. Perceiving this state of their absorption, Narada 
submitted as follows:— (7) 


selfeecnisa afeat water: agreseisa factfedt wart 
Wel: Wet A ugufacisa wadst freaamt wvafdi ¢ i 
amt dete aq aha fSfafara ster aet alas 
stafastat «dda Oma 6onfa oa | Oar et 
*& & falgufd acq wa Ae Hama 
puatuetated frat see: ars  adiaart: 1201 


Such transcendent virtue emanating from the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata in a week 
has been witnessed by me today, O great sages ! Even those who are ignorant and wicked, 
including beasts and birds here, have all become most sinless. (8) Therefore, in the Kali 
age there Is certainly no other holy act on earth, the region of mortals, as efficacious in 
purifying the mind as well as in wiping out the heaps of sin as the story of Srimad 
Bhagavata. (9) (Pray) tell me what types of individuals get thoroughly purified through a 
seven days’ Yajna consisting of an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata. Keeping in view the 
good of the world an altogether novel method has been brought to light by you, 


compassionate as you are. (10) 
PART Hz: 


2 eal: Wanda det wal ater faartm: | 
mae: pies aifta: aga amet Gia Fie! 
at eat: fAGaiqiarqnpersnsaadatsid: | 
a afiaer aakoist feaet: waaay wel wa 21221 
uEURScsdnia: mi: far sa fess a1 
Teas! afraenthr: 9aAeaad 4 oaet Wid A123! 
wad art arate ude fel sda Bat goa Al 
wage Aiea «SURI: ae et CGAP A ex 





24 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [Dis. 4 
ee tae a ee Pe a ee a a a aa a ak a a aa a aa a EEE Se a 


The Kumaras said : Those men who constantly perpetrate sinful déeds, who are 
ever addicted to immoral practices, who take to evil ways, who are consumed by the fire 
of anger, and who are wicked and full of passion are purified in Kaliyuga through a seven 
days’ Yajna (as aforesaid). (11) Even those who are devoid of truthfulness, who revile 
their parents, who are restless due to thirst for pleasures, who do not follow the duties 
of their Agrama, who are hypocrites, who are jealous (of the achievements of. others), 
who take delight in destruction of life become holy through a seven days’ Yajna in 
Kaliyuga. (12) Those who commit the five great sins (drinking, killing a Branhmana, stealing 
gold, having intercourse with the wife of one’s preceptor and treachery), who are (ever) 
engaged in practising deception and chicanery, who are cruel and merciless like demons, 
who have grown fat with the money of Brahmanas, who commit adultery, are all purified 
in Kaliyuga through a seven days’ Yajfia. (13) The fools who are ever obstinately engaged 
in committing sins by thought, word and deed, who are parasites, whose mind is impure 
and whose heart in wicked, they all attain purity through a seven days’ Yajna. (14) 


aa a oaldiaend sled Wa ae sauraraur ue: Wead! 41 
SE REGC Gaara | aa AUT: TaeTHUT UeTAchHHAT: 1 VE I 
Bidea: Ut die aAdadalfagnee: | sicendy Peat fects sa Veh: 1 V9 
Pree fertatecites after epereit Gyan | rareereentfteat Pret Pat Tpeleay | Ve | 
Cina BU Way ageleter yt A Jepay Hav Hetafwarl ve 1 
wa fraadt: Dom amet Warorel: | Sat: SMITA Gals YetiaHa! Ro | 
Wag: WARSI 8 eartsda | Meyfervaaraite cheat aesd: Tall 22 | 
areal eeaioT aa att ate Al Ayal Ae al Yat dave YMA! VI 
(Narada,) we now relate to you an old historical legend. Sins are destroyed by merely 
listening to it. (15) In days gone by a beautiful town was situated on the bank of the 
Tungabhaadra. All the residents of that town performed the duties of their caste, spoke the 
truth and engaged themselves in righteous acts. (16) There lived in that town a Brahmana 
named Atmadeva, who was well-versed in all the Vedas and proficient in performing rites 
laid down in the Srutis and the Smrtis. He was glorious like a second sun. (17) Though 
rich he made his living by alms. His wife called Dhundhuli was of good parentage and 
good looking; but she always ruled over her husband. (18) She indulged in worldly gossip, 
mosily talked a lot, was cruel and miserly and expert in household duties, though 
quarrelsome. (19) So the Brahmana couple lived together affectionately and enjoyed life. 
They had enough to satisfy their desires and achieve their objects. They had a good 
house fo live in yet they were not happy. (20) When they became aged they commenced 
righteous deeds with the object of having an issue. They started gifting everyday cows, 
land, gold and cloth to the needy. (21) In this manner they spent half their fortune on 
righteous deeds, yet they did not get a son or even a daughter. This greatly worried the 
Brahmana. (22) 
User & test Sle Ye Aaa St Aa: | HATA Gia Stes BAUTATT | 23 | 
Uke viet Favored wsigat anita: i ygatefe ata dare afssera: 1 2x! 
geal Uldsiet tq faut AACE A, | Ae A UTA PPA SARA: GE | | 


— = > 





anas 


Wurot-waast 


Vyasa discourses on Pur 


War AraenT 


26 


ee 


POT 94) Aq paoeag ewsIug Suy.edap au, 


a rr. —— porey, t —— ae wae 
fn 
J - we eo 


\. 


AA *\ yy “o/ 


Oln GL 





‘he avi ihe y 
. : \=- NEARS 


~ 
_ 


> 


oo ere hee 
7 ; 7 Ln 


Brahma emanates from the navel-lotus of Narayana 





— ee oe ot eee ete 





aha to Gods and Rsis 


Vision of Lord Var 


x 


ie or Ge §re 


o—a 


Kapila preaches knowledge to mother Devahuti 


* 


em EY 


; f Ps 
a4 
—_ 1 FEO *t22 
~ ae as , 


Cte se Fe 


/ 


- 


oJ 


4 


DAD 
: % 
. 


iy | 
XOnN ’ 





¢ 


44 
ak 
\ 


Sew eS 
. ie : = 





\ Neen tiem 


nN ° wore S 
1 Re me of 
* oo - on st 
. a al ¢ 
e , 


ae 


o Z 
"4 . s 
fe “ 
- 
« N 
j 
: 
: =? 
‘ ‘. | 
- 5 
~~ 
anil 


The grace of Lord descends on Dhruva 





ffnss 


5 


| 
St 


im 
i 

: 

g 

‘ 
ag 


a 7 
. = — 





; 


Ninefold devotion 


—— eee er 
os “ 


+. ae » 
i Ly ee? Oy 


be “ 
¥. ° 


“ [aed Bilan: Rd 





nu as a Dwarf 


is 


Lord V 


Distal We Ve He We HOWE He He Me Me He Se He Re %¢ ¥¢ ,SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 25 
: ite tat the Brahmana, distressed as he was, left his house for the forest. At midday 
Re | irs and therefore went up toa tank. (23) The grief born of issuelessness had made 

im lean an thin. After he had drunk water, he sat down (exhausted). After one Muhurta 
(48 minutes) a Samnyasi too arrived at that very spot. (24) When the Brahmana saw that the 


Samnyasi had quenched his thirst, he went to the Sarmnyasi and after bowing athis feet stood 
in front of him sighing. (25) 


Waeara 
we Wels far a a a far acted | ae Weal Wel SS SSS HUME! 


The Samnyasi said : O Brahmana, why do you weep ? In what great distress are 
you ? Tell me at once the cause of your grief. (26) 


MAT SATA 
fe sata mea ga ydada dfaaqinde: gderetd maremqayed 1201 
Wed da Wera ster tat fanaa: i sone@aq RNS wotreagpfitrerna: 1221 
fersitfad som frye a set faa fired amare fies daft faa ize! 
Wedd A Aa Iq: A awa Aden acl! al Har Vaal gar: Pisa aqeacarstae_ 130 | 
ane Uae da zt farsa furaenaae fad sifadt 41321 
sae A Mica quadifea:iqer ae ada mmeunyatiadt 1321 
aserenaiet A aeamMa aariad wea afa: vse alae i33! 


The Brahmana submitted : O sage, what description shall | give you of my sorrow 
earned through sins | did in my previous lives ? When | offer oblations of water to (the spirits 
of) my (departed) ancestors, the water becomes lukewarm through their sighs and they drink 
that lukewarm water. (27) The gods and the Brahmanas do not accept my offerings with 
pleasure. | am so grieved by the agony of issuelessness that everything appears to me to 
be void (of no value) and I have come here to end my life. (28) Worthless is life without an 
issue. Worthless is home without an issue. Worthless is wealth without an issue. Worthless 
is a race without an issue. (29) The cow | keep turns out to be altogether barren. The tree 
| plant does not bear any flower or fruit. (30) The fruit that comes to my house, soon gets 
rotten. When! am so unfortunate and issueless, what for should | live ? (31) Saying so, and 
struck with grief, the Brahmana began to weep bitterly beside him. This greatly moved the 
heart of the ascetic. (32) He was established in Yoga. He saw the lines on the forehead of 
the Brahmana and, coming to know everything, then spoke to him at length as follows: (33) 


adeard 
Wa wa atest ado aft: | fate q@ AA AT AANA 13% 
oyu fas Hat asa Sel ¢ faetfenay| Masrararet qq ut ta a ta Bisz4l 
Gad: am gana: WW AM 1 t AS Hetaat Aas Aaa Tay 13! 
The Samnyasi said :(O Brahmana !) give up the infatuation for getting an issue. Most 
powerful is the course of (one’s) destiny. Taking recourse to wisdom give up the craving for 
mundane existence. (34) Listen to me, O Brahmana, | have looked into your past Karma 


today. For seven lives you will have absolutely no son; and no son at all. (35) In the days of 
yore, the kings Sagara and Anga had to suffer (a lot because of their sons). Therefore, give 


[564] B. M. 2— 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 4 


nn fit hh ha eRe We We Me Ree Re Te Ree Ve MC We Ke He He Me Mee Vee Ke Me Wee Ke Ke Fe He Gee We We We We Me He Ve Ve 9; 


26 


BeBe We Re Re Wee Kee Ree RR RO Re RE RE HE wr Wr 


up all hope of having a family. There is all happiness in renunciation (Samnyasa). (36) 


SIO FATA 
faded Wake A Ti ale aoa | aA AAAAE Wiest Blenyfasa: 13191 
GIaaeist dare: Yen wl fey: AA ws UAaaaAad: (3c 


The Brahmana said : (O saint!) How will Viveka help me ? Perforce let me have a son, 
otherwise | will in your (very) presence become unconscious with grief and give up my life.(37) 
This renunciation, in which there is no pleasure of having ason etc., is altogether insipid. The 
only sweet thing in this world is family life crowded with sons and grandsons. (38) 


sf fase ger sidka ale: ifarcaeia: as fafa 13¢! 
a uf qa une dcaadem: | at ga Guise ales fe acre iol 
Seeing this insistence of the Brahmana, the sage rich in askesis said, "King Citraketu 
suffered (greatly) in his attempt to undo his destiny. (39) Therefore you cannot be happy with 
a son because you are like one whose plans are frustrated by destiny. You are So insistent 
and stand before me seeking end; what should | tell you in these circumstances ?" (40) 


qaqa ANelad Heth A ada se NA Ua a aa: ua wfacia ixet 

Ga Wea cal aaah I Asta aslafe fear aad aa uaisfafades: ive 
When the sage saw that the Brahmana was still pressing his demand, he gave a fruit to the 
Brahmana and said, "Let your wife eat this fruit. She will then give birth to a son. For one year 
your wife must practise truthfulness,cleanliness and kind-heartedness, give alms and take 


meals consisting of (only) one type of cereals (and that too) once a day. By doing so she will 
get a son of exceedingly sinless disposition." (41-42) 





Tage gat atit fase yearra: | Gem: oUt He al a alae Hater 1s3 | 
wet pict qa Wet a wile @1 Hel fee aaa He ae A Aa Iv! 
mova mH: wWretuleahedt | aeaua adisaketena weer wad isu 
emiaMel SIA ueriaion HM yada HA: Bm ive! 
haederiat mwiedet A aM adi wat qeul aw Gert wma ae ive! 
waa «Aa ade Aare! etal | Geena «gue: A aad xc 
Cet Wet Sa wea ade | azar ar face ad ahaat ata a ala: Ive 


Having said so, the Yogi departed and the Brahmana returned to his house. (There) he 
gave the fruit to his wife and himself went away somewhere. (43) Crooked as she was, his 
young wife wept and said to one of her female friends, "I am greatly worried and so | will not 
eat this fruit. By eating the fruit | will conceive a child and get big-bellied. | will not be able to 
fake full meals. This will make me weak and | will not be able to do domestic work. If by 
chance dacoits attack the village, how will a pregnant woman be able to run 7? If, like the 
celebrated sage Suka, the foetus lingers in the womb, how will she be able to deliver it ? (44—46) 
In case the foetus comes outina Slanting position (at the time of delivery), | may (even) lose 
my life.(Otherwise too, O friend !) pangs of childbirth are (very) severe, how will a delicate . 
woman like me bear them ? (47) When become feeble (due to confinement), my husband's 
sister willin that case take away all my possessions (from my house). (Moreover) it appears 
difficult for me to observe the vows of truthfulness, cleanliness and soon. (48) Awoman who 


Dis.'4 | SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 27 


Bede MERE HE HE RE REG E WEN HOME KE HE HERE MORE HERE ME HE REM RCRA REE MERE MERE RERE RE MORE TERE RE RE Re He eR ACRE RE RRL ROR REO RERE BEBE ROBE RE RE REDE RE He He Re RE RE BCR RE He 





has borne a child has to suffer a lot in bringing up the child. In my view the happy woman is 
she who is barren or who has lost her husband."(49) 


Wa qedchatia aden ta afeeiuven ys we oh uw ala aafea iho! 
Geel Hit tae Beas i del wed ad fara nedt fe Aue 
giet da gaa age aeenit fea adie asiisha a arent safaa: 1421 
Mace arta wa fis ye qa fd @ adds a A cella Alen 1G3 | 
wont "dt ses sft cleat ates ia ans wlefrents free & ge ex 
mond ea a ullent q aradiadehka wd ada whaweaa: 144i 


Arguing on these fallacious lines she did not eat the fruit. When her husband asked her 
if she had taken it she replied that she had. (50) One day her sister came to her house of her 
own accord. She narrated everything to her and said, "I am greatly agitated over this. (51) 
| am getting weak (day by day) on account of this worry. Sister, what shall | do?" (52) The 
sister replied, "| am in the family way. When a child is born to me, | shall give it to you. Till 
then you pretend to be enceinte and stay in the house comfortably. Give some money to my 
husband and he will hand over the child to you. (53) (I willso manipulate things that) people 
will say my child died at the age of six months, while | will come to your house daily and suckle 
the child. (54) In order to test its efficacy, give you the fruit just now to the cow to eat." As is 
the nature of women, the Brahmana's wife did precisely as her sister told her. (55) 


AI Bea A AN Wa Alec aAcliswila sal ales Wa qeyel at 14a! 
aw a afd wt sea: qaade: | ame TAA MaAAeaISNeaTT, 1 419 | 
cat art fisnfeat sited faerar ai vitcafestelsypegrt nee ag GCI 
UUs We ah Ha AA sete Men Het Gans aly 1491 
Wag Waa yal Mew add arena We wat a asd atefaena igo! 
Ua 38odhd 8 ad Raed oe eeeenifa ae ae oiiea ice 


Now in due course when a child was born to her sister,the father of the child secretly 
brought it at once and gave it to Dhundhull. (56) She too informed her husband that a child 
had been comfortably born to her. All were happy to learn that a son was born to Atmadeva. (57) 
The Brahmana performed the ceremony of Jatakarma in connection with the birth of the boy 
and made gifts to Brahmanas. There was a mixed noise of songs and musical instruments 
and much festivity at his door. (58) Dhundhull said to her husband as follows:— There is no 
milk in my breasts. Milkless as | am, how shall | be able to nourish the child on other milk ? 
My sister. has (recently) given birth to a child, but the child died. Calling her, keep her in our 
house so that she will suckle your babe and nourish it." (59-60) For the protection of his son, 
her husband did all that (ne was told by her). The mother (Dhundhull) named that child 


Dhundhukaril. (61) 


fora frida ara ar aa: qyasdei daisaqet feet Pde samssriset 
281 Saat fared den aes | vessed se: Ve feganel Warta: 1631 
qNGaSIA Wd SNe Tea at ae: Ere taeda alge esl 
aq Wa ages q af fafa: i mtenol at aa sgt Ment am arent Gul 


28 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA (Dis: 4 


Ree We Re ROR ROR Re Re Re Ke Re Ge Ke Ke Hee Me We We Be Be He ee Me We Ke Mee We We Kee We He Hy 





Ge We Fe Ve Ke Ve Te Sr Mr Cee RR RE Re MR RR RR ROR REE Re Be PME HEM We Wy Wr Ve Fe Me He Me 


nths later the cow also gave birth to a human child. All its limbs were well- 
sate rt Was god-like, spotless and shone like gold. (62) The Brahmana was delighted to 
see the child and he himself performed (all) the purificatory rites connected with it. People 
took it as a wonderful phenomenon and all came to see the child. (63) They said to 
themselves, "Look here: fortune has (indeed) smiled on Atmadeva at the present moment. 
It is (really) wonderful that even a cow should fetch him such a god-like child. (64) By the 
dispensation of fate no one came to know of the secret. Seeing that the ears of that child were 
like those of a cow, Atmadeva named it 'Gokarna’. (65) 


feacsied dt wiat aeut aaarasi | tient: aftedt art een aerae: 161 
araiairada det meafia:iaquitveadt a Tae ATI E01 
an: adsest weaned: | Sloane Ga: HA Aaa 1 G21 
fram: wet a dari wise: | auemefaa Feat ae: wea: 16e1 
wa aes fet fad q aera wat fort wea ori eae iol 


With the passage of time the two boys grew to manhood. (Of them) Gokarna was learned 
and wise, while Dhundhukari was very wicked. (66) He never washed himself nor did he 
observe cleanliness and other rules of good conduct (appropriate to a Brahmana). He ate 
undesirable things. His anger knew no bounds. He possessed evil things and even ate food 
touched by the hands of a dead body. (67) He committed thefts and bore ill-will to all. He set 
fire to others’ houses. He took children in his arms (apparently) in order to fondle them and 
immediately threw them into a well. (68) He took delight in killing and moved about armed. 
He oppressed the miserable and the blind. He delighted in the company of members of the 
lowest caste and used to wander about, noose in hand, with dogs (in search of game).(69) 
Falling in the evil company of prostitutes he squandered (all) his paternal fortune. One day 
he cudgelled his parents and himself took away (even) the utensils (from the house). (70) 


aha FUN: weedeat we gl ae q aati Haat eae: 102! 
STs & ese Hl A S74 Saleae | OTST SGA BI HS WA Ue 192 | 
vei _@ AAMT Met wedge: i alee wah au uftesfaq iva 
Sa: US PAN gad fadien: | qa: Hel et Hel Aeasacashanq 10% | 
1 usa We fafa qa amafia: i qeaha faener ataraifaa: eu! 
Waki SE Aledt ath «fa: | fuofserfa tasd ad wal ad aT IE! 


When all his property was thus lost, the miserly father of Dhundhukari began to wail at 
the top of his voice: so the tradition goes. He said, "It would have been much better if his 
mother remainedissueless. An evil sonis a source of agony. (71) Where should] live? Where 
should | go? Who will alleviate this distress of mine? Ah, a great calamity has befallen me. 
This suffering will prove to be the cause of my death!" (72) That (very) moment the wise 
Gokarna arrived there. Revealing the glory of dispassion, he tried to open his father's eyes. (73) 
(He said) “There is no substance in this world. It is full of misery and is a source of great 
infatuation. Neither son nor wealth (really) belongs tous. Aman attached to these has to burn 
day and night (on their account). (74) Happiness neither belongs to Indra (the king of gods) 
nor to a universal monarch. He alone who is disgusted with the pleasures of sense, is given 
fo contemplation and lives in seclusion is (really) happy. (75) Give up the silly notion that 
Dhundhukari is your son. Through infatuation one's lot is cast in hell. This body (of yours) is 





Dis. 5 
ert Reo SRIMAD BHAGAVATA- MAHATMYA 29 


Sr tr 
SSE RR SSE SESS ESAS SER AE SERS R ERRATA REAR TERRA E RSET ES We Br He Ve Ke 





bound to fall; (therefore) renounce everything and retire to the woods." (76) 
valet qf Warevd wry: feast fe adder at ama ad aa Ase Ive! 
sry AE ag: Use We: leaden ufadt zt ASX aa 10d! 
Hearing this admonition of Gokarna his father decided to go to the forest and said, "O son, 
point out (to me) in detail what | should do while living in the forest. (77) A fool as | am, bound 


by ties of affection, | have lain as a cripple in the deceptive well of mundane life due to my 
(past) Karma. Surely lift me up, O storehouse of compassion!" (78) 


Tat Sara 
eesfemtaekrshat at a wergaiey aeal anal faust 
Udit wee 0 oasis «aerial «sa fairs: 1091 


a wa wad aa cee dae aerate amaqemi 
TI aay ya Aarnaana frat faa amido 


Gokarna continued : Cease you to identify yourself with the body consisting of bones, 
flesh and blood. Give up for ever the feeling of meum with regard to wife, son and so on. 
Constantly look upon this world as momentary. Taste the joy of dispassion and be 
established in devotion to the Lord. (79) Constantly practise the virtue of remembering the 
Lord. Abandon all temporal duties. Wait upon saintly persons and give up the thirst for the 
pleasures of sense. Ceasing at once to dwell on the shortcomings and excellences of others, 
enjoy you exclusively the delight of serving the Lord and listening to His stories. (80) 


wa Udkeasanst we fase amt aq fernieiasisad: | 
Gat wialet ukeadarat sipermmm fad aa eric?! 
sft SITSIgO SavaUS siteerradterca fasatatt AM aqealseaa: | ¥ I 


Renouncing his home in response to his son's advice, Atmadeva withdrew to the forest. 
Although he was on the wrong side of sixty at that time, he was a man of firm determination. 
Engaged day and night in service to Sri Hari, he attained to Sri Krsna by regularly reading 
Book Ten of Srimad Bhagavata. (81) 


Thus ends the fourth discourse entitled “The Deliverance of Atmadeva 
(a Brahmana)," forming part of the "Glory of Srimad Bhagavata™ 
in the Uttara-Khanda of the glorious Padma-Purana. 


PII SIL 


31 GSalSearea: 


Discourse V 
How Gokarna attained final beatitude (alongwith others) 


Yd Sara 
fram dat set 9 afscdt Re a ea Se 





30 SRIM AD BHAGAV ATA-MA HAT Wes We Wr By By We Be Br Be Bir ie Br We We Bie He Br Be We Wy Lois: 2 
sa 0 dae WAG: | HA Ta: ad wat dat at Ret Ae 121 
austere felat andere: ia ad a Ge we a ad ae area: 131 

Sita began again: His father having retired (to the woods), Dnundhukari severely beat 
his mother (one day) and threatened her saying, “Tell me where the money Is or else | will 
thrash you with a burning stick." (1) Afraid of this threat and grieved by the ill-treatment 

received from the son, the mother threw herself into a well at night and died of the fall. (2) 

Established in union with God, Gokarna experienced no sorrow or joy. He had no enemy or 


friend and left on a pilgrimage.(3) 
sTejennat Testpasmwvaayad: | stadt «=a | aareurfageeit: 1 v | 
Wed pecan yurafiiema: iat fridt Ternmaren qaqnae & | 
aes] «Meet fad «ORR OG: | aatsae Caen yeu fara a & | 
aad get wat aal arereqiatet ate fem wn aera © ) 
fad get was afer «fare aratseitqaa yenenfy: fe a waadic 
Peat Weert arert aa gatas sit a Maa Hear qa wore teat: 1 ee 
Ut aus eae ayo: laa A WARe feared 1201 
ddgneaqgia aga fe fafafenq: 1 sfaeaenteaa aie fe ma: 1221 
aq ee Waid wa: ela: fea: ia Wa asses A Hate ada wee 
Gleh: USI adhd I at aid: frat fe a: | sirerfa atisher faustafaenfia: 1231 
ait Aa gq faa epi wage: | fase a: feudt ae: a eG: uf ex! 
qa adt areat aries wad wea ares fra: at ara alfear iui 
Hea fea a ait: Heel Agden: | Gert ayarer wer Ya: senda: 12E1 
Teen «= eat Meranieaitsac! aiteraaahtes: «6 en:  feorfara: 1201 
A OH al aie a caf yedaqi fearon Mesut qa Stereqer 2c! 
sma stated Tretetgreiietd| afeiente ag dart aa smaenadeieet 
Dhundhukari stayed in the house with five prostitutes. His understanding having been 
confounded by his anxiety to maintain them, he began to perpetrate the most heinous acts. (4) 
One day those unchaste women sought ornaments of him. With that end in view he went 
out of the house blind with passion and forgetful of his death. (5) Stealing money from here 
and there, he returned home and handed over to them costly garments and some gold 
ornaments. (6) Seeing a collection of abundant riches the women thought the same night, 
“This fellow commits burglary everyday, hence the king will (surely) apprehend him. Nay, 
confiscating his wealth the former will also certainly sentence him to death. Therefore, for 
the preservation of this wealth, why not secretly kill him ? (7-8) Disposing of him and 
appropriating the wealth, let us go wherever we like’. Having resolved thus, they bound him 
tightly with cords while asleep and placing a noose round his neck tried to strangle him. He 
(however) did not die soon. Then they were filled with anxiety and actually put live coals into 
his mouth. Distressed with extreme agony caused by the flames he expired. (9—11) They 


consigned the dead body to a pit, as women are generally daring. Nobody could know of this 
clandestine act of theirs in its true colours. (12) Questioned by people they gave out that, 


Dis. 5 | SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 31 


BeBe Pe Pe Fe Fe Bee We Be He We He Be He He Hr 


BERBER RRR BERR RR BER RAMEE Re ACRE ERE RE RRR RE RE HE ERE MERE ERE RE REEDED RE REREAD RARE REE RERERE 


lured by greed of wealth, their paramour had gone to some distant place and would return 
within that (very) year. (13) A wise man as a matter of fact should under no circumstance 
repose trust in wicked women. The fool who relies on them is assailed by calamities. (14) 
None IS beloved of women, whose speech is full of nectar and enhances the delight of the 
concupiscent, while their heart is piercing as the edge of a razor. (15) Collecting (all) the 
wealth those unchaste women having many a paramour absconded; while Dhundhukari 
took the from of a dreadful spirit as a result of his evil deeds. (16) Assuming the form of a 
whirlwind and tormented by cold and sunshine, he ever ran hither and thither going without 
any nourishment and remaining thirsty. (17) Repeating the words "Ah, goodness !" he found 
no protection anywhere. After some time Gokarna learnt from the people that he had died. (18) 
(Realizing how helpless the spirit was, Gokarna performed the Sraddha ceremony with 
eee Svaas at Gaya. Nay, to whatever place of pilgrimage he repaired he did Sraddha 
there. (19 


Wa we a Mel: eat aqtfsari wat Wegul wyurndisefaa: ut: 1201 

wa a a fama eae waarsaqi faite cafamra uentaqt ay: 1221 

apa: upeeit apa nfetisvadi vps: anes: gas yeatswad 1221 

autafe apr weno = aedaa: 1 ard alfa: ast fsa ansate 1231 
Roaming about in this way the said Gokarna returned to his own town. Unnoticed by 
others he came to sleep at night in the courtyard of his own house. (20)Coming to know that 
his kinsman was lying asleep there, Dhundhukari revealed himself to him at midnight in a 
most frightful form. (21) Now. he appeared as a ram, now as an elephant and again as a 
buffalo. Now he appeared in the form of Indra, now as the god of fire and again in a human 


form. (22) Perceiving this inconsistent behaviour (of his) Gokarna concluded that he was 
somebody in an evil plight and, remaining firm spoke to him (as follows): (23) 


MPU SaTq 
SAA Wat seal Aral aafaari fH ar Ya: fran ar ceratseifa Bra a: 121 


Gokarna said : Who are you appearing in an exceedingly frightful form at night and 
whence have you been reduced to this plight ? (Please) tell us whether you are some spirit 
or fiend or ogre. (24) 

Yd sald 
Wa yseal aq ele: Gt: Gil sarnl ae GAMMA wer ziRu! 
AUS We Heal Menoleqerad| atewecaaisat WaMATaSHA 12E | 


Sita continued : Questioned by him thus at that moment, the spirit cried at the top of 
his voice again and again. Being unable to speak, he made gestures alone, it is said. (25) 
Taking water in the hollow of his joined palms then (and consecrating it with a sacred text) 
Gokarna threw it on him. (And) purged of his sin (to some extent) by being sprinkled with that 
water, the spirit began to speak (as follows): (26) 


aq sara 
ae oat adlaisher eet Aad: | aaeta aol ela Ale AAT 1291 
alot aha Gen A AeA faatta: | cream fean: aise Vlitg: aa Ata: 1221 
ata: Naaa seat A aRrae arent sitar «© cateitaHetaan 1291 
at aN HUN waaay Atsa i Menu cat al AR aTarAeAate 1301 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 5 


Re Me We eRe Re We We We We We We Re Wey We Be Bie Be Ae We We Be Be Be Mie We We We We We We We wy 


32 


Ge Becta eke Re RE ERE RR AAR RA AR AA AAR ERLE ER MER HEPES ESE 


The spirit submitted : “lam (no other than) your (own) brother, Dhundhukari by name. 
The status of a Brahmana was forfeited by me through my own fault. (27) Numberless sins 
were committed by me, revolving in the plane of rank ignorance. | killed (many) men and as 
such was (in my turn) tortured to death by (public) women. (28) Attaining the form of a spirit 
in consequence of this, |am undergoing a miserable plight. As my sinful deeds are fructifying 
now as ordained by providence, | subsist on the air (alone). (29) Oh friend, O brother, ocean 
of compassion (as you are), redeem me soon." Hearing his appeal Gokarna forthwith spoke 


to him as follows: (80) 





TMHUl SATA 
aes q warfauet war ant faenad: i ana da amisfa sarge Fed 13k 
Taste «6g «= AToieae i fee fade wat Ma aa aq Alaa 132! 


Gokarna said : Oblation (in the form of balls of cooked rice etc.), has been made by me 
for your benefit in accordance with the scriptural ordinance at Gaya. It is a matter for great 
surprise to me how you have not been liberated in spite of that ? (31) If no redemption has 
been brought about (even) through Sraddha at Gaya, there is no other remedy in this behalf 
| am afraid. Point you out in detail, O spirit, what should be done by me (now ).(32) 


Yq sara 
Tastes «=dked aA wUfasaisaraat afera faa arqdi33! 


The spirit submitted : My redemption will not be brought about even through hundreds 
of Sraddhas done at Gaya. Think you of some other remedy now.(33) 


Sia deladarenvd weno fae wa: 1 adsieed RAs Art aa 13x! 

saat q fat wratag sa fda: | a@akeaeea fefaeretite faad a isu 
Gokarna was struck with wonder to hear that reply of his and said, “If your redemption 
cannot be brought about (even) through hundreds of Sraddhas (done at Gaya), your 
liberation (1 am afraid) is impossible. Nevertheless at present, O spirit ! stay in your abode 


free from fear. Pondering over this question, | shall do something conducive to your 
liberation." (34-35) 


Gyan orn daesedt wa: | Menvifadamra at wit a deem 131 
TIARA Et Glen: shat BAMA: | ded wid aa send a ver fafa ae 
fast ames aft selenfed: | ahh ta Ascea Used: ASI 13 C1 
dd: ad: qdeaed cat wofad ai Ment: werd ah adam a aa i3el 
Ta aM smenfas gfe a Ukreda| tape git: ye: ehefreraatad Xo! 
aaa: Uae are pelsia waa: adebied q faaaixes 
AasHad Seed adel Yat faci ttenot fis pear arent yafda: v2! 

As instructed by him Dhundhukari departed thence to his own abode. Gokarna taxed his 
brain (over the problem) the whole night, but could not strike upon any expedient. Seeing him 
come, people called on him in the morning out of affection. He related (to them) all that had 
occurred the previous night and how. (36-37) Men of learning, those established in Yoga 
(union with God), enlightened souls and exponents of Veda, even though they ransacked 


heaps of sacred books, did not see his liberation through any expedient. (88) Thereupon on 
the question of his liberation the verdict of the sun-god was accorded the supreme place by 


Dis. 5 J SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 33 


Be Be Be We Ke We We We We We We We Pe He He He He 


We Ke Be We Fe WH, ¢ 
Weve We MEME We We Be Me eRe Re Hee Me Re eV REM. RE RE RE ERR HERR RE RE REMEBER RE RE RE BEME RE RE RE BEM MERE REED E RE ROR EH ERAR 


all. Gokarna, they say, then arrested the movement of the sun-god (by virtue of his askesis). (39) 
(He prayed to the god as follows :—) "Hail to You, O witness of the universe ! (pray) tell me 
the means of release (concerning Dhundhukari)."Hearing this the sun-god spoke distinctly 
from afar as follows :— (40) "Mukti will follow from Srimad Bhagavata. Give a (complete) 
reading to it in the course of a week." This pious exhortation of the sun-god was as a matter 
of fact clearly heard by all. (41) All said (in one voice),"This should be pursued with diligence; 
It IS SO easy to accomplish." Making up his mind (to that effect) Gokarna set himself to the 
task of expounding Srimad Bhagavata. (42) 


wa erate aM Fa: | Wears asi uma a 1x3! 
Wa = ele «= Gaferetareaeh: | aeaTaAATRTa «= Menuism HAL Se I 
a Sets daissad: WH ugafadeda: | aeahead © aaseepbeeng fea iu 
motestiaga sant fer wati amet fea awdvarn aamnfaad ive 


Men flocked to that place from the different parts of the country including the countryside 
for the purpose of listening to an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata. They say the crippled, 
blind, aged and dull-witted too arrived for the attenuation of their sin. (43)There was a large 
concourse which caused wonder (even) to the gods. The moment Gokarna ascended the 
seat (meant for the exponent) and started expounding the story (of Srimad Bhagavata), the 
aforesaid spirit too arrived. Looking about fora seat he saw there a bamboo with seven joints 
standing erect. (44-45) Entering the hollow at the base of the bamboo, he actually settled 
down there for hearing the exposition. Unable to remain fixed (at one place in the air), 
gaseous as he was, he entered the bamboo.(46) 

aM AU Wei stat ames a: | TI: WARSI Assis Iv! 
fara wart me aa fat aya ei astmafatesyasied Usadl aan ixcl 
fadtaste am ama fedtaafoterqi qdiaste am ae gqdtaaeadter xe 
wW waneda  aantefatertinal a geeHwtaadd el 140! 
feerarent WMdteoatenmtsd: | Uttara TARA Aepel HUSeAad: 1421 
AAA «wat Aal Menrlfafa arrcdit Gale Alfaal Get Ha MrHgdond 1421 
aM UeTadt alat Yadtefaaeet i aaretst aM aa: HOt wHeske: 1431 
mua daa wapresaut fed i sieath Sed Ga: mem da aed 14x 
ang WR OY WIS algaeeais: Har saul faaead ola: afhet aa 4h 

Taking a Brahmana, who is a votary of Lord Visnu, to be the chief listener, the said 
Gokarna (lit., the son of a cow) began to expound Srimad Bhagavata in an audible tone from 
Book One (itself). (47) At the close of the day when the exposition was adjourned (for that 
day), they say, a marvel took place. One of the (seven) joints of the bamboo (viz., the last 
one) cracked while the good men present there looked on. (48) On the second day at sunset 
likewise the second joint (from below) burst open and on the third at dusk the third one 
similarly burst open.(49) Having burst open in this way the seven joints of the bamboo in 
seven days, the spirit shed the form of a spectre through the hearing of (all) the twelve 
_Skandhas (of Srimad Bhagavata). (50) He appeared in a divine form, dark-brown like a 
‘cloud, clad in yellow (silk), adorned with strings of Tulasi beads, wearing a diadem (on his 


head) and decked with (a pair of alligator-shaped) ear-rings. (51) He presently greeted his 
brother, Gokarna, and addressed him as follows:—"Out of kindness, O brother! | have been 


- 


af 


- nee 





sR] A -MAHATMYA [ Dis. 5 

id by~ he deluded form of a spectre. (52) Blessed is the exposition of Srimad 
Dee eatich drives away once for all the agony a spectre is heir to. And praiseworthy 
is a seven days' reading of Srimad Bhagavata, which bestows (on the hearers) as Its reward 
an abode in the realm of Sri Krsna. (53) When a seven days’ reading of Srimad Bhagavata 
is at hand, all the sins shudder to think that the contemplated exposition will bring about their 
dissolution apace. (54) (Even) as a fire consumes (all kinds of) pieces of wood—whether 
moist or dry, small or big, So does a (seven days’) hearing of Srimad Bhagavata eradicate 
(all kinds of) sin—whether recent or of long standing, minor or major, and perpetrated in 


thought, word or deed. (55) 
afer & una at afthidadate 1 stmensnfaunt gat fens ora tft 148 | 
fe aed deat WA aclamisigqan aku zauanat fe iy 
seers ae Mreaiforefaai aaiere «tet oot Gargitwalt: 1421 
Salleh faa Tela Wma! gE aera TUTTE 148 | 
afer waka afsiai sero fer ad qatsd mreea fe 1G01 
Wad: Ud aa aa da farsafri adage wae at ama Me ee 


It has actually been declared by the wise in an assembly of the gods that the birth in this 
(land of) Bharatavarsa of men who fail to hear the story of Srimad Bhagavata is fruitless. (56) 
lf one does not get to hear an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata (the scripture associated with 
the name of Sri Suka), of what avail is this unstable body, maintained through excessive 
fondness, nourished well and made stronger ? (57) The body is supported on a column of 
bones, held together by (a network of) nerves and tendons, mortared with flesh and blood 
and covered all over with skin; (nay) it is full of bad smell, being a receptacle of urine and 
faeces. Itis (ever) afflicted with old age, sorrow and metamorphosis, is the home of diseases, 
frail, difficult to satisfy, hard to maintain, corrupt, faulty and momentary. It has been 
characterized as having Its finality in what goes by the name of worms (if it is buried), faeces 
(if it is devoured by vultures and crows, dogs and jackals) and ashes (if itis cremated). Why, 
then, should one not perform with this unstable body action leading to immortality ? (68—60) 
What permanence can possibly be ascribed to an organism nourished with the essence of 
a foodstuff (such as rice) which, if it is dressed in the morning, gets rotten by the (same) 
evening ? (61) 

weetameste sad fet et: iant aatqwedtata fe areriaet 
Gael gd May Ul sa WAIN waWMda Heaaurafsa: 163! 
Visa Were aa aiefaterq faa faq der fardaterta: Genera 1ex 
Perera eeatueerd ada: | aad are wHaler aarewact Ha aut 
Panamera anertactata lmurdea Ret fad aketa ae: eat 1g! 

. Through the hearing of a seven days’ exposition of Srimad Bhagavata Sri Hari is brought 
within one's reach. Hence the aforesaid indeed is the only means of driving away-(all kinds 
of ) SINS. (62) Like bubbles appearing in water or mosquitoes among living beings, those who 
remain deprived of hearing an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata are born only to die. (63) 
When the joints of a dry bamboo, a (purely) material substance, could be broken open 
through the hearing of such an exposition, what wonder, then, if the knot ( of ignorance) in 


the mind gets (similarly) Snapped (thereby) ? (64) The aforesaid knot in the heart is broken, 
doubts of every kind get resolved and ( the residue of ) past Karma gets eliminated when a 





Dis. 5 ] 


Be Fe Ke He He Wr We Ke He He Ke Be Be He Hee 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHA , 
chenthsancenatanbenthenarne te ee) 
seven days' exposition of Srimad Bhagavata is heard.(65) When the sacred water in the 
shape of such exposition—which is highly efficacious in washing off the stain occasioned 


by the mud (sins) of worldly life—gets treasured up in the mind, Mukti. (final beatitude) is 
declared by the wise as insured. (66) 


wt galt a fe femarranc | aqusafeiiek  sepdifineen ice 

acet ug AA faa epytaa: | fear eure Steet Mrenuit area, 1 GC | 
(Even) while the spirit was speaking in this strain they say, there arrived on that (very) 
occasion an aerial car manned by denizens of Vaikuntha and invested with a dazzling halo. (67) 
(The spirit of ) Dhundhukari (the son of Dhundhuli) boarded the aerial car while everyone 


looked on. Beholding the attendants of Lord Visnu in the aerial car Gokarna spoke (to them) 
as follows: (68) 





TOT FATT 
aaa aed: ara sitet wa Peden: 1 anita fae a ast arama: 16e1 
vat aa «=a «= gee i ete: al la: aera eh: iol 


Gokarna submitted : On this very spot there are many sinless souls that have listened 
to my discourse. How is it that aerial cars have not been synchronously brought (by you) for 
them ? (69) It appears that all those assembled here have listened in an equal measure, how 
(then) has disparity come about in the matter of reward ? (Kindly) explain this, O beloved 
servants of Sri Hari ! (70) 


ENCE Ha: 
sauraa «fated wmotdisa Ofer: 1 saul dq Hd Wad AM wad Har 
HaVNarial Mat Ustalela AS 1192 | 
amas «=A MaOT | a Aaa cen aa feria Sa Barri! 
ee A Wt Wa SARA ed AI alert fe et Aen afar edt wa: 1031 
arawral gat sat ed Meno eased aaaareMt wd Herioxi 
fart eaety 0 faded | aatletestasa erat fare ata: 194! 
Vane Ha Aekdtel a Hal Heri Ga: Hara aati agus aafagaq io 
TWehul da Wad Mele cet GAL! Waqaal aq: Ud agus wltalda: 199! 


The servants of SriHari replied : "The disparity in the matter of reward here has come 
about on account of diversity in hearing the exposition. Though it has been heard by all, ithas 
not been reflected upon in an equal degree (of intensity by everyone). Therefore has this 
disparity resulted in the matter of reward in spite of their (common) devotion (in the shape 
of hearing the Lord's stories), O bestower of honour (on others) ! (71) The exposition was 
heard by the spirit (of Dnundhukar)) while abstaining from food and drink for seven (days and) 
nights together. Cogitation etc., was also thoroughly done by him with a composed mind. (72) 
Infructuous is spiritual wisdom which is not firmly rooted; hearing of scriptures is marred 
through listlessness; counsel which is received with a doubting mind is lost and fruitless is 
the muttering of a sacred text done with a restless mind. (73) Damned is a tract of land 
destitute of devotees, food offered for the benefit of a departed ancestor or relative to an 
unworthy recipient is lost; a gift made to one not versed in the Veda goes in vain and a race 
which is devoid of good conductis ruined. (74) Faith in the words of a preceptor, the thought 





sR] A AHA Dis. 
SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA See eee: Ps 


SO ceeere etree tee ttre tt RRR GREER ERR AE SERRE RA SAR RE RA AH AH 
of one's wretchedness, the subjugation of one's mental aberrations and unfaltering devotion 


to the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata — if these and other such virtues are accomplished, then 


i i Sri 5 icaci ing (of this 
hearing of Srimad Bhagavata efficacious. At the end of a second hearing (o 
ery 3 ; (75-76) Lord Sri Krsna (the Protector 


scripture) all will surely attain an abode in Vaikuntha. 76) Le | 
of cows) will personally take you, O Gokarna ! to Goloka (His divine realm)." Saying so, they 


all ascended to Vaikuntha (the divine realm of Lord Visnu), chanting in a chorus the names 
and praises of Sri Hari. (77) 
sraut uifa wel: HAGA aM UA: | AaMAad! YA: aot a: Ha TA: 1921 
HUA Asis FAA AI ARE 1198 
fad: We wa eafadya El Wage] AAI, Wedel Ico! 
Wea de wir wa eft: i Menot gq aAfegaratindaaa at: 122! 
siqtan, eae, Ulaeleaaree: | fatter: Husferata deh a: AUT 162 | 
dam & fart sitar sreramogresta: | fart wrftareisht wMenutepaa det 123 | 
Saat eketh a aa westa aia: 1 Mes a Moret Mes Maa | 
HUAI: Beat raat Wace: 1 C¥ 
saleatalfea: Ga aM WA Aa: | aa HOM a ata Mele Aree 141 
wa gia aaa fagei a uta: wait we fe Tae _ Beerraasane 1c | 


In the month of Sravana (roughly corresponding to July of the English calender) Gokarna 
gave an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata according to the same procedure in the course of 
a week once more and they (all) heard it again.(78) Now hear, O Narada ! what happened 
at the end of the exposition. (79) Sri Hari appeared, they say, alongwith His devotees in a 
number of aerial cars. Shouts of triumph and greetings issued from many lips on that 
occasion. (80) Out of delight Sri Hari Himself blew His conch, Pafncajanya, on that spot. And, 
closely embracing Gokarna, Sri Hari gave him a form similar to His own. (81) Sri Hari likewise 
instantly transformed other hearers (too) into (so many) divine personages dark-brown of 
hue, clad in yellow silk, decked with a diadem and a pair of (alligator-shaped) ear-rings. (82) 
(All) living beings that were present in that village, including dogs and men belonging to the 
pariah elass, they too were given a seat in the aerial cars by the grace of Gokarna on that 
occasion. (83) They were (all) transferred to the realm of Sri Hari, the destination of Yogis. 
Delighted to hear the exposition of Srimad Bhagavata the aforesaid Sri Krsna (the Divine 
Cowherd), who is (so) fond of His devotees, ascended with Gokarna to His divine realm, 
Goloka, (So) dear to cowherds. (84) (Even) as the residents of Ayodhya accompanied Sri 
Rama (to His divine realm, Saketa) in the former days, so were they transplanted to Goloka, 
Which is (so) difficult (even) for the Yogis to attain. (85) By only hearing (an exposition of) 
Srimad Bhagavata they (all) actdally reached that (divine) realm which is ever beyond the 
reach of the sun, the moon and the Siddhas (a class of semi-divine beings naturally endowed 
with mystic powers).(86) 


Tia a fe wegewad aurea weg dfn 
aut tevigmat a: das & wine a wa: Ico! 
AAPA arewarars eda esl sItenronatea: ; 
aig dart a at aft a amemasata aa a icc 


Dis, 6 
Se Se We Be We We We We Me We We We We He eee ma ct MAD BHAGAVATA- MAHATMYA 37 


We, 
We Be We Re We We He Hr We We He Ve Ke Ke He Ke Vee Ke Ke Kee He Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Be Bee Ke GEC Bee He He We Re We We Hr Re He We We We Ge Be Fe He Be 


gieerara qua anftecatsit afta: | ask fare = w@nrauftga: 12¢1 


area aft at ahs free 
he sah — fiqaftrnadiixe qasreuatad Algol 
St ATA Saeas seMraaEel eniherachy ary vardisea: 1G 1 


What shall we tell you on this occasion about the glorious rewards that are earned by 
hearing the stories forming part of Srimad Bhagavata according to the procedure of a seven 
days Sacrificial session ? (In short) those by whom (even) a single letter of the exposition (of 
Srimad Bhagavata) given by Gokarna was drunk with their ears no more returned to a 
mother's womb.(87) People undoubtedly attain by hearing a seven day's exposition of 
Srimad Bhagavata that destiny which people cannot attain by living on the air, water or dry 
leaves and emaciating the body, (nay,) through severe austerities practised for long periods 
of time and Yogic practices.(88) Staying in Citrakuta, the great sage Sandilya too reads out 
this sacred story while immersed in the bliss of oneness with Brahma (the Absolute). (89) 
Heard even once this most sacred story bids fair to burn one's whole mass of sins. If read 
on the occasion of a Sraddha it brings satiation to the manes and if read carefully everyday 
it leads to cessation of rebirth.(90) 


Thus ends the fifth discourse entitled "A Description of Gokarna’s 
Liberation", forming part of the "Glory of Srimad Bhagavata” 
in the Uttara-Khanda of the glorious Padma-Purana. 


et: mt fF £3 
FDI OI ESS SO IT em 


SF FD | UBSeara: 


Discourse VI 
The procedure of hearing Srimad Bhagavata (in a week) detailed 
PART Haq: 
aq a aayaeam: aaresavl faferi qedaiasa ora: area fafa: wa: 1 et 
tat MA Aad Geer ae: i fare ateet fad cleat uftencuad! 2 1 
ava start a ariaite: fate: | Ut AAT: HAGN slquit Atatgetct: 1 3 1 
Tami fax za ata area aden aesat aa mde: Gers Ai x | 
oat eal dat aa aial Wear wae: | Mae HA Aa sera Hela: 1 & 1 
Selina: Hfaetateadchidar: | faa: Yaleat A aA aa Atel Act Aa & | 
ear tat faent A awa: aldatent: |aga WA HAI A Acoaaladiia © | 
Gat wast Alaa Bat Wesw:ismdweta aM aA vasa ¢ 1 
saPTaac a aaa TAS: | HaAT AMT AAA = WAdcaa: | e | 
Aan: wean amit aiadenssmd Hei auisAa ges: 101 
vant vat adel faadt a1 serge aael SI Hew 188 


38 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA es owararanaral Dis. 6 

The Kumaras began again: Next we shall discourse to you in detail on the procedure 
of (fully) hearing Srimad Bhagavata in a week. This procedure has been declared as 
ordinarily observable with the help of associates and earthly possessions. (1 ) To begin with, 
one should specially call an astrologer with due respect and inquire of him a propitious day 
and time (for commencing a seven days' sacrificial session for an exposition of Srimad 
Bhaqavata). He should (further get together and ) set apart as much wealth as Is (generally) 
spentovera (girl's) wedding. (2) The months of Bhadrapaaa, Aswina and Kartika, Margasirsa, 
Asadha and Sravana (corresponding to August, September and October, November, June 
and July )—these are harbingers of Moksa for those commencing an exposition of Srimad 
Bhagavata during any of these months.(3) Even in these months, O Narada, hours which 
are worth eschewing must be avoided under all circumstances. Nay, others too who are 
industrious should be enlisted as one's associates in this undertaking. (4) Again, amessage 
should be particularly sent to all places saying that an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata is 
being arranged and that people should (make it a point to) attend with their families. (5) Some 
people stand remote from the stories of Sri Hari as well as from the chanting of Sri Visnu's 
names and praises. It should be so arranged that they as well as women and those belonging 
to the Sudra community and other such (low-born) people may be apprised of the fact. (6) 
Letters should be addressed everywhere only to the votaries of Lord Visnu, who have 
renounced all worldly attachments and are keen on chanting the divine names and glories. 
The wording of the letter has been suggested as follows :— (7) "For seven (consecutive) 
days an exceedingly rare congregation of pious men is expected to meet, and there will be 
an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata full of unprecedented charm. (8) You too are requested 
to come soon in order to quaff the nectar of Srimad Bhagavata, possessed as you are of an 
insatiate longing for such nectar, love being foremost in your mind. (9) Even if perchance you 
have no time to spare, nonetheless at all events you must come at least for a day only; (for) 
even an instant on this occasion is most difficult to get."(10) Invitation should be politely 
extended to them in these words and one should keep ready places of abode for all who 
come. (11) 


cite arf at arf 3S at seul HAH faenen age aA Adel AcHATRIE 122 
Wet UR yA ans yee year «freee e8 
valerie aero sated adel qua: sid: mecthauenfted: 19x! 
mouMeetagtadra fartista: | agieer eastat Seeaeista: 124 | 
wea Wha Stas cheat: Meera! Ay fan farts erode: were a 1281 
Wa we aden aie apantt qt ferme UitHeqad 1 219 | 
qa went stat & SGaea | Mya Taet sitet ICT ECE CUME LAL 
seat Uefa Geena: | sttquranra sikpt aarenrenfeasriee: 12° | 
fart aerat fast cea egha | GAH A Me ArH THIS: WE: 120 | 
WAHAaMrA: OM: UIatsmticd: | Portrait Ahead ate afvsa: 122 1 
aR: ard werareora: WIStaMas: 1 USI: Ue «Hala: 1221 
The hearing of Srimad Bhagavata is commended at a place of pilgrimage or in a 


woodland or even at one's (own) residence. That site (alone) should be selected for the 
exposition, where an extensive ground is available. (12) Removing the household effects. 


DENS SRIMAD BHA nt 
saeennenntnnesnesnsnesnnnesesnnneeeenae mc MG AUMA | canneeneneonueneunnwe®, 
(if it is to be arranged in one's own house) one should keep them in a corner of the house 
and the ground should be cleaned and Swept, plastered with d d cl d 
decorated with paintings of minerals (dissol dj i Hea eee 
should'get together with zealc : Olved in water). (13) Five days in advance one 
Srcirattallivatiiomperan ire seas (to be spread on the ground for the visitors to sit on) 
NAS Gar . ould be erected (on that ground) and decked with (fresh) 
FF (aten)| e€ shed should be roofed with an awning and decorated all round 
gre ) caves, flowers and fruits. Flags should be planted on all sides and adorned with 
decorations of various kinds. (15) Nay, on a higher level (within the shed) seven spacious 
divisions should be made (one higher than the other), each representing one of the seven 
spheres (into which the universe stands divided) and Brahmanas as well as those who have 
shaken off worldly attachments should be seated there after due persuasion. (16) First of all 
seats should be arranged for them one after another and then one should get ready an 
excellent seat even for the exponent of Srimad Bhagavata. (17) If the exponentis to sit facing 
the north, the (chief) listener should in that case sit actually facing the east. And if the 
exponent is to sit facing the east, the (chief) listener should then sit facing the north. (18) Or 
(if Such arrangment is not possible) the space intervening the worshipful exponent and the 
worshipper (listener) should be considered to be the east: such is the ruling given about the 
hearers by those possessing (authoritative) knowledge concerning the time and place etc., 
of hearing (an exposition of) Srimad Bhagavata. (19) A Brahmana who is a votary of Lord 
Visnu and has shaken off (all) worldly attachments, who is capable of expounding the Vedas 
and other scriptures, is expert in giving (apt) illustrations (to bring home a truth), is discerning 
and altogether free from cravings should be selected as the exponent (of Srimad Bhagavata). (20) 
Those who are bewildered by (their attraction towards) diverse courses of conduct, are fond 
of women and preach heresies should be avoided as disqualified for an exposition of Srimad 
Bhagavata (the scripture associated with the name of Sri Suka), even if they are learned. (21) 
By the side of the exponent (just ) by way of helping him should be installed another learned 
man of the same calibre, capable of resolving doubts and intent on enlightening the 
public.(22) 
aaa att sendet feneatadaa | steutedsat freed ate ert Ware 123 | 
fia wad: Fal AA A Waad: \alanieana 9 Wea WS 1 2X I 
faqa, dae Sgut Waa PAE AUS A Nadel cA VTE eee 124! 
Forest Aa ateotater HA | MeO, OSA Sf aeeeT_ 1 2G I 
Rt ut at at memati addeniag Aer ala! 
sirerraden dd: wt saad: laden fafa stem gqudltaatad 1221 - 
ade sie Fal ATER SAN | Mifd: NaAfada Ade cae; dal 121 
SH SrTadreaSa TAA: HN va fei Mnasa va aA yaad Waar 130! 
Tira wdaist Whe: ade aaifafdata mde caise da chala 1321 
In order to undertake the sacred vow of expounding Srimad Bhagavata the prospective 
exponent should have his head and chin etc., shaved on the eve of the day when the 
exposition is to commence. Easing his nature at daybreak, he should duly take a bath. (23) 
Finishing with zeal his Sandhya prayers and other devotions in a short form everyday, he 
should particularly worship Lord Gane§a (the elephant-headed god) for warding off obstacles 
in the way of the exposition. (24) Having duly gratified the manes through oblations of water, 








SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. § 


Se Re Be Re RR REE ERE AE RRR Be Re BER ERE BE MERE AE BEEBE RE BEST BES BBB Be Me Be Be Hr fr #r8y 2, 


he should go through a course of expiatory rites for the sake of purification (of his Self) and 
should draw a mystrical diagram (used in invoking a deity) and instal on it Sri Hari (in the 
form of an image or the Salagrama stone). (25) He should (then) with the chanting of 
Mantras (sacred texts) successively offer to Sri Krsna (through that image) the (sixteen 
prescribed) courses of worship including Pradaksina (walking round the Deity clockwise) 
and salutation and at the end of the worship address (the following) prayer (to Him):— (26) 
"Rescue, O Storehouse of compassion ! from the ocean of mundane existence my 
wretched self, sunk in that ocean of metempsychosis, my body having been seized by (the 
alligator in the shape of) infatuation for action." (27) Worship should be zealously offered 
next with due ceremony and love to (the copy of ) Srimad Bhagavata as well by means 
of articles including incense and light. (28) Nay, holding a cocoanut (in the hollow of his 
joined palms), he should then duly offer salutation and then witha cheertul mind alone the 
following prayer should be addressed (to Srimad Bhagavata); for here is Sri Krsna Himself 
manifest (before us) under the name of Srimad Bhagavata. "! have sought You, O Lord ! 
for being rescued from the ocean of mundane existence. (29-30) This aspiration of mine may 
(kindly) be fulfilled by You in everyway without impediment as a matter of fact, (since) | am 
Your servant, O Krsna !" (31) 

Ud dead: Shel amt AA Gad! GA aayaiy: Grd d aA Meta 1321 

Teed wali  adalelaamel UenasEea Aen faa i33t 

aan fan: usted: AAA YCli AACA aM ania: a wa fe iaxi 

at Usa = nenghtqda net 6 ctetsiieh «= glagmanticterer 134 | 

MUI ANA AARAM Hlth: | Aa Wel aA: Waaraqarfaatt 136 | 

CHa A  Alwefead: Wen: a wAensqaay 121 


Having addressed this piteous appeal (to Sri Krsna in the form of Srimad Bhagavata), 
he should next worship the (prospective) exponent and, fully adorning him with wearing 
apparel and jewels, should further duly extol him at the end of the worship (as follows):— (32) 
"O manifestation of Suka, expert (as you are) in enlightening others and well-versed in the 
enti re range of sacred lore, eradicate my ignorance by revealing (to me) this story (in the form 
of Srimad Bhagavata)." (33) Before him then a vow should be gladly taken (by the chief 
listener) for his own (spiritual) good and it should be truly observed by him at all events to 
the best of his ability for a (full) week (34) Five Brahmanas should be engaged as priests for 
averting interruption in the exposition; they should mutter prayers to Sri Hari by repeating 
the twelve-syllabled Mantra ( 3% Hi "ad arge¢ara ). (35) Bowing to the Brahmanas and other 
votaries of Lord Visnu as well as to those engaged in chanting the names and praises of Sri 
Hari and, duly worshipping them, he should himself occupy his seat (only) when permitted 
x ane pe tie 0°. giving zs the thought of the world, riches and other possessions, 

n, focusses his mi iti j 
secueetnd highest route ane mind on the exposition (alone) with a guileless heart 


AAT RSPR Seen sear Merienes yell i3ct 
= Saal Hee UieaTET qenemy ard a aikhy aundeat 13¢1 
is eR: alae: | gietad ade Meat aenfeiar xo! 
SOrer AAA a WPseP Vater | FAUT Wa:aM Hal a TUATHA |S 2 | 





\ 


Dis. 6 S57 ; ne oe 
C2 dd elerarssoge Oar ee RIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 41 


BO SCR RRR Re Bt Be Bt Re BER Re GR Re Re Be RR eR ERE R RER RE RRR RR BERR RE RR BR RRR RRR RR arte 


ARTE es WTS yea aT Wl Gaaed weer adel sauna a ixei 
ist Gat wa Reamer atuard az: sie: qonferend ae vet 
Starting the exposition from sunrise the highly intelligent exponent should properly 
expound the story (of Srimad Bhagavata) in a moderate tone for three Praharas and a half 
(ten hours and a half).(38) At midday a pause should be made in the exposition for about 
an hour. During that interval the votaries of Lord Visnu should as a matter of fact take to 
the chanting of the Lord's names and glories in consonance with the theme of exposition 
of that day. (39) For controlling the urge for the evacuation of one's bowels and bladder a 
light diet is.as a matter of fact conducive to happiness, One who seeks to hear an exposition 
of Srimad Bhaégavata should (accordingly) take his meal only once (a day) and take only 
such food as fit to be offered as an oblation to the sacred fire. (40) He should hear the 
exposition abstaining from food for (full) one week provided he has the stamina (to do it) 
or he can do so with ease living on ghee or milk (alone). (41) Or he may live on fruits and 
vegetables etc., or even on one species of cereals (alone with vegetable etc.). In order (to 
be able) to listen to the exposition one should take such a vow as can be easily 
observed.(42) | should certainly prefer taking a meal if it would enable one to listen to an 
exposition of Srimad Bhagavata. A fast (on the other hand) is not commended if it stands in 
the way of hearing the exposition. (43) 


ages dat faaeeq anei fasdianadart after: mesa ixxi 

Teasaay: wlaeat a AeA Heaaam ye a Halfaa Haat iv 

ffs aq as a ue ata aiwaqs udfad wenfaet Hens ive 

md mia He AM A BMA Daw ae aM Bh Had Baad ive 

aqamrafasant «= etsfaat «= dati akemedt Fret aside: eenadt ive 

HRA GT AIST ores aa aeh eT 1 A aed: Masdt xe! 

aa att eat diaasia faqd qaisarama aged 9  paicparadt iyo! 

ates at wit fauta: omedar seoet Aletent: Aja HeaTArT 14s | 

SGT THIHaARA VI FRAT AT A Fateh | AAR A Al ANT Aa MSM Waea: 1421 

wy fafa sma degaat wadistaqaat wer feen alfeagmese 1431 
(Now) hear, O Narada ! the rules of conduct that should be followed by those who have 
taken a vow to hear (an exposition of ) Srimad Bhagavata in the course of a week. Those who 
have not (yet) been (duly) initiated into the worship of Lord Visnu (or received from a qualified 
Guru a Mantra sacred to Him) are not eligible for hearing (an exposition of ) Srimad 
Bhagavata. (44) A man who has taken a vow to hear an exposition of Srimad Bhagavata (as 
aforesaid) should constantly (during the period) observe continence, sleep on the floor (or 
on a plank-bed but in no case on a bedstead ) and take his meals on leaves joined together 
or on a sinale leaf if it is big enough) at the end of the exposition (for the day). (45) One who 
has taken the aforesaid vow should always avoid (during the period) pulses, honey oil and 
heavy food as well as such edibles as are vitiated by impure associations (e.g., a fruit with 


blood, red peel or kernel such as cherry or ripe tomato, or one with a fleshy kernel, such as 
the jack-fruit) and cooked food which has been kept overnight. (46) A man who has taken 


the aforesaid vow should eschew concupiscence, anger, arrogance, pride, jealousy and 
greed too as well as hypocrisy, infatuation and hatred. (47) He who has taken the aforesaid 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 6 


eRe Re Re Re REAR RR RR RR RRR REE RRR RRR LER TH Re He Be rg, 


ERE REAR ERERARAERERERERRALA LAAN AEE 


vow should abstain from reviling the Vedas, the votaries of Lord Visnu and the Brahmanas 
one's elders or preceptor, those who are vowed to the service of the cow as Well as the 
womankind. the king and exalted souls. (48) He who has taken the aforesaid vow should 
not speak to a woman in menstruation, a member of the lowest classes, a Mleccha (a beef- 
eater). an apostate, a member of the twice-born classes who has not been invested with the 
sacred thread though grown to a mature age, a Brahmana-hater and those who are outside 
the pale of Vedic religion. (49) Similarly he who is vowed to the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata 
should observe truthfulness, (external and internal) purity, compassion, silence, straight- 
forwardness, modesty (in his dealings) and likewise practise liberal-mindedness. (50) A 


pauper, one suffering from consumption, any (other) ailing man, a wretch, a man of sinful 
deeds, one who is issueless and a seeker of Liberation should hear this story ( of Srimad 
Bhagavata in seven days). (51) It should be heard with zeal by a woman who has 
prematurely ceased to menstruate or who has borne only one child and ceased to conceive 
further, nay, (even) by her who is barren, also by her whose children have died as well as 
by the woman who miscarries. (52) If it is heard with due ceremony (by those enumerated 
in verses 51 and 52 ), the hearing bids fair to yield them a fruit which is absolutely free from 
decay. This superb and divine story (of Srimad Bhagavata) is capable of conferring (on its 
hearers) the fruit of tens of millions of sacrificial performances. (53) 


Ga pet adtafeqenoraeretd! searedisdta cadet montis: 14x 
Stearate UY Wa Ae: | Aaa gard fren aera aa: 144! 


__ Having thus (duly) observed the rules of conduct prescribed for this vow (of hearing 
Srimad Bhagavata in a week) the (chief) listener should then perform the rite concluding the 
vow. By those seeking the (special) fruit of it this rite should be performed (just on the lines 
of the rite of concluding the fast on the Janmastami day (the eighth of the dark half of the 
lunar month of Bhadrapada, the birth anniversary of Lord Sri Krsna). (54) In the case 
(however) of devotees claiming nothing as their own it is not ordinarily imperative that the 
formality of concluding this vow should be gone through. They are hallowed by the very 
process of hearing, disinterested votaries as they are of Lord Visnu. (55) 


Wa Amease aa sighted | ua a apa ger oraifraina: 1461 
Taegedine sigan deamiyemeoted adet atid ad: 1401 
Wigieq AA: eq Werled A Ha! fea araceasy fanaa a daa 1c 
faepsecare tt aren outset i yewstwer wa: adea: aden 14e! 
shee ¢ agate ame aimed aq afiss frerafeadaq ico! 
Waa ett Sala «Tae: ia. OC ivdct: 162 
earnest gat wea zoracnefesad i arihexhrtert  — =aanfirpartal: 1621 
abel maa A VoaMaeaHH | et UMA Wa AR Ad: 1&3 | 
ovhen these seven days' sacrificial session (consisting of an exposition of Srimad 
ees) Is Over, worship should presently be offered by the listeners to the book 
(of rimad Bhagavata) as wellas tothe expositor with great devotion. (56) Remnants of food, 
basil leaves and wreathes of flowers offered to the Deity should forthwith be distributed to 


the listeners and the chanting of the Lord's names and glories, sweetened by the sounding 
of wooden tomtoms and the Striking of cymbals should then be resorted to.(57) The (chief) 


Dis. 6 ] SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 43 


We He Be He We He He Hr He He He Me He He 
BeBe He Be He Ke Bie He He Be Ke Re Re Ke Re Re Re Re Re RR RE RE Re Re RE Me RR Re Re Re Re Re Be Re He Be he ee Re We Be Be Me Be BeBe Be Be Ve Ge Fe Be Ge Be Ss Se He He He Ve Ge eH 


listener should make the audience utter with him shouts of triumph and words of greetings 
and raise blasts of conchs; and money as well as food should be dealt out to Brahmanas and 
mendicants.(58) If the (chief) listener is a man who has renounced the world the Gita should 
be read the following day. If (however) he is a householder, in that case oblations should be 
poured into the sacred fire by way of expiation for any sin (voluntarily or involuntarily) 
committed in course of the act (of hearing). (59) With the utterance of each verse of Book 
Ten (of Srimad Bhagavata) rice boiled in milk with sugar, honey and ghee and mixed with 
sesamum seeds and food-grains (barley etc.) should be consigned to the fire. (60) Or (as an 
alternative) the chief listener should perform the Havana with a concentrated mind alongwith 
the muttering of the holy Gayatri,Srimad Bhagavata (the supreme Purana) being in essence 
the same as the Gayatri. (61) In the event of his being incapable of performing the Havana 
a wise man should give away (to Brahmanas) materials fit to be consigned to the sacred 
fire in order to achieve its fruit. (Nay) in order to make amends for the various short comings 
(that might have married the performance) as well as for neutralizing the faults of deficiency 
and excess (committed) he should read the Visnu Sahasranama (the thousand names of 
Lord Visnu catalogued in the Mahabharata, Padmapurana and other sacred books). 
Through that every performance bids fair to become fruitful inasmuch as there is nothing 
more efficacious than that. (62-63) = 


Weal AOTC seed: icareaet ss ACCC TUM GX 
arnt uesafad wuifte faa ai are ged ere feted oleae icy! 
Mea aA TSM: aera | aaron:  gfrart 939 aaa 16 
ararata aeitdkal Am: Risaeee: | ua ga fad a adarafanc icy 
Hee VII F{ Maerad Ba wteraresdatenont aes Mra Aaa: 12! 

He should then feed twelve Brahmanas with sweets and rice boiled in milk with sugar and 
give away gold and a cow (to Brahmanas) for the completion of the sacred vow. (64) Having 
got prepared a seat of gold weighing three tolas, if his means allow it, he should instal on it 
the book of Srimad Bhagavata, written in beautiful letters. (65) Duly worshipping the book 
by invoking in it (the presence of ) the Deity ensouling it and through other forms of worship 
including a gift of money, the wise listener should presentit to the expositor of restrained mind 
when he has been worshipped by offering wearing apparel, ornaments, sandal-paste etc. 
By doing so he will be rid of the shackles of birth and death. On the procedure of hearing (an 
exposition of ) Srimad Bhagavata,which purges one of all sins, being thus completed, the 
blessed and glorious Bhagavata-Purana yields the desired fruit and proves to be the means 
of securing religious merit, self-gratification, worldly possessions and Liberation : there is no 
doubt about it. (66—68) 


PART Ad: 
sfa a afd ad fe ya: stafrofaisiaeradda aieamt at fed ice! 

The Kumaras went on: In this way everything has been pointed out to you. What more 
do you wish to hear ? Through the glorious Bhagavata alone both (worldly) enjoyment and 
liberation are brought within one's palm. (69) 

Yd sald 


Sqeal A ae: srquinad Heri adore quar aeghesaiairy io | 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 6 


dea RR RRA RRR RRR RAR RRR RR RRR RR KER SEBEL HE BER BE BERE EBERT NT SE EES SESE SEE SEE Se Bee Be Bh Re 


Ae RE RRRRAEEES ALLA EER AERA EE LAA A SAR SALLE SS TS ERASE TRESS LESSEE a 
suai aayart wae Pee seria art ea WBA: FST 1981 
qa Weare Ysa Wided ww AAA TAIN 1192 | 
anes saraisyfeas SA Waa | Yomnipaaaly: UAT: 1193 | 
wd sui amevd anal wale: i eT are Aare Saletier: 19x | 


Sita resumed : Having spoken thus the aforesaid exalted souls (Sanaka and his three 
brothers ) expounded with due ceremony in the presence of all living beings, who listened 
with a restrained mind, for seven days the sacred story of Srimad Bhagavata, which absolves 
one ofall sins and bestows (on the hearer both) enjoyment and Liberation. Then they extolled 
Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person). (70-71) At the end of it Jnana, Vairagya and Bhakti feit 
highly invigorated and attained exuberant youth, which ravished the mind of allliving beings. (72) 
On his ambition having been realized Narada too felt (much) gratified. The hair stood on their 
end all over his body and he was overwhelmed with supreme joy. (73) Having thus heard the 
exposition (of Srimad Bhagavata) Narada, the beloved of the Lord, spoke to them with joined 
palms (as follows) in a voice choked with emotion: (74) 


Ag sdid 
TUSeAPEISA Ades: Hoot: | Seal A wTaiewer: Teast aft: 194i 
FA PAM Al At AMA: | dHvUseN Ad: HO: HAUTE Hwa et 
Narada submitted : Blessed am | in that | have been favoured by you, compassion being 
foremost in your heart . This day has been attained by me Lord Sri Hari, Who takes away all 
sins. (75) | account the hearing of Srimad Bhagavata as the best of all righteous courses, O 


sages rich in askesis ! For through the hearing of it is attained Sri Krsna who dwells in 
Vaikuntha. (76) 


Yd sara 
Wa galt a at ane ameiahwea ana: yal aaa ive 
dada weasel carat  weanerferca: | 


ama fsermgu: wn daq UPlad aA: Wa: 1921 

eel Gee: «Weds «eI: «= eats Te 

Met atime «= fleisaetyaraet «= fire 109 1 

Suta continued : While Narada, the foremost of the votaries of Lord Visnu, was 
speaking in this strain, there actually came wandering about at the moment Sri Suka, a 
master of Yoga.(77) Presently there appeared on the scene at the end of the exposition, 
slowly and fondly reciting Srimad Bhagavata, Sri Suka (the son of Vedavyasa), a 
(veritable) moon that occasions a rise in the ocean of spiritual wisdom, who is sated with 
Self-Realization and (ever) looks like a youth of sixteen summers. (78) Those present in 
the assembly rose at once with reverence to behold Sri Suka (who was possessed of very 
great splendour), and offered him an exalted seat. Narada (the celestial sage) worshipped 
him with love and Sri Suka, when comfortably seated, spoke as follows: (Please) listen to 
his faultless speech.(79) 
MIA FAA 


Primencaniniferd The Ynyalaqdsadada 7 
fad Wad Tamed deret weet wfa waa: idol 


Dis. 6 —_ : > 
Le eee aie ipyies SHINED BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 45 


EEA ALAA IAEA AA LAA LAA LEBEL IIIA 
oH: Sihgdehratsa oat Predera wat det arerana aay ras aTEAAIOTA 
merged fea ar atta: welt gereeeacion apie: Soa 122 | 
Ararat VUnfted wear et afer udder at wt afte | 
a abetted Teprtarfeepe mepUaH ws fraUTTe We faqeatat: 1221 
wart Wal Schemes SHUS AE TA: | ata: frerg waa wr ur yar we 123 | 


sri Suka Said : O you devotees, possessing a taste for divine joy, Srimad Bhagavata is 
the fruit (essence) of the wish-yielding tree of Veda, dropped on earth from the mouth of the 
parrot-like Sage Suka, and is full of the nectar of supreme bliss. It is unmixed sweetness 
(devoid of rind, seed or other superfluous matter). Go on drinking this divine nectar, again 
and again, till your body-consciousness ceases. (80) In this glorious Bhagavata, produced 
by Vedavyasa (the great sage), has been taught that supreme Religion (the Religion of God- 
worship, the Bhagavata- Dharma as it is called) which is entirely free from all self-deception 
(in the shape of desire including the desire for Moksa or Liberation). Nay, in this has been 
expounded that absolute Reality which can be known only by saints who are free from 
malice, nay which is the bestower of (supreme) bliss and uproots the threefold agony (1— 
the agony caused by bodily distemper, 2—that which is attributable to natural agencies 
and 3—that inflicted by a fellow being).While it is doubtful that God can be speedily captured 
in one's heart by other means, He can be instantly seized through this work by those blessed 
persons who have a keen desire to hear it recited. (81)The glorious Bhagavata is the 
ornament of the Puranas and the wealth of the Vaisnavas; in it stands celebrated the (one) 
supreme Reality, which is all consciousness (as well as all truth and all bliss), free from (all) 
impurity (in the form of contact with Maya) and which is the goal of Paramahamsas (ascetics 
of the highest order) alone. In this Purana withdrawal from (all) activity, coupled with spiritual 
enlightenment, dispassion and Devotion, has been expounded. A man devoutly listening to 
it, carefully reading it and given to pondering it bids fair to get liberated. (82) This nectar (in 
the shape of the story of Srimad Bhagavata) does not exist in paradise, in Satyaloka (the 
highest heaven, the realm of Brahma, the creator), in Kailasa (the realm of Lord Siva) and 
(even) in Vaikuntha (the realm of Lord Visnu). Therefore quaff it, highly fortunate ones ! 
Never, O never cease taking it. (83) 
Yd sald 

Ww gam ala seuamt ae amar eftafareia 

WeeaedeanIeTatatyad: quisedagsira a1 C¥ | 

apt Sea neat oat a diet 9 alias | 

Wal Vara HAGTAAR daAnTAchidateataral 124 | 

SBIR CHA ACS TAART AGA: HATA SUTEAA AU: AH Aeaca Whats asAT | 
Salsateryes MATA HU: caida a HARI Aa Waar! Atatatqal sara aya 1 cc! 
wad «ua fieta at Hacilenm Acasa | 
aiaifecn  aldandadiad eft: wealst  daelssedta ice 





* Itis a well-known truth that a fruit bitten by a parrot is exceptionally sweet. There's a pun on the word “Suka" in this verse, 
which also means parrot. 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis.'6 


eRe eRe Re Re Re Re RR A REE RE RE ERE RE BERET REE  B BER HEBER MRE RE BE HEHE ST SEER BEBE RY Be Be Re He Be Hr 


46 


aa at wMaadequed sid: HUlHldaaseay AAA | 

gat  aareaafaseat: 99 Surfer = afte TIC 

ema «89a | Aa ah EAaT wea wala! 

TAA Sa ufequuieredetia Baar: 128 | 

Sita went on: While the glorious Suka (the son of Vyasa) was speaking as aforesaid,Sri 

Hari appeared in the midst of the assembly, accompanied by Prahlada, Bali, Uddhava, 
Arjuna and others. Narada (the celestial sage) worshipped Him as well as the afore- 
mentioned (devotees). (84) Beholding Sri Hari, who was now perched on a high seat, 
cheerful, they presently commenced chanting the divine names and praises before Him. 
Lord Siva (the Source of the universe), accompanied by Goddess Parvati (the divine Spouse 
of Lord Siva), and Brahma (who remains seated on a lotus) arrived on the scene to witness 
the Kirtana. (85) Prahlada held (struck) the wooden cymbals because of his agility, while 
Uddhava held the brass ones. Narada (the celestial seer) played upon his lute; Arjuna, who 
was a master of tunes, kept up the vocal melody. Indra (the lord of paradise, the ruler of the 
gods) sounded a wooden tomtom; the aforesaid Kumaras (Sanaka and his three brothers) 
raised shouts of glory in a melodious voice (at intervals) in that chorus, where Sri Suka (the 
son of Vyasa) stood foremost giving expression to (different) emotions by means of charming 
(literary) compositions. (86) In the centre of that assembly danced like actors that very trio 
of Bhakti and others (the other two being JAana and Vairagya), who were full of great 
splendour, Sri Hari too was pleased, to witness this transcendent Kirtana, and presently 
spoke as follows :— (87) “I feel (highly) gratified at this moment through the exposition (of 
Srimad Bhagavata) and the Kirtana. Ask a boon of your choice of Me, who have been won 
by your devotion." Greatly rejoiced to hear these words of the Lord, they submitted to Sri Hari 
as follows, their heart moistened with emotion:— (88) "Our ambition is that in (all future) 
sacrificial sessions consisting of a seven days’ exposition of Srimad Bhagavata, You must 
be present with all these (devotees of Yours). This should be scrupulously fulfilled by You.” 
And saying "Be it so !" Sri Hari (the immortal Lord ) disappeared. (89) 


Ad SATA ARGS enter ATT 
HY wes: ufasar: wt aq: dtamemqard col 
“Une: gana we wan a we aatast aat yar 
ato atainara «Aare «aarenft «fe }4aerarmieet 
ailisag: aeaxanfedtat IPI EHC UIC IC CIC 
wane utr aa a «amad saifriert 
Thereupon Narada bowed in the direction of the feet of the Lord and His companions, 
as well as to Sri Suka and other ascetics. All those who had drunk of the nectar in the shape 
of the exposition of Srimad Bhagavata had their delusion dispelled and, extremely delighted, 
forthwith dispersed. (90) The celebrated Bhakti alongwith her two sons (Jnana and 
Vairagya) was then installed by Sri Suka in Srimad Bhagavata (the scripture associated with 
his name) as well. Hence as a result of the Vaisnavas resorting to Srimad Bhagavata Sri Hari 
actually occupies their heart. (91) Srimad Bhagavata, they say, loudly proclaims its efficacy 
to deliver those tormented by the fever of agony caused by poverty, those trampled upon by 
the deviless of Maya and those hurled into the ocean of transmigration. (92) 





Dis. 6 ] SRI p A 
IMAD i A 
SESAEESORARER DEN ES NS a RE then eR BERT ERS NCAT MMA |g enannannnnennenwen ween 


| Ae SATA 
. Terie Hel UN Maia ae UA: | Gea art sralfeera A dard flan. 1931 
= Sa abe Soe ey : When was Srimad Bhagavata expounded by Sri Suka for the sake 
O ing (Pariksit)‘ When again was it expounded by Gokarna and when (again) by 
Sanaka and his three brothers (sons of Brahma) for the sake of Narada (the heavenly seer) ? 
(Pray) resolve this doubt of mine as a matter of fact.(93) 
Yd Sarg 
STTEPONT AAT fetes teteH Ta Het | Aaa AWA A HTT sels 1e¥ 
wife «=a cet ada Ya Bel Aaa a AqaitsmHercHaMy eh | 
vere amet sme fieaina afti set fea ud aerat wert: gar: 121 
gat WA ass MMi ael Aad art sade eet 


Sita continued : Sri Suka started his exposition of Srimad Bhagavata on the ninth of 
(the bright fortnight of ) the month of Bhadrapada (roughly corresponding to August of the 
English calender) after thirty years of the Kali age, commencing from the departure of Sri 
Krsna (for His divine realm), had rolled away. (94) After Pariksit's hearing (of Srimad 
Bhagavata) when two hundred more years of the Kali age had elapsed, Gokarna (who was 
born of a cow) commenced his exposition (of Srimad Bhagavata) on the ninth of the bright 
half of Asadha (roughly corresponding to June of the English calendar). (95) When thirty 
more years of Kaliyuga had elapsed since then, Brahmas sons (Sanaka and his three 
brothers) commenced the exposition (of Srimad Bhagavata) on the ninth of the bright 
fortnight of Kartika (roughly corresponding to the month of October of the English calendar). (96) 
| have thus told you as aforesaid what | was asked by you, O sinless Saunaka ! The 
exposition of Srimad Bhagavata in the age of Kali puts an end to the disease of 
metempsychosis. (97) 


asa daca aA yates vkpiaordtanty | 
aa: mudenfe frat oleh fe disiafeitetdaa fra! ¢c | 
wuera dler uretext adit aa: feo da HUTS | 
Get ATA AI SERENA UTIL! 8 
sat dat fata: amd dard frat YeTeTGe TT! 
fend or at aot Hae Headend witfereatalt aeagrorTaAAAAAy 1200 | 
TAO Ysa BM Bs wae at A sguorygrad 12081 
sf a wee adtearatag ale frifed ¢ wreast fetes | 
siifa qencneat fates afer fener fra ae aedtaleanearUaAN 120} | 
wi a fradan soift wae agar cneaft aeceoray | 
dl aafatiiawnens oa areneata fe gad feereraedy 12031 
sf strs Savers SMa Hamas AM Fase: 11 & I 


SAE shAeeTaaaeea 
Git: 32 aad. 





48 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA [ Dis. 6 


POR TR RR RE RR RR RRR RR BR ROR RR RR TR RE Me Re ARE Be Re Re Re Kee Ke Re We Be Be He Kee Be He Be Be We Be He Be Be Me We Be We He Ke We We wy wy 






Drink with reverence, O pious souls ! this (nectar-like) story, which is (so) dear to Sr 
Krsna and wipes out all sins, (nay) which is the only means to (the attainment of) Liberation 
in this world and promotes Bhakti. What will be gained as a matter of fact by associating with 
worthy men and visiting places of pilgrimage? (98) Beholding even his own servant (going 
out on his errand of taking the life out of dying persons), noose in hand, Yama (the god of 
punishment), it is said, whispers close to his ear, “Leave alone those who are enraptured 
over the Lord's stories; (for) | am the ruler of other men but not of the Vaisnavas." (99) O 
men whose mind is agitated through attachment to the poison-like pleasures of sense! drink 
the peerless nectar in the form of Srimad Bhagavata (the story narrated by Sri Suka) for your 
(spiritual) good (even) for half a second in this unsubstantial world. Why wander for nothing, 
O friends ! on the wrong path resonant with vicious talks? Emperor Pariksit stands as a 
witness to corroborate the statement (found in our sacred-books) that Mukti (emancipation) 
follows in the wake of Srimad Bhagavata entering the very ears. (100) He bids fair to attain 
lordship over Vaikuntha (by becoming one with the Lord of Vaikuntha), to whose voice gets 
joined the story narrated by Sri Suka immersed in a stream of (ecstatic) joy. (101) In this way 
has been imparted by me to you just now a most esoteric truth, the (very) substance of all 
conclusions, after ransacking a pile of sacred books. There is nothing purer than Srimad 
Bhagavata (the story narrated by Sri Suka). Therefore, quaff for the enjoyment of supreme 
bliss the nectar embodied in the twelve Skandhas (of Srimad Bhagavata). (102) He who 
hears (an exposition of) Srimad Bhagavata in a regular way with devotion and he who 
expounds it before a pure-hearted votary of Lord Visnu—both attain the true reward of 
hearing or expounding Srimad Bhagavata because of their duly observing the procedure laid 
down for it. There is nothing which cannot be achieved by them. (103) 


Thus ends the sixth discourse entitled "The procedure of hearing 
(an exposition of) Srimad Bhagavata detailed", forming 
part of the "Glory of Srimad Bhagavata" comprised 
in the Uttara-Khanda of the glorious Padma- Purana / 


END OF SRIMAD BHAGAVATA-MAHATMYA 








WAG: Cheesy: 


: SID TAA SEAT: 
Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana 
Book One 


Discourse | 
Saunaka and other sages interrogate the famous SGta* (UgraSrava) 
WHI USaaMlerdsnagiae: Wwe AI Hal Fal A stead yea Bea: | 
astarkaeat ven fataat aa frertisge arat Sa Ver Arete Ael ut eine 121 
ad: sifertchadisa ual Frauot wai det ardana aed farad aaron | 
sitertad aemend fe at uti: Wel gaaeeadsa cia: ase fsreceond 12 | 
Frmencaenniterd THe Wryareqdsadaay | 
faad Tad tated derel wat yfa warqent: 131 
We meditate on that transcendent Reality (God) from whom this universe springs up, in 
whom it abides and into whom it returns—because He is invariably present in all existing 
things and is distinct from all non-entities—who is self-conscious and self-effulgent, who 
revealed to Brahma (the very first seer) by His mere will the Vedas that cause bewilderment 
even to the greatest sages, in whom this threefold creation (consisting of Sattva,Rajas and 
Tamas), though unreal, appears as real (because of the reality of its substratum)—even as 
the sun's rays (which are made up of the element of fire) are mistaken for water (in a mirage), 
water for earth and earth for water—and who ever excludes Maya by His own self-effulgent 
glory. (1) In this glorious Bhagavata, produced by the great sage Vedavyasa, has been 
taught that supreme Religion (the Religion of God-worship, the Bhagavata Dharma as it is 
called) which is entirely free from all self-deception in the shape of desire (including the 
desire for Moksa or Liberation). Nay, herein has been expounded that absolute Reality which 
canbe known only by saints who are free from malice, nay, which is the bestower of Supreme 
bliss and uproots the threefold agony (1.the agony caused by bodily distemper, 2. that which 
is attributable to natural agencies and 3. that inflicted by a fellow-being). While itis doubtful 
that God can be speedily captured in one's heart by other means, He can be instantly seized 
through this work by those blessed persons who have a keen desire to hear it recited. (2) 
O ye devotees possessing a taste for divine joy, Srimad Bhagavata is the fruit (essence) of 
the wish-yielding tree of Veda, dropped on earth from the mouth of the parrot-likefsage Suka, 
and is full of the nectar of supreme bliss. It is unmixed sweetness (devoid of rind, seed or 


* The Sitas are a mixed caste born of a Ksatriya father and a Brahmana mother. 
+ Itis a well-known truth that a fruit bit by a parrot is exceptionally sweet. There is a pun on the word ‘Suka’' in this verse, 


which also means a parrot. 





UR 
45 Eee baile 


= 4 
--"4 
=! 
= 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1 


Br Re We Gr Sr Gr Hr Br Ry Br Kr Hr Br Br wr By By Br Wr Br By By By Hr Hy Hr er Hy 


ee Bete We Be Be eRe Bee Re RR RE RRR RRA RRR RE RR RR RE RT RE RT RR BE Ae eR RE RPE TY 


other superfluous matter). Go on drinking this divine nectar again and again till there js 
consciousness left in you.(3) 
Sfishiat wa: wears: iat wala wlna AEAAAATAd | ¥ | 
a wed @@ Wa: Seedeaa aed =A UTP NAT | & | 
Once upon atime, inthe forest known as Naimisaranya (the modern Nimsar in Oudh), 
a place sacred to Lord Visnu, Saunaka and other sages were engaged in a great sacrifice, 
to be completed in the course of a thousand years, with a view to realizing the Lord who is 
sung in heaven andis the abode of His devotees.(4) One morning, having poured oblations 
into the sacred fire,the sages paid their respects to the Suta; and when he had taken his 
seat,they asked him the following question with due reverence. (5) 
RIT HA: 
aa Ga won Ahern aaa senate eigen argq | & | 
aa adfaet sel WaM aera: isra a qaqa: ya udarfact fag: i 9 | 
aa a Wel aad aaameqendi sa: ferra freer wel Were ¢ 
qa aaISaISSae Vaal afefafsra Garter: Naeta: wzhaqea i & | 
WAONSUTS: MA HOA Gl SA: WAT: YAH ACU Wag: ol 
aif ykenaifin stteanft fase: | sta: Arelisa AA BAYA AAA | 
Sle A: AEMMAMT SA AAAlahr 12k I 
Oa safe us A WAM Arad Ufa: | eaaat aqeaet wait ae facntdar 122! 
aa: WAMIMMeaSTqad | AAAI YA AAT A Vara BAIez! 
aaa: Agia ani aaa faaet wridd: wa faqea afedia aa variexi 
aed: Od Wa: OIA: 1A: GOS: Wefaaisqdaar eu 
al al Wade quaeclesdehaur: | Besa A AUjaAlelat: cleo 12a 1 
qa magenta ufo ki: 1 we A: Seem clea seid: How: 1 V9 
The Sages said : O sinless Suta, you have indeed studied and also expounded all the 
Puranas and Itihasas as well as the codes of laws.(6) Whatever is known by the divine sage 
Badarayana (Vedavyasa, so-called because he is reputed to have his abode in a grove of 
Jujube-trees), the foremost among the knowers of Veda, and even by other sages who have 
realized both the qualified and absolute aspects of the Godhead, you know all that in reality 
by their grace, which you were able to earn by your guileless and pure heart; for the teachers 
confide even their profoundest secrets to their beloved pupil. Be pleased to tell us, O long- 
lived suta, that which you have determined through a study of all those sacred books as the 
unfailing and easy means to the supreme good of men. (7—9) O the ornament of holy 
congregations, in this age of Kali people are mostly short-lived, slothful (little inclined to tread 
the path of God-Realization), most dull-witted, unlucky and tormented with diseases and 
other evils. (10) The scriptures too are numerous and inculcate not one discipline, but a 
number of practices and rituals; and, besides, (being too voluminous) they have to be 
listened to part by part. Therefore, benevolent as you are, draw out by your critical insight 
their quintessence and declare the same to us, who are full of faith, so that our mind may 
become placid and tranquil.(1 1 ) Sita, God bless you, you know the purpose for which the 
divine Lord, the protector of His devotees, was born of Devaki, Vasudeva's consort. (12) 
Dear Sata, please explain it to us who are keen to hear of the same; for the Lord's descent 


Dis.-1 ] 

1 BOOK ONE 2 
Br Wr Br Sr We Hr Hr Br 
SSS EGA RR RA Be A REAR HALLER AA AAA AACA 


on this earth Is intended forthe protection and prosperity of all living beings. (13) Anyone who 
has fallen Into the terrible whirlpool of birth and death can be speedily delivered from the 
same if he utters His Name even helplessly; for Fear itself is afraid of the Lord. (14) Suta, 
sages who have taken shelter in His feet and therefore ever abide in perfect calm forthwith 
purify those who come in contact with them; whereas the waters of the celestial stream 
(Ganga) cleanse the heart only by long and continued use (because they are no longer in 
direct touch with those feet, although they still retain their purifying virtue because of the 
touch they once had with them). (15) Is there anyone who, though desirous of purifying one's 
soul, would refuse to hear the glory of that divine Lord whose exploits are extolled by saints 
of holy renown, since such glory wipes out the impurities of the Kali age ? (16) Narrate to us, 
who are full of reverence, the noble doings of the Lord who playfully assumes various 
forms—the doings that have been sung by seers (like Narada and others). (17) 


saree «86 etiiaaadkae: «9a: i eter «fae: «= eee 12861 
at q a faqem siagcieiamd i apvadi Wa Sig Aig Ue Ud ike 
pda fee dtattr ae want chara: | aifamaifa WTa We: HUCAAG: 1201 
fears as ama aa arm dear Herat aaron at: 1221 
a a: Geleit ae cet ffeadtdar ais aaet gat auiene gamiay 122! 
He aeart pet sava adadiirieal arpmepad at: & ai Wa: 1231 
Sa sterrad Heel URAee Sleds SerreHal APeraoReMs erAISeATa: 11 8 II 
"O wise Suta, now recount the blessed stories of the descent of the Almighty Lord who 
enacts at will sports of various kinds by dint of His Yogamaya (divine potency). (18) We, for 
our part are never sated with hearing the exploits of the illustrious Lord, which are more and 
more delightful to hear at every step to those listeners who have a taste for sweet things. (19) 
Indeed the divine Sri Krsna, who had disguised Himself in a human semblance, performed 
with His elder brother, Sri Balarama, feats that were beyond human power. (20) Having come 
to know that the age of Kali has arrived, we are assembled in this holy retreat sacred to Sri 
Visnu for a long sacrificial session and have thus got ample time to hear the stories of Sri 
Hari. (21) This age of Kali takes away the purity of mens' heart andis thus difficult to conquer. 
Anxious as we are to get over this Kali, Providence has arranged our meeting with you, even 
as a pilot is shown to those who seek to cross a turbulent sea. (22) Since Sri Krsna, the 
Master of Yoga, the friend of the Brahmanas and the Protector of virtue, has leftfor His abode 
(in Heaven), tell us in whom has righteousness sought protection now.(23) 


Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the story relating to the Naimisa forest, 
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita (the book of the God-realized souls). 


PISSED 


1 +A 


af 





; 
be 
pe 


4 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 2 


Ree RRR RRR RR tee ee eT Se eRe Re Re RRR Re RL RE Re Be Re Re eRe Be Be eRe Be Be Be We We Be Be Be Be He Hr Hr He Br Ke Be Br Ke We wy 


31g fedlarseara: 


Discourse Il 
Glory of the Lord's narrative and of Devotion to Him 
ond said 
sm wuedest fast 9 wreditt: 1 sfaqea aaeet «89 - Napa 2 
Vyasa says : Ugrasrava (the son of Romaharsana) was transported with joy to hear 
this question of the holy Brahmanas. He welcomed their words and commenced his 
discourse.(1) 


Sr Ve Sr sr er 





Yd sald 
aq yasadaqadddnd sara fara sea! 
wit aad adishrest adyreqd 9 afrardisfet 1 2 | 
a: wamanhaesfaantenenendtantatadttat AAS 
Gao Mourisse TUN A aragqqqaaia WS AAA! 3 | 
Aa ae Ci eet Gea OT a aI x | 
Suta said : When the sage Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa; lit., one Who was'born in an island) 
saw his son (Sukadeva) going away all alone with the intention of leading the life of a recluse, 
even though he had not yet been invested with the sacred thread and had, therefore, had 
no occasion to perform any secular or religious duties, he was agitated at the thought of 
separation from him and called out, "Hullo, my son!" At that time it was the trees (on the 
roadside) that responded on his behalf, filled as they were by his presence. | bow to that sage 
(Sukadeva), who (being one with the Universal Spirit) has access to the hearts of all. (2) 
Srimad Bhagavata is a mysterious Purana; it possesses a glory of its own and constitutes 
the very essence of all the Vedas. It is a unique light illuminating the spiritual realities for 
those worldly men who seek to go beyond the darkness of ignorance. It was out of 
compassion for such men that this teacher of sages, Sukadeva, uttered this Purana. | take 
refuge in that son of Vyasa. (3) After bowing to the divine sages Narayana and Nara, the 
Supreme Person (Sri Krsna), Goddess Saraswati (the goddess of speech) and the sage 


Vyasa, one should then recite Srimad Bhagavata (which enables one to conquer the cycle 
of birth and death as well as all the aberrations of the mind). (4) 


Te: Me Yess vatawianged | ae: Hosa Aan |yeltefe 1 & | 
a a Gai a eat act wfnceant| steaerafaea aaissa aareiefa | & | 
amet Wald wea: wath: saa awd AH WU aetari w | 
ad: wafea: Yer fagadanerg 4:1 arenedefe wa oa ua fe haem ct 
aa guade seatsufaraenead | ater efenrmre ral ors fe Ga: 1 e | 
we Atsasifieiat sida aad sie acatrare aet ade afi: 1201 
aad aadfacerd «= aga alfa UMM «eff sera 1221 
cee = Aa ANAT | ORAS ae areetray 122 | 
oa: Offsite: auismfauma:iaqieae 4d | dfahediareur 23! 
qed TAR Wa areal Ufa: | Maer: ailfdacrs ea: yoass Frere 1ee 
aqqeae «= ort: «doar fecha allachedel ail A halen 1241 


Dis. 2.] 
BOOK ONE S) 
Or Br Br Wr Br Se Br Br Hr Hr Hr 
SS BB BR Be Me Be BB Be Re Be RR Be Re He BR ARE REA He Re RE Be Be Be he he te he He he er Be Pe Rr eRe ERE EREARAAAARH 


cc Sere neve done well in asking mea question which is conducive to the welfare of 
Sat » fOr your enquiry relates to Sri Krsna, a topic which completely purifies the heart.(5) 

at alone Is the highest duty of men, from which follows devotion to Sri Krsna—a devotion 
which is absolutely motiveless and knows no obstruction, and as a result of which the soul 
realizes the all-blissful God and thus attains its object.(6) Contact established with Bhagavan 
Vasudeva (Sri Krsna) through Devotion speedily awakens dispassion and immediate 
knowledge. (7) A duty well performedis but labour lost, ifit fails to generate love forthe stories 
of Bhagavan Viswaksena (Sri Krsna). (8) Riches cannot be the end of Dharma (virtue), 
which culminates in absolution or final beatitude. Even so wealth is a means of earning 
religious merit; Sensuous enjoyment has not been recognized as its consummation.(9) 
Again, gratification of the senses is not the end of sensuous enjoyment; keeping the body 
and soul together is the only use of sensuous enjoyment. And enquiry into Truth is the object 
of keeping the body and soul together and not the attainment of heaven etc., through the 
performance of pious acts.(10) The knowers of Truth declare knowledge alone as the 
Reality—that: knowledge which does not admit of duality (the distinction of subject and 
object), in other words, which is indivisible and one without a second, and which is called 
by different names such as Brahma (the Absolute), Paramatma (the Supreme Spirit or 
Oversoul) and Bhagavan (the Deity). (11) Sages who are full of faith perceive that Truth as 
their own Self in their own heart through Devotion coupled with Knowledge and Dispassion 
and acquired through hearing (of Srimad Bhagavata etc.). (12) Therefore, O noblest of 
Brahmanas, the consummation of duties efficiently performed by men according to their 
respective Varna (grade in society) and Asrama (stage in life) lies in securing the pleasure 
of Sri Hari. (13) Hence with undivided mind one should ever hear and sing the praises of, 
meditate upon and worship the Lord, who is the protector of His devotees. (14) The learned, 
who are armed with the sword of constant meditation on Him cut asunder the hard knot of 
Karma therewith. Who, then, would:not take delight in His stories? (15) 


Ww: WIA  araeanaea: | areata fam: quadtefetaund 12s 
Vad WHA HM: Wasavnlds: | eran DAs faetia Tecaary 129! 
vsape fia wmaddamiwagquaath afedafa afset ec 
dal wide: «Mewes Aiad wdetfag fed aa seller 1ee! 
Wi seat Wash: | Weatdiagt Wrage Wad lol 
fad  eeaatufoedt adds: i ated are await gs ware 1221 
adt a maa fiat ke aa yaliarmead wNala Hawa 1221 


By resorting to holy places of pilgrimage, O Brahmanas, one obtains the privilege of 
waiting on exalted souls and thereby successively develops a desire for hearing the stories 
of Bhagavan Vasudeva (Sri Krsna), faith in and a relish for such stories. (16) Sri Krsna is 
a disinterested friend of the virtuous and His praises sanctify those who listen to or sing them. 
He abides in the heart of those who hear His stories and uproots the evil propensities of their 
mind. (17) When the evil propensities are well-nigh eradicated through the constant service 
of His devotees (or the day-to-day study of Srimad Bhagavata), there wells up abiding . 
devotion to the Lord of excellent fame. (18) The mind is then freed from passions such as 
lust and greed, which have their root in Rajas and Tamas, and established in Sattva, attains 
purity. (19) In this way, when one is rid of all worldly attachment through loving devotion to 

the Lord, and the mind is filled with delight, one realizes the truth relating to God as a matter 
of course.(20)The momenta man sees Godas his very self the knot of ignorance in his heart 
is broken asunder, all his doubts are dispersed and the entire stock of his Karmas gets 





— 
— 
— 
— 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 


Br Be Re Br Ge Re Be Re Re Re Re Re Be BEB AY BY BH BR BE BY RR Br BY Hr By Hg, 


eae — orf tr or 
eek EEA REALE AAA LL EA LANL AHH SET 


liquidated. (21) That is why with utmost delight the wise constantly practise devotion to Lor 
Vasudeva which purifies the soul. (22) 


a we sf spaionedde: oe Ger Uh see a 
Roaned Bifakte da: Fafa a WE AAO |: (R23! 


Urfsiarereutt TRAST ARTETA A RTSRTAAL 1 RY 
Qt  ywAalsert anata | ae faye Aaa Hea Asq aN 1241 
ayaa eeu fear | yatta) aaron: ATT aaa QAGTE: 1261 
wes: weiter asta aifigyrstenda = faretadsstara: 1201 
arama «Ag aT ET: Farge ATT aaa: fepat: 121 
amauta (TRE CT Fae raf aTqeaT fet: 128 
Q Wad Basa  WaMiemaal ! deagal ara qomampn fay: 1301 
am fasta wy Wearalsrsfas anata fags fags: 13¢1 
am @aledt afaataya: waa | ara waits fear ye A AM GAL 1321 


ara qUaatasrasttarae: ahiag Ast qe yay TAI 133 1 
Maa Bad Gls A HlHAalas: | Stead cafadeaieg 13% | 
Sfa SAS Mad ASN GRASS Aled Tee Afslaoreas fedaiseara: | 2 I 

Sattva, Rajas and Tamasare the three attributes or modes of Prakrti (Primordial Matter); 
assuming these for the preservation, creation and destruction of this universe, the one 
Supreme Person severally bears the names of Hari (Visnu), Virihci (Brahma) and Hara 
(Siva). Yet the supreme good of men flows from Sri Hari alone, whose body consists of pure 
sativa. (23) Justas smoke Is higher (more active) than wood, which is an earthly substance 
(and hence inert and dull), and higher than smoke is fire, which is associated with many 
sacrificial acts recommended in the three Vedas, even so Rajas (the principle of motion or 
activity) is Superior to Tamas (darkness or inertia) and even higher than Rajas is Sattva (the 
principle of light or knowledge), with the help of which one is able to realize God. (24) Of yore 
Sages worshipped for their salvation Bhagavan Visnu alone, who is pure Sattva personified. 
Even now those who follow in their footsteps likewise get qualified for blessedness. (25) 
Those seeking liberation worship Bhagavan Narayana and His part manifestations, all of 
whom are so gentle in aspect, leaving alone the lords of evil spirits (Bhairava and others), 
who possess a terrible form, though not reviling them. (26) Those, however, who possess 
a Rajasika or Tamasika disposition and are seekers of wealth, power and progeny, worship 
the manes, evil spirits and the lords of created beings, possessing as they do a character 
similar to theirs. (27) The Vedas ultimately treat of Bhagavan Vasudeva; the sacrifices 
themselves aim at the attainment of Vasudeva; the various Yogas eventually lead to 
Vasudeva; and all sorts of rituals too have their end in Vasudeva. (28) All wisdom has its 
culmination in Vasudeva; all austere penance has Vasudeva for its goal; all virtue aims at 
the realization of Vasudeva and all destinies culminate in Vasudeva. (29) Although the Lord 
is Himself beyond Prakrti (Primordial Matter), and its three modes (Sattva etc.), yet it was 
He who evolved this universe at the beginning (of creation) through His own Maya (Prakrti); 
which consists of the aforesaid three Gunas and is both real (in its phenomenal aspect) and 
unreal (ontologically speaking). (30) Having entered into these three Gunas, that have been 
evolved by the aforesaid Maya, He appears as possessed of these Gunas, though 
essentially He Is Consciousness personified. (31)Just as fire, though really one, appears as 
many when abiding in the different logs of wood that manifest it, so does God, the soul of 
the universe, (though essentially one) appear as many, when manifested in different 





Dis. 3] BOOK ONE 


Br Br Br Br Br Br Br Br Hr Hr Br Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr 
Se Br Br Be Bee Heh Hr hr he BH He He HHH HH Ere Be Be Ke He Kr Ke Hr Ke Me Ke Ke Re He Ke He He Hr He Br Ke We Be Ke Ke Br Ke Hr Ke He Ke Ke Ke Hr Ke Ke Se Se Fr Ke He Ht 


beings.(32) Entering (as the soul) the various material bodies created by Himself out of the 
various evolutes of the three Gunas such as the subtle elements, the senses and the mind, 
the Lord enjoys the sense-objects appropriate to such bodies. (33) It is He, again, who 
creates the different worlds and descending by way of sport in different species such as the 


gods, the human beings and the lower forms of life, protects all the beings through His Sattva 
or goodness. (34) 


Thus ends the second discourse, forming part of the story relating to the Naimisa 
forest, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


Phat hth 
PII SS es 


BAMA Fata searea: 


Discourse III 


The Lord's Avataras or Descents into the world of matter 
Yd sad 


aye | Uked «0S TTaTeatiafR: | aad «= SealHoal «= lenfergarar 2 | 

qari ware aiast $= facaa: | afigerasnerdia san faaget ofa: 1 2 | 

aMatadest: chieadt stale: ide wad ea fag araghia 3 | 

URawel SUAS TaAAT ACA S YS AAT | 
aearesrauntarttach AAA HUSlead | Y | 
Warman fan dhmerqiaqaRiRa gr  dafddeqes: | & | 
Sita says : In the beginning (of creation), with the desire of evolving the different worlds, 

the Lord assumed the form of Purusa (the Primal Person) consisting of sixteen component 
principles (viz., the ten sense-organs, the five elements and mind) and constituted of Mahat 
(the cosmic intellect) etc. (I)While He (the aforesaid Purusa) was displaying His sleep of 
Samadhi (absorption into or communion with the Self) reposing on the causal waters, there ~ 
appeared from the lake of His navel a lotus wherefrom sprang up Brahma, the lord of 
progenitors of the world. (2) Itis on the disposition of His limbs that the various worlds stand 
superimposed; that is the most exalted form of the Lord, consisting of pure Sattva or 
goodness. (3) The Yogis behold that form by means of their divine eye, wondertul as it Is 
with its thousands of feet, thighs, arms and faces; it has thousands of heads, ears, eyes 
and noses and is resplendent with thousands of diadems, robes and ear-rings. (4) This 
form of the Lord (popularly known by the name of Narayana) is the imperishable seed of 
the various Avataras and the abode to which they all return (after accomplishing their 
purpose). It is by a ray (e.g., Marici) of His ray (Brahma) that gods, human beings and the 
lower forms of life are created. (5) 


@ wa sad ta: aa ain: i ae get Ae seaednaitent! « | 
fil dq Aaa Widen wei seiterqued aay: let ay:1 | 
qdaquart a waa A dea Aadaas AeHel aut aa: 1 ¢ | 
qi aianereatt || AETaOTat | yeatssattagaranta get a: 1 < 
wae: afar ama fee: wlefagr Narre 9 aret aranmfatioiay 101 





: — ab.ea Se Oe es he >. —— bi) 
“ j ae > o Sa. a ™ ES 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3 


RRR Re Re RR BA Re RY RE RE Re Re Be We Me Be Te Re He We Be Br Be We ge Me Be Be Me We We Be He Br Rr eRe Br Re Br Re He Hew yy 


8 


LQVVRKK AKAN LK KSA KH AKAN SAH KALA Kee LI wr er 


ae same ga: WaStqaar siifacntroala seretiged Gira 18k 
ad: Wa aipet edgisensmead! a arate: AUT RURATARArATL 122 1 
apa teat a Weld sea: lata ad shot Tals 1231 
ssfifuaifaar Sa aad ula ag: 1 weaves A RATT ev! 
eG a we We Mawleerga area «Aaa | ATR 
areata TIO a Mot yy UAleet fay: ee 
mad ged wiermmda walsmaanraeien ale fea ee 
aat 4|aRe 0 fawedisaieicen = aidareeet |= Heer 181 
West «aah mae ae: iced aaa: ysellaqhatasaz ieee 
sad SISA URS CISA. OMI aaa: afadt P:aarmenrae 120 | 
qd: GA Wid: Aaa WNL! ah Aaa: Aa sBI TalscaAera: 1221 
Acasa: Ganifantdan | washed ash alavad: aie 
Ualtiaa fasted afer sma sartiwmanemniaf yal | wTarecee 1231 
dd: mol BNad Umer gqidesiqel aAMeMga: almeqg vfaeia ex 
Saat Tea RIT Ust | Stara ferwyjersratl Ara chfeensitrafa: 1241 


lt was this very Lord (Narayana) who, first manifesting Himself as the Kumaras (Sanaka 
and others), took the form of four Brahmanas and observed the hard vow of perpetual 
celibacy. (6) During the second Avatara (manifestation) the Lord of all sacrifices assumed 
the form of the divine Boar with a view to lifting the earth that had sunk into the lowest depths 
of the ocean, in order to proceed with the work of creation. (7) Appearing in the person of 
the celestial sage (Narada) in His third manifestation as a Rsi, He taught the Gospel of the 
Vaisnavas (the Pancaratra), which inculcates the method of doing things in such a way that 
they may cease to bind us. (8) During His fourth manifestation, in which He was born of 
Dharma’s better half (Murti), He appeared in the dual form of the sages Nara and Narayana 
and practised severe penance with perfect control of the mind and senses. (9) His fifth 
manifestation was known by the name of Kapila, the lord of the Siddhas (perfect ones), who 
taught to the sage Asuri the Sankhya system of philosophy, that determines the nature of 
the fundamental principles and had been cast into oblivion through the ravages of time.(10) 
During His sixth manifestation He appeared as a son of the sage Atri at the entreaty of 
Anasuya (Atri's wife) and taught the Science of the Self to king Alarka, Prahlada and 
others.(11)Thereafter in the seventh manifestation He was born Akati, the spouse of Ruci 
(one of the lords of created beings), as Yaijfia; assisted by His sons Yama and the other gods 
He held the office of Indra during the first Manwantara, presided over by Swayambhuva 
Manu. (12) In the eighth manifestation (as Rsabhadeva) the all-pervading Lord was born of 
queen Meru Devi, the spouse of king Nabhi, and taught by His own example the mode of life 
of the Paramahamsas (enlightened souls who have transcended all bounds of morality and 
have no duty to perform), whichis adored by men belonging to all the four ASramas or stages 
of life.(13) During His ninth descent, at the solicitation. of the seers, He took the form of a king 
(Prthu) and made the earth (in the form of a cow) yield ail its products (which she had sO 
far withheld), and hence this particular manifestation of the Lord proved most propitious to 
the world.(14) At the end of the Caksusa Manwantara, when all the three worlds were being 
deluged by the ocean, He took the form of a fish (during His tenth manifestation) and rescued 
the future Vaivaswata Manu (the lord of the present Manwantara), picking him up on the 








Dish Si) BOOK ONE 


We Be FEMME RAE BEACH BE BORE REE REE We BEBE ME WEBER He REM HE He HEH, 9 
earth, which had been transformedinto a boat. (15) During His eleventh manifestation, when 
the gods and the demons began churning the ocean (with Mount Mandara), the Lord 
assumed the form of a tortoise and supported Mount Mandara on His back.(16) In His twelfth 
descent He took the form of Dhanwantari (and emerged from the ocean with a jar full of 
nectar ); while during His thirteenth manifestation He assumed the form of an enchanting 
woman and gave the gods the nectar to drink, keeping the others (the demons) spell-bound 
all the while. (17) In His fourteenth manifestation He took the form of a man-lion and tore 
with His claws the bosom of the most powerful demon king (Hiranyakasipu) even as a maker 
of straw mats would tear a reed. (18) Assuming the form of a dwarf in His fifteenth descent 
He visited the sacrificial performance of Bali (the demon king) and asked him for three paces 
of land with the covert intention of robbing him of (his kingdom of) heaven. (19) In His 
sixteenth descent (as ParaSurama) He found that the kings had become inimical to the 
Brahmanas; enraged at this He rid the earth of the Ksatriya race as many as twenty-one 
times. (20) Then, in His seventeenth descent (as Vyasa), He was born of Satyavati through 
the sage Parasara and, finding the people of poor intelligence, divided the tree of Veda into 
many branches.(21) Then again (in the eighteenth descent) He assumed the form of a ruler 
of men (Sri Rama) with a view to accomplishing the purpose of the gods and performed 
heroic feats like bridging the ocean and so.on. (22) In the nineteenth and the twentieth the 
Lord was born among the Vrsnis as Balarama and Sri Krsna and relieved the earth of its 
burden. (23) When Kali sets in, He will be born in Magadha (North Bihar) as Buddha, son 
of Ajana, with a view to deluding the enemies of gods. (24) Then again, towards the end of 
the Kali age, when the kings mostly turn into robbers, the Lord of the universe will take 
descent from (a Brahmana named) Visnuyasa as Lord Kalki. (25) 
staat WaeaTsaet: «Aaa: | aerfaafea: Hen: Aa: A: Asal: 1261 
a «HAal Wal WAU Aehta: iment: ad Bla UIeTGAIMT 1201 
Ud Dhol: Ta: HI War Ba sake sth Ysaha AT ATI! 
TH UW Wad @ Wea At 1 aa Wao Vaan g-aaaeqedd 12° 
Even as thousands of rivulets flow from a lake that never dries, so there are countless 
descents of the Lord, whois a storehouse of Sattva (power, wisdom, etc.) ,O Brahmanas.(26) 
The sages and seers, the Manus, the gods, the sons of the Manus, the Prajapatis (lords of 
created beings), in fact, all those who possess great power, are rays of Sri Hari. (27) All 
these, however, are either part manifestations or rays of the Supreme Person; while Sri 
Krsna is the Lord Himself. All these Avataras or manifestations of the Lord appear from age 


to age and protect the world when it is oppressed by the enemies of Indra. (28) This story 
of the Lord's descents is a secret. The man who devoutly recites it every evening and 


morning with a pious mind is rid of all suffering. (29) 
wig wad gece faa: | mar@ifatad Tealfefsaht 130 | 
amr aufa water wal uftiatsfeiua sBR qacanifaarafsiy: 1321 
a: Uk TESTE! Aguada «= Sitat | aeTHa: 132 | 
aaa oes | fate 060 efacti afeaerissat qa sft ageaRtty 1321 
aaroral zat art aad afa:i aaa wala facta we aéiad 13x! 
w wa anit dade alauara wt maa aaqenf gad: 1341 


This gross manifestation (in the form of the material universe) of the Lord, who is 
essentially spiritual and has no material form, has been evolved by the products of His Maya 
such as Mahat (the principle of Cosmic Intelligence) and so on, and superimposed on the 


[564] B. M. 3— 





10 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA oe ere S(t DISKG 
Lord Himself. (80) Even as men of poor wits assume the existence of the clouds in etherand 
of dustiness in the air, (even though the clouds, as a matter of fact, hang in the air while 
dustiness belongs to the particles of earth,) so the ignorant superimpose the gross 
phenomenal universe on the Self, who is the seer. (31) Beyond this material form is a subtle 
(and unmanifest) form of the Lord, which is constituted of undeveloped Gunas (Gunas that 
have not assumed distinctive shapes) and is neither open to perception nor to hearing. It is 
this (subtle or astral) body which is termed as the Jiva or soul (because the soul seems to 
enter it or is identified with it) and goes through repeated births or transmigrations. (32) It 
is through nescience that the aforesaid astral and material bodies are superimposed on the 
Self. When this superimposition is removed through self-knowledge, that very moment takes 
place the realization of Brahma. (33) The knowers of Truth are aware that when the Lord's 
sportful Maya in the shape of Knowledge withdraws, the Jiva becomes one with Brahma and 
gets established in the glory of the Self. (34) In such terms do the wise describe the descents 
as well as the doings of the Lord, who is the Ruler of all hearts and is really without birth or 
actions; for His descents and doings are a guarded secret of the Vedas. (35) 


a a 3a fayanucle: gasaatt 3a aardsie 
Wag Urdied sida: weahie faafa wequrar: 1361 
1 mea asf age we pads adit: | 
art = weft) teenie: «= at «= Aecraifara: 1301 
a aq oq: val we geddida waigar: | 
SSAA Aadeaqaea Wsid ACIETTAN 132 1 
3% FM Wad si  aAgradcdstaaataayy | 
‘gata daimenata 4 wt wa: URad Sa: 12g 
The pastimes ofthe Lord are always purposive; by mere sport He creates, preserves and 
reabsorbs this universe, but never gets attached to it. Abiding unperceived in the heart of 
all living beings, He seems to enjoy the objects of the mind and the five senses as the ruler 
of all the six. But being the Master of His Self He remains aloof from these objects (they fail 
to bind Him). (36) No stupid creature can know by any dialectical skill the names and forms 
or doings of the Lord, revealed by His thought or word (the Vedas), any more than an ignorant 
man can understand the performance of a conjurer, accomplished through his will and 
speech. (37) The power of the Lord who wields the discus in His hand is infinite; though the 
Maker of this world, He remains ever beyond it. He alone can know His ways who inhales 
the fragrance of His lotus-feet through constant and sincere devotion to them. (38) Now you 
blessed ones are lucky indeed, since you in this life and in this world (which is full of 
impediments and obstacles) thus cultivate that undivided love to Bhagavan Vasudeva (Sri 


Krsna), the Lord of the entire universe, by virtue of which one never fal ini i 
vortex of birth and death.(39) : alls again into the terrible 


SAM AM aot elena Rela «= eR Taf: Ivo! 

Piste wre eel GRA Ueidee Wea Yaad am ixel 

adeckeemt Uk Uk AAI A q Maa wet wife Isei 

safes «Meta uit «|= oan: i et weraroma eiaafefs: ae xe! 

aol | Aseete = yuromeniseptfea: aa. aihtedt «fam fawiisifidera: iv 

ae Med aa ffaseeqerdi aise a: srafaents aeneita aoa ive 
ad ASMTad AE Wee Medea NIE ArsraoRea Pataseara: 11 3 





Dis. 4 ]: 
a. J se BOOK-ONE: > -:- 11 
POSSESS SESS SE SESE R R RET Be Be Be Re Be Be Re RR RRR Re BERR RHA RE RRR RR AR ROH RRR RRR LARA RAAT AA AAR ACR 


The divine seer, Vedavyasa, composed this Purana, known by the name of Srimad 
Bhagavata, which stands on a par with the Vedas and contains the stories of the Lord of 
excellent renown. (40) He taught this blessed, benedictory and great Purana, for the highest 
good of mankind, to his son (Sukadeva), whois the foremost among Self-realized souls. (41) 
This represents the very cream extracted from all the Vedas and Itihasas (epics). Suka in 
his turn recited it to the great king Pariksit, who sat on the bank of,the Ganga, surrounded 
by the foremost sages, with a vow to fast unto death. Now that Sri Krsna has left for His 
(divine) abode with piety, wisdom and all, this sun-like Purana has made its appearance for 
the benefit of those who have been blinded (by the darkness of ignorance) in this Kali age. 
While the glorious sage Sukadeva, O Brahmanas, was reciting this Purana there (on the 
bank of the Ganga), | too was present and learnt it by his grace. | will now recite the same 
to you even as | have learnt it, according to the best of my lights. (42—45) 


Thus ends the third discourse, forming part of the story relating to the Naimisa 
forest, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


sek Pret PRT TS 
PII SSES eS 


BAYA ATasearea: 
Discourse IV 


A sense of frustration overtakes Vedavyasa 
ONY Sa 


sft gant dea wit dhfafom ge: Houta: a sega: Bcnisseiy | kl 
Vedavyasa says : When Sita spoke thus, Saunaka, who was a student of Rgveda and 
the head of a large seminary,and was the oldest of the sages assembled for that long 
sacrificial session, applauded him and said:(1) 


sich Sara 

Ga Ua AMT aq AN aqdt Ati Hat Wtadh qual ade WIakegH: | 2 | 
afer at sakt wa at Qa Be qa: wales: Hem: Fear aieat gh: 1 3 
qa Ua vent angatdenccs: | wardafeist at qs saad i x | 

earnest cat feat ukegt gra faa 

adie gaat Wat ageariear eitg set a gq Ure fefernes: 1 & 1 
muMefad: Ut: AANA: Hessen | Saryestsalsae, TaTaTea | & | 
ai a ucdae wef wel tare: HAYA SAM Tt Aft: | | 
aq mae fe gy getirmisaad semeiedeiigdeeema. ¢ | 
ahi a MeVitadtay | Ta ST Hes cHatfor a qorife a: 1 < 1 
a ae He a eal: Tg Wrage: | wratafast §— AgaaTgenfertefserH_ | Yo | 

anfa acieenaaed: rar eta wii wea: 

at wu dh: framq geet gqaudtcegael aeraia: 128! 





: 
‘ 


SRIMAD’BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4 


a, cawnennwesarkrenennne Set RRO E ROROE SOR BOR EE ROR ROR RE ROR ROME RA TOR MERE ROR OR KR Rete Hy 
ry . : (Ee 


fam wise wad Ya A saRVeIHaTAT SAT: | 
Stafa arene urd wata fafa gpa: mea 1221 
aad a: anaea ost alee fesai aa at fag areal Sasa Sraald 1831 


Saunaka said: Sita, youare highly blessed and the foremost of expositors. Pray, repeat 
to us the same sacred story of the Lord as the divine sage Suka recited (to king Pariksit).(2) 
In which particular Yuga (aeon) was the discourse held and at what place, and what was the 
occasion for it ? And at whose instance did the sage Krsna (Vedavyasa) compose this 
Samhita (large collection of poems) ? (3) His son (Sukadeva) is a great Yogi (mystic), viewing 
all alike, in whose eye diversity has ceased to exist, whose mind is exclusively set upon God 
and who has awoke from the sleep of worldliness. He remains incognito and is therefore 
taken for a stupid fellow. (4) On perceiving the sage Vyasa (closely) following his son (who 
was retiring to the forest as a recluse) the ladies (who happened to be bathing in a pond on 
the roadside),covered themselves out of modesty, even though the sage had clothes on, 
while they took no notice of his son (who was stark naked). Noticing this strange behaviour 
on their part the sage asked them to account for it; thereupon the ladies told him that he was 
still alive to the difference of sex, but not so his son, whose vision was faultless (who 
perceived no difference at all ). (5) How did the citizens of Hastinapura come to recognize 
him when he visited the Kuru-Jangala country and went about that city like one mad, dumb 
and dull ? (6) And, how did the royal sage Pariksit (a scion of Pandu) come to have a 
talk with that sage, in the course of which the latter recited this Bhagavata-Purana ? (7) 
That highly blessed sage (Sukadeva) waits at the door of householders to sanctify their 
abode only for such time as one takes in milking a cow. (8) They say king Pariksit 
(Abhimanyu's son), O Sita, was counted among the foremost devotees of the Lord. Kindly 
narrate to us the story of his most wonderful birth and doings. (9) Why did that emperor, 
who served to enhance the glory of the Pandavas, take his seat on the bank of the Ganga 
with a vow to fast unto death, spurning his imperial fortune ? (10) Enemies bowed at his 
footstool, bringing to him riches for their own security. It is really strange, dear SUta, how 
did that valiant prince, while he was so young, take it into his head to relinquish that fortune, 
which is so difficult to renounce, as well as his life. (11) Men who are solely devoted to the 
Lord of excellent fame live, not for their own sake, but only for (promoting) the welfare, 
affluence and prosperity of the world. Why, then, did he cast off his body, which was the 
support of other beings, in a spirit of aversion ? (12) Therefore, pray, tell us all that we have 
asked you on this occasion; for we know you have mastered the entire range of sacred lore 
barring, of course, the Vedas. (13) 





Yd sara 
eat AST te Sis Ta | A: UE arent mea Bt: 1e%! 
a adie sage we afaifafames: sre sfed vfanues eu 
Wea: A AM: Aietermea | aedeant sm yfa atk aqrieai 
Utert A Wart ks A cepa! SIA BAAN: 12191 
gums sam diet yfiéer aaeratiadauisrron aeeat feaaaraaae 1ecl 
Ute Hye wat diet ate seme  aatc  agider ee 
ROL AMNAARA «aI «say: | seTagT CUS «aa Se 1201 
arden: Us: arm staf: afa:iaaroaa waat ffenal aaerqa ize 
AAA AAT Aer SUT Of: | siterageonar «6 faar A treet: 1221 


Dis. 4-] TA BOOK ONE. «~~ 13 


wr Br Br Se Wr Wr Ky ey Ar By Ay Br 
BeBe Re RM BE BER Be BER RRR RE RE RE RE RE RE RE LEME RE RE RE RE RERE RE RE BER RR eRe Re Me Re RRR REE RE RE RELL RERERE RE REE RE MERERE RELA RERER BERR 





a Wt ww ag @ @ aerate | fare: whreahseldeara anhetstert 123 | 
qa We sa dette yeieieri wd ce war Sa: PITTA: 121 


Suta replied : In the Dwapara age, the third Yuga of the present Caturyugi (the period of 
four Yugas from Satya to Kali) the great Yogi, Vyasa, who is a part manifestation of Sri Hari, 
was born of Satyavati (who had sprung from the seed of Uparicara Vasu) through the sage 
Parasara. (14) One day, after taking his bath in the sacred water of the Saraswati he sat ina 
lonely place just at sunrise. (15) The sage, who had an unfailing eye and could read the past 
as well as the future, saw how by flux of time, which passed unnoticed, there ensued in every 
age an overlapping of duties, as a result of which the potency of material objects had 
diminished and people had grown irreverent, weak, dull-witted and short-lived. Finding the 
people so unlucky, the sage began to investigate by means of his divine insight as 
to wherein lay the welfare of men belonging to all the grades of society and stages of 
life. (16—18) Perceiving that Vedic sacrifices, which are performed through the agency of four 
priests (viz., the Hota, the Adhwaryu, the Udgata and the Brahma’ ) are the purifiers of men, 
he divided the one Veda into four for the continuance of sacrifices. (19) He thus separated the 
four Vedas under the names of Rgveda, Yajurveda, Samaveda and Atharvaveda. And the 
Itinasas and the Puranas are called the fifth Veda. (20) Of these Paila received (was taught) 
Rgveda, the seer Jaimini (was the first who) learnt how to chant the Samaveda, while 
VaiSampayana was the only one who mastered the Yajurveda. (21) The sage Sumantu, son 
of Daruna, acquired proficiency in the Atharvaveda; while my (Stta's) father, Romaharsana, 
gained mastery over the Itihasas and Puranas. (22) These latter sages (Paila and others) 
divided their respective Vedas into more than one branches. In this way through their pupils, 
pupils' pupils and the pupils of these latter the four Vedas came to be divided into so many 
branches. (23) The divine Vyasa, who is compassionate to men of poor wits (evidently) did so 
in order that even the dull-witted might be able to retain the Vedas (in parts). (24) 


Gates oat 2a afmreniadsafa gent sa wa swafeg 
Sit ARCA PAT Atal Pay 124 I 

Ui Wada Wal wai Safa fan: | Galatea aal Aldea ad: 12e1 

aisrdieayed: 9 Wane? 9 _- Yat | faachay fafamer se Stara eifad iu! 

gamed fe ua wala  atiswa: ima Peictea Weld Aeraqyi2c! 

andes emda  deid:iqad aq walle alastietteaa i2¢! 

aaa aa a set mien dart fay: ist = sarsifa «= Mela TTA: 1301 

fe a armada eat a sant refed: | fat: Wasa aA Wa Wea: 132! 

aaa faourmd wae fae: | HO ANISM see 1321 

aaa dee sae ya: igre = fafsaane qegferdy_ 1331 

fet SATA FET TRACE Shea MHA ASAT AGeS ATA 

Seeing that the women, the Sudras and the fallen Brahmanas, Ksatriyas and Vaisyas 

were debarred even from hearing the Vedas, and did not know how to perform acts that are 


* The function of a Hota is to invoke the gods by reciting the Rgveda; that of an Adhwaryu Is to measure the sacrificial 
ground, to build the altar, to prepare the vessels, to fetch wood and water, to light the fire while repeating the Yajurveda. and 
so on; that of an Udgata is to chant the Samaveda and that of a Brahma to supervise the sacrificial performance and set 


right mistakes. 








s 
P 


ti tt te ee i 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ['Dis.-5 


Se Be ke Be Bee Be Be Be Re Be Re eRe Re Re ER AR RRR RE ERE RE RETR RT RT RR RE BRT Re AT AY Re RT Be Be BAT AE EM Me Re BSE TBE ST HE SE SY ST ST SY Be Br Br Br Br Br Sr Hr er Hy 


conducive to good, the sage (Vedavyasa) was good enough to compose the Mahabharata 
epic in order that women and others too might attain blessedness through the same. (25) 
Even though Vyasa ever remained whole-heartedly engaged in doing good to living 
creatures, his heart wes not satisfied with it, O Brahmanas ! (26) Feeling uneasy at heart, 
the sage, who knew the secret of Dharma (righteousness), sat reflecting in a secluded spot 
on the holy bank of the Saraswati, and said to himself thus:— (27) “Observing the vow of 
celibacy | reverently studied theVedas, served the elders and worshipped the sacrificial fires 
and honestly followed their precepts. (28) | have also revealed the purport of the Vedas 
through the Mahabharata, in which even women, the Sudras and others can find their 
respective duties and other things explained. (29) Though | stand foremost among those 
who are preeminent in sacred knowledge, and possess uncommon powers too, my soul it 
seems has not yet realized its true nature (oneness with Brahma). (30) Is it because | have 
not yet fully expounded the virtues that enable one to attain the Lord? It is these virtues that 
are loved by God-realized saints and they alone are dear to Lord Visnu Himself." (31) While 
the sage Krsnadwaipayana (Vyasa) was thus sorrowing with the consciousness that 
something was wanting in him, the sage Narada called at his hermitage already referred 
to.(32) When the sage Vedavyasa saw Narada come, he instantly rose to receive him and 
duly offered worship to the celestial sage, who was adored even by the gods. (33) 


Thus ends the fourth discourse, forming part of the story relating to the Naimisa 
forest, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita 


SARIS 
PIRI SESS 


BA USAISeATa: 
Discourse V 


Glory of singing the Lord's praises and an account of 
Devarsi Narada's previous life 
Ud saa 
Ha ad Waa sa gqeasar: 1 cafe: se fast atonath: wafeai et 


Suta Says : When comfortably seated,lute in hand, the celestial sage (Narada) of 
extensive renown spoke to the Brahmana sage Vedavyasa, who sat beside him, as if 
smiling (at his disconsolation).(1) 

Rg Sad 


arene) ARTE Wad: 9 cpfsercat | ake atk sen aaa wa ari 2} 
fagntad qaersrat a Heegd ada Und aed waletaftaferi 3 | 
Renta. A adesel Area! sremfe Weraiasapds Sl wai x | 


Narada said : Most blessed Vyasa (son of Parasara), | hope your physical self as well 
as your mental self are satisfied in themselves. (2)! am sure all that you wanted to know has 
been fully realized, since you produced the most wonderful Mahabharata which fully deals 
with all the objects of human pursuit (Dharma etc.) . (3) You have also investigated the truth 
of and realized the eternal Brahma (the Absolute); nevertheless my lord, you bewail your 
lot as if you had not yet realized the object of your life ! (4) 


Dis. 5] 
sAnanbertnnsnneneounennnesanannnnanssarane entunsnunsnnennennnenneaneannenunnns 
ON Sa 
seta oR adie aakh ami aan ukaea 21 
TYAS ey Gere AUSSAMATA AAA | & | 


a wWweah sa fietateast araftarerarait | 
wat osaft mitt ad: ame a wanes faaedi | 


Vyasa replied: All that you have said about me is true;yet my soul finds no satisfaction. 
We ask you the cause of it, which is unknown to me, since your knowledge is unfathom- 
able, you being a son of Brahma (the self-born). (5) You know all hidden truths inasmuch 
as you have worshipped the most ancient Person, who is the Ruler of both Prakrti and 
Purusa (Matter and Spirit) and who by His very thought creates, sustains and reabsorbs 
the universe with the help of the three Gunas, though remaining unattached to the 
Same.(6) You go about all the three worlds even as the sun does; and, moving within all 
like the vital air (by dint of Yogic power), you can read the minds of all. Even though I have 
fully realized through the practice of Yoga and the observance of sacred vows both the 
supreme Brahma (the Absolute) and Brahma in the form of the Vedas, pray, point out to 
me my great deficiency. (7) 


SARE Jaa 
Waddie amt  wradisaeni dart a dea at aaa fae ci 
am 486oamicasnat = afaaiqaniftar: ia aa armgqeae uafeat aaaftia: 1 ¢ 1 
41 wagafsaae ede osmafat squia = 6 oféfei 
daa odidqera amet a aa gat freereferaea: 1201 
dgitaant wadefagar afar  sfaaetenagaatc | 
Wada saissaht apvata Waa Worra rea: 1221 
TStnaeyimndasid A wad waa freq 
Sd: Ua: waeawstiat a altd pad aqurHRomieet 
AM AUT Waradewm Whaat: Weal Was: | 
SoHAAM away SATA aeateay 123 1 
adsam feat  afgaaa:  yereqdiepaecamt: | 
a gata a gfe xvfadta arateddtharcar ext 
Sifted  wigndsyaad: WMacha Ae afar: | 
agead wd sda: fet a aad aa anol aa: 124 
faagoiseria afd fasaanare maid: qan 
Wade «| URI «SS aeetet «= SS Pere: 121 
ae wer auras esitaumisa uadddt afe 
a wm amsanyenes fH al ait sigisusidt wera: 1201 
aaa edt: Wadd alfaal A orad aquearcaguea: | 
anda «| gsadedt: «= GG HI TMIRAT 1k 





16 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 


Pe Bee Re eRe Re RE RE RR RR RR RR RR RR RR RR RR AR RR RR eT A RE A eR NE NB BT SN AN SA RY AY A Re BY Be BY rr 
eee eg EE 


aIeIssHAAaedeh «=U Oe: ORI: OT 
ai owed waa: faa ateaqurangeasemaar 1221 
s fe qaawe: aaa a fase Gea a afer: | 
sfaadisd:  cfafurtafdt agquasereqergqaaqy 1221 
ae wdiadassd Wi dearg wens acaeq 
fafa aenm wa art zasgeor safe ffdfaaar i231 
aq Teqahaeraaes stich erdsydchisdhSqaiat | 
Ue: pur deta gqeaeetr: wyeat yaatscourfaftr iexi 
shepeurqaied fest: wae ya  dearetenicas: | 
Wa sade 486 faggedederet 8 ovate: = aT 1 241 
darde POH al: TAA aAqAeUNAVTa TATE: | 
wT: seat Usqae fayquad: asa antag: 1261 
Wee  weleddent frastaercaterd afada | 
qaeddeeaeaan «86 uefa OT ea = at 1 R 
CO MEEECICIE COC CUMS Ccts i: (MR 60 CoC MS ELIAS Col: 
aaa aprisrtercatsasite: SAUISSARARTATET 12 1 


daa Usa see sade: | SEMA SOR SAAS WIR! 

WH 8 6Uedd | =| - ae atacand! staat Tera: Hua dace: 130! 

wae Wad ae see: i aenquadiae aq wesha aaet13e1 
Narada replied : You have failed to sing adequately the stainless glory of the Lord. | 
consider that wisdom to be deficient, which does not tend to please the Lord. (8) O chief of 
Sages, you have not so fully described the glory of Bhagavan Vasudeva as you have dealt 
with the objects of human pursuit such as Dharma etc. (9) Speech, which, though full of 
figurative expressions, never utters the praises of Sri Hari—the praises that possess the 
virtue of sanctifying the whole world—is considered to be the delight of voluptuous men, who 
wallow in the pleasures of sense like crows that feed upon the dirty leavings of food. Like 
_ Swans, thatare traditionally believed to have their abode in the lotus-beds of the Manasarovara 
lake, devotees who have taken shelter in the lotus-feet of the Lord and therefore ever abide 
in His heart never take delight in such speech. (10) On the other hand, that composition 
which, though faulty in diction, consists of verses each of which contains the names of the 
immortal Lord, bearing the impress of His glory, wipes out the sins of the people; it is such 
composition that pious men love to hear, sing and repeat to an audience. (11) That wisdom 
too which is free from blemish and is a direct means to the attainment of liberation does 
not adorn one's soul so much, if it is devoid of devotion to Lord Acyuta. How, then, can action 
with an interested motive, which is rooted in sorrow at every stage (both while it is being 
performed and at the time of its fruition), and even disinterested action that has not been 


Dis. 5 7 ; vie 
sussisshihithensersessntivenesemie reo Oe nar 
dedicated to God serve to heighten one's glory ? (12) Endowed with an unfailing eye and 
possessed of sacred renown, Ohighly blessed Vyasa, you are devoted to truth and steadfast 
of resolve. Therefore, with a concentrated mind now recall the exploits of Sri Hari, who wields 
unthinkable power, with a view to the liberation of the entire humanity. (13) The man who 
desires to talk of anything else than the Lord's exploits falls into the trap of the manifold 
names and forms, evolved by such desire and sees diversity everywhere. Like a boat beaten 
by a blast, his unsteady mind finds no rest anywhere. (14) It was a great error on your part 
to have enjoined horrible acts (acts involving destruction of life) in the name of religion on 
men who are naturally addicted to such acts. Misguided by these precepts of yours the 
ordinary man of the world would believe such acts to be pious and would refuse to honour 
the teachings that prohibit such actions. (15) Only some wise man can by withdrawing from 
worldly enjoyments experience the (supreme) bliss which forms the essential character of 
the eternal and infinite Lord. Therefore, kindly narrate the exploits of the Lord for the good 
of those who are working under the impulse of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and lack 
the spiritual sense. (16) Has evil ever befallen him anywhere (in any womb or birth), who 
adores the lotus-feet of Sri Hari neglecting his own duty, even if he dies at a stage when he 
is yet unripe in his devotion, or falls from his Sadhana? On the other hand, what purpose has 
been achieved by those who fail to worship God, through devotion to their duty ? (17) Awise 
man should strive after that object alone which cannot be attained by going round from the 
highest (Brahma’'s abode) to the lowest (infernal) regions. As for the pleasures of sense they 
are had as a matter of course everywhere like sorrow as a result of past actions by flux of 
time, which is too quick to be perceived. (18) Dear Vyasa, a servant of Lord Mukunda (lit.,the 
Bestower of Liberation) never returns to this world, consisting of birth and death, like others 
(i.e., men of action who are averse to the Lord's worship) even if by accident he turns averse 
to Him at any time. Recalling the joy of having once (mentally) embraced the Lord's lotus- 
feet, he would not think of abandoning them, since he has tasted their sweetness . (19) This 
universe is no other than the Lord, who is yet apart from it, being responsible for the 
continuance, destruction and coming into being of this world. You knowit yourself; yet | have 
indicated it to you by way of a hint. (20) O Vyasa of unfailing vision, know it for yourself tnat 
you are a ray of the Highest Person, the Supreme Spirit, and that, though unborn, you have 
taken birth for the good of the world. Therefore, describe at full length the exploits of the Lord 
of exalted glory. (21) The wise have declared that the abiding purpose of man’s austere 
penance, sacred knowledge, sacrificial performances, recitation of the Vedas with correct 
intonation, enlightenment and bestowal of gifts is to recount the virtues of that Lord of 
excellent fame. (22) During the last Kalpa, in my previous existence, O sage, I was born of 
a maid-servant of Brahmanas well-versed in the Vedas. While yet a boy, | was told off to 
serve some Yogis (wandering ascetics) who wished to stop at one place during the 
rains.(23) Though a mere child, | was free from all childish frolics, was quite tame and 
submissive, spoke little and remained aloof from playthings. Though viewing all alike, the 
sages were particularly kind to me, who did all kinds of service to them. (24) With the willing 
consent of those Brahmanas | ate, once in twenty-four hours, whatever was left in their 
dishes after they had finished their meals, and was thereby cleansed of all sins. Thus 
engaged in their service, | attained purity of mind, which conceived a liking for their religious 
creed (the creed of Devotion). (25) There (in that society of godly men) by the grace of those 
saints, who were given tosinging the Lord's praises, | would daily listen to the soul-ravishing 
stories of SriKrsna. Even as | heard these stories with reverence, O dear Vyasa, step by step 
| developed an attraction for the Lord of delightful fame. (26) When | developed an affinity 
for Him, O great sage, my mind got firmly established in that Lord of delightful glory; through 
Such a mind I began to perceive the whole of this gross and subtle world as assumed in me, 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 


AD tee een tenn ne ehenent te RCeReTeE ETE ERARERSAEELE LESSEE SEES ESL SATE ELE EET Eiht 
the Absolute by Maya. (27) In this way, throughout the rains as well as in the coming 
autumn, | heard with rapt attention thrice everyday the holy praises of Sri Harias they were 
sung by those high-souled sages; and forthwith sprouted in my heart that Devotion which 
eradicates the element of Rajas (passion) and Tamas (ignorance). (28) Tome, who was 
devoted to those sages, modest in bearing, sinless, full of faith, tame and submissive, 
though yet a child, those saints, compassionate as they were to the afflicted, graciously 
imparted, when about to depart, that most esoteric wisdom which has been directly 
revealed by the Lord Himself. (29-30) Through that wisdom | came to know the glory of 
that Maya (deluding potency) of Lord Vasudeva, the Maker of this world, by knowing which 


men attain to His (supreme) Abode. (31) 
Uda fad Seretasateatentad | ada waft ad wafer arfani321 
sat as YAR Wad At Wadi dea waa sei a Gaia fatnicady 1331 
wa qo fear: ad defdeda: ia waeiaaena werd afeca: at 13% 
qaqa fad we wnaakdeumiana ane fe ufarrantadi3ul 
fain aa waif wnakeswadnd! ra Wes HPoMTehd A I3e! 
aa Wed qa ameaa wdaeingqueatega a: aged Zz 
st oadifseara 86 eaidaaiieiasd aged @ aerate: qari3ci 
SH Sem Aaa  Aadied! aerA wae aie Ud a Hala: 1391 
wumeusa fayd faa: aarad aa fact ayia 
sTrReate g: adericarert Usparaorattedt AAA iol 
Sit AA ad ASM UAE Blades NAA STARGMale GSAISeaTa: 11 4 II 
O sage, | have thus indicated to you how actions dedicated to the Lord, who is the Ruler 
of this universe as well as the supreme Brahma (the Absolute), serve as the cure for 
the threefold agony. (82) O Vyasa of commendable vow, the same substance which 
contributes to a particular malady cannot ordinarily counteract the disease; but, when taken 
in a properly medicated form, it does cure the ailment. (33) Similarly, all the activities of men 
ordinarily lead to transmigration; but the same, when offered to the Lord, lose their binding 
character.(34) On duties (of an obligatory nature) that are performed in this world for the 
pleasure of the Lord depends the attainment of wisdom combined with Devotion. (35) Those 
who perform their actions in obedience to the Lord's behests repeatedly utter and meditate 
on the praises and names of Sri Krsna (in the course of such actions). (86) "Obeisance to 
You, O Lord Vasudeva: we meditate on You. Obeisance also to Pradyumna, Aniruddha and 
Sankarsana." (37) The lord presiding over sacrifices has the divine Mantra (mystical 
formula) for His body and has no material form. He alone is of true insight, who worships 
Him uttering the name of the four forms as indicated above. (38) O holy Brahmana, when 
| had thus Carried out His behest, Lord KeSava blessed me with Self-Knowledge, mystic 
powers and loving Devotion to His feet. (39) O sage of unlimited knowledge, pray, recount 
the glories of the Almighty Lord, by hearing which even the wise reach the end of their quest 
for knowledge. For they recognize only the chanting of such glory, and no other, as the only 


means of relieving the afflictions of those who are repeatedly tormented by trials and 
turmoils. (40) 


Thus ends the fifth discourse, forming part of the dialogue between Vyasa and 
Narada, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PISSED OD 


Dis. 6 ] \T2\ BOOK ONE 19 


Sr Br te Br Br ke ert j 
rt Bre Be Be Be Be Be Br Be Be eB Re Be Be Re Be he Be Be BR Re Re BER RE BERL RRR RE BRL Be Be Be Be Be Se Be he Be Be he Be Be Be Br Be re Be Be Be Be Be Be Be Be Be Re Re Be Be Be hr Be Be Be bre 


IY AEISeATa: 


Discourse VI 
The rest of the story of Narada's previous birth 
Yd Sard 
wT era wnarathit ad ai wa: we a se Sie: aeadtaa: | 2 | 
Siita says : O Saunaka, having thus heard the story of the Devarsi's birth and spiritual 
endeavours, Maharsi Vyasa, the son of Satyavati, again enquired of him as follows : (1) 
CN Sava 


faatfetsratad faaiepiitera | adart agent dd: feeatesar.i 2 | 

Saya HA Ga atid A Wt aa: 1 Ha aaqeeett: aid WA Heal 3 | 

Tencuiararat «ait 6A RAMA IA PN Aaeenis UN Adiauaia: | x | 
Vyasa said : When the ascetics who instructed you in spiritual wisdom had departed, 
what did you do, since you happened to be a mere child at that time ? (2) In what manner, 
O son of Brahma (the self-born), did you spend the rest of your life ? And how did you cast 
off your mortal coil when the time came? (3) Foremost of heavenly beings, how did time, 


which obliterates everything, fail to obscure the memory of your existence in the preceding 
Kalpa? (4) 





Rg 3d 


fuatiiasatad faairepitda | ada «arene «ad Uae OG 

Wale A sat afer a feat i nares Uh AsMeRA! «& | 

aaa A qmeassdiariad atasdt 1 dara fe ast oral arear arena aa © | 

3 A Agee  sivateeter femal ae: asses: 1c | 

Weel friat ‘eget fafa at uf i aatsearaer we: quot aHievatfed: | < | 

dal daedierel TAT Aa: | State AA: «ofS fear Ig0l 

Narada replied : When the ascetics who instructed me in spiritual wisdom had left, | 

proceeded to do this (what follows), tender of age as | was. (5) | was the only issue of my 
mother, who was anignorant woman anda servant-maid to boot. She had bound herself with 
ties of affection to me, her son, who solely depended on her. (6) Much as she liked to supply 
my wants and to provide against my future, she failed to do so, dependent as she was. The 
world is indeed subject to the control of its Ruler (God ) even as a puppet is controlled by 
the wire-puller. (7) Out of regard for her! continued in that locality of the Brahmanas. Being 
only five years of age, | had no idea then of the four quarters or even of space and time. (8) 
Once during the night she left her house to milk a cow. While on her way she trod on a snake 
which, as fate would have it, bit the helpless woman (and this brought about her untimely 
end). (9) | took it as a boon from the Lord, who is solicitous for the welfare of His devotees, 
and then set out in a northerly direction.(10) 

Chidisdareda GUase | Geadedetsy aq =a RR 

farendataasta ata ysigart, [SoRMbsasotttett: Uataat: 122 

fore: vuardfdae wartra: | qmaupenetapecnteren Tec 1231 

we welfenrdtsensteat fated vedi ae sftarenrt SATOH 1 LY 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6 


“ ste Be ete Be Re eRe Be Re Re Re RRR RRR RR RR RE RE RRR ERE RE RE LR RE RR ER RE RB REP BE AE BE BEB BER SEAT BB BE Be SE A SE BY Mr BM 


uksrabsarcne qeatdt qufara: | areat kat Se AEM SATS WAV: 1k | 
aferircgsiseoa § « firorerret | START: | STATS ATTA ATL 1 8G | 
TAT ALOT st TAMMaATaT | VieHUSUTAH TAA CTSA We: 1201 
SfaaRaqeae shite: larraaga sit amRaqya WA ect 
Si wad aa Yai sma Wes agengiat ga iee 
feauee ya: sirera wat aeidiemmonsa aanfaqa galdt: 120! 
W dad fa ammerted Fre wikeewe arr Ya: seatsa 12°81 
edfeaaa wart at sBitedti sfacnerant edatise . pati 122! 
ape ae afeid oda asqe | Weal: Wh: UA: Valse TAL 123 | 
aaa dear a sia afa ce afa: i feats ote we Asrrata 12x 
Tad faaed a facda afefadisereiadas alas 9 avaqeriel 
Uaqeaan =e Ge MOET 
3 WU ams edi welaa atetiaad faaetsqenftua: 1261 
AMIS + edaAG: Us Wes ust maf a ae 
™ Udemqpral ude: aie ode fame fans 1201 
In that journey | passed through prosperous lands, cities, villages, temporary habitats 
of cowherds, mines, hamlets, stray habitations by the side of mountains and rivers, 
enclosures containing plantations, groves and gardens, mountains charming with minerals 
of various colours, trees with boughs broken by elephants, lakes containing delightful water, 
lotus-ponds frequented by gods and rendered vocal by birds of diverse notes and adorned 
by bees hovering about (from one lotus-bed to another). Having journeyed across these all 
alone, | came in sight of an extensive and formidable forest dense with rushes, bamboos, 
reeds, Kusa grass and hollow bamboos and which presented a dreadful appearance, 
infested as it was with serpents, owls and jackals. (11—14) Wearied in mind and body and 
overcome with thirst and hunger, | bathed in the pool of a river, drank of its water, rinsed my 
mouth with it and felt refreshed. (15) In that forest, uninhabited by man, | sat down at the 
foot of a Peepul tree and contemplated with a collected mind on the Lord residing in my 
heart,as | had heard of Him (from the lips of my preceptors). (16) Even as | meditated on His 
lotus-feet with a mind overpowered by love, tears rushed to my eyes as a result of eagerness 
to behold Sri Hari, who gradually appeared on the screen of my heart. (17) The hair of my 
body Stood on end due to an outburst of love, and my heart experienced a thrill of excessive 
joy and tranquillity. Immersed in a flood of ecstasy, O sage, | lost consciousness of both 
myself and the object of my perception (Sri Hari). (13) Even as | failed to perceive that 
indescribable form of the Lord, which was enrapturing to the heart and dispelled all grief, | 
felt disturbed and sprang on my feet like one troubled at heart. (19) Longing to behold it once 
more, | fixed the mind on my heart and looked for it, but could not see it. Now | felt miserable 
like one whose desire had not been sated. (20) To me thus struggling in that lonely forest, 
the Lord, who is beyond words, spoke in sublime yet soft words, as if to soothe my grief: (21) 
“Alas ! in this birth you are unfit to behold Me; for | am difficult of perception for those who 
have not attained perfection in Yoga (Devotion), and the impurities of whose heart have not 
yet been wholly burnt. (22) It was only to arouse in you a burning désire to see Me that | have 
once revealed My form to you. One who longs to see Me shakes off gradually but completely 
all one’s latent desires. (23) Through services rendered by you to the saints even for a short 





Dis. 6 ] ee 
qawentanatnnwnnwanneNneNnanwanerre OOS ON E 21 


Be Bee Be Be He Be He Br Ke Be He Ke Pe Ke Ke Ke Ke Se He He Ke eB Re HORE Re Me Re Re Re Be Ke Re He eRe Re Me Bee He He Ae 


period your thought has been irrevocably fixed on Me. Therefore, casting off this 
reprehensible (material) body you will attain to the position of my own attendant. (24) The 
thought you have thus fixed on Me shall never cease. And by My grace you will continue to 
remember Me even when the whole creation has perished." (25) Having said this much, that 
great invisible Being, the Ruler of all and omnipresent as ether, stopped short. Realizing His 
unique grace I for my part bowed my head to Him, the greatest of the great. (26) Shaking 
__ Off all shyness | now began to repeat the mysterious and auspicious names and fixed my 
thoughts on the exploits of the infinite Lord. Rid of all Cravings, free from vanity and jealousy 
and contented at heart, | roamed about on the globe awaiting my end. (27) 


wi PUMISITAAHAMAH: | HIG: Mewes afsalerat sen ict 
TEM ae at Bel radi aq smereifaten staat oreithie: 12e1 
eed 8 seme =—- Taseraqeda: | frerfasieasrot «= fafastseree «= fst: 1301 
wean semae ss Petar: | ilfaftien saa: sMraisé a ah 1321 
sistas 9 olatet «Ueteenfedsd: | sqrerretaeintaernt: «wafer 1321 
eae «= dot eatfayfeari ae «= eftenat | Tease 133 | 
wad: wetatfor dteare: frase: | ated ga A eitst agit aria aafe iax 
UdeMldtada Alareatasar We: | vafeegat est eiaatqauiaisul 
amfaftaimaat:  amevtedt ae: | dcdaar aaranssare! A amas 1361 
ad diaqnem agpisé aad iwvaediee A vada 1301 
To me, who had my thoughts fixed on Sri Krsna, who was free from attachment and 
whose heart was thus purified, death came at the appointed hour like a flash of lightning, O 
holy sage. (28) When | was about to be translated to the immaterial form of an attendant of 
the Lord, my material body fell, the Prarabdha that had been responsible for it having been 
reaped. (29) At the end of the preceding Kalpa, when Lord Narayana slept on the waters 
of the universal Deluge, having reabsorbed the whole creation into Himself, and when 
Brahma was going to enter His body andsleep there, | too (my subtle body) entered His body 
with the ingoing breath. (30) At the expiry of one thousand revolutions of the four Yugas when 
Brahma (the Creator) rose and wished to bring forth this creation again, Marici and the other 
Sages as well as myself were evolved out of his senses. (31) With my vow of constant 
remembrance of God continuing uninterrupted, | move about inside as well as outside the 
three worlds; and by the grace of Lord Mahavisnu (Bhagavan Narayana, the Primal Person) 
my passage is nowhere obstructed. (32) Playing upon (to the accompaniment of ) this lute, 
bestowed upon me by the Lord Himself and bringing out the seven primary notes of the 
gamut that represent Brahmain the form of sound, | go about singing the story of Sn Hari.(33) 
As | thus sing of His exploits, the Lord of delightful renown, whose feet represent all sacred 
places (being the origin of them all), soon reveals Himself in my heart as if summoned by 
me. (34) Narration of the Lord's doings has been found to be a veritable raft to cross the 
ocean of mundane existence for those whose mind is incessantly tormented by the craving 
for sense- enjoyment. (35) A heart smitten with lust and greed every moment does not attain 
tranquillity so surely by recourse to the various practices of Yoga, such as self-control and 
so on,as through the worship of (devotion to) Lord Mukunda (the Bestower of Liberation).(36) 
O sinless one, | have thus told you all that you asked me, viz., the secret of my own birth and 
doings (spiritual endeavours) and the means of satisfying your soul. (37) 








| RT SA Dis. 7 
SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 


Yd sald : 
wa Fs Waa aay! STAT SOT WIAA Salt AlaheseAl Af: 1301 
aa dafititsd oat agers: | mearefad dat TAA SINR | 
eft SRPTaS HEU URSA Seca TAR ARASH USISea: 16 | 
Siita says : Having thus spoken to Vyasa (the son of Satyavati), the divine sage Narada 
took his leave and, playing upon his lute, went his way, having no object of his own to 
accomplish. (38) Ah! blessedis this celestial sage, who, while singing the glory of Lord Visnu 
(the Wielder of the Sarnga bow ) to the accompaniment of his lute, feels not only intoxicated 
himself but delights the unhappy world as well. (39) 


Thus ends the sixth discourse, forming part of the dialogue between Vyasa and 
Narada, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


* tS a 
SSIS RS 


SIT AYASeaTa: 


Discourse VII 
Aswatthama assassinates Draupadi's sons and Arjuna 
in his turn curbs his pride 


de Sara 
Frid Ane OA Wad sews: | adardewad dd: fHandfey: 1 2 


Saunaka said : On the departure of Narada, what did the divine and all-powerful Vyasa 
do, after hearing that which was in the mind of the celestial sage? (1) 
Yd sara 
cen maa: usd dei snare sid Sikh wel Gaal: 1 2 | 
der @ sist areal aaiiqusafted | ardiaisa sawgea wives Wa: Ga! 2 | 
Wir Ate Way softies | ssaged Gd al A acu! x | 
aa aAttedt sta seam fone wis avqdsadt ded afta & | 
sTaaiaar MAaharana#st | Slehaiaa fagige aradaieart i & | 
wa a saat get uel Une Ga: <eritewamers © | 
aU Med WMad Haya aes Yenc fafated af: ct 
Suta replied : On the western bank of the Saraswati river, presided over by Brahma, 
there is a hermitage called Samyaprasa, which promotes the sacrificial activities of the 
Sages. (2) In that hermitage, which was Vyasa's own abode and was surrounded by.a grove — 
of jujube trees, the sage Vyasa sat down and, after sipping a little water, collected his mind 
by Self-effort. (3) In his sinless mind, which had been perfectly concentrated through the 
practice of Devotion, he saw the Primal Person as well as Maya, who depends for her very 
existence on Him. (4) Deluded by this Maya, the individual soul, though beyond the three 
Gunas, thinks itself as consisting of the three Gunas and suffers the evil consequences 
brought about by this identification. (5) Knowing that the practice of Devotion to the Lord, who 
is beyond sense-perception, is the direct means of counteracting these evils, the sage 


composed Srimad Bhagavata (the book of the Vaisnavas) for the use of the common people, 
who are ignorant of this fact. (6) Even as a man listens to this work recited, Devotion to Sri 


Dis. 7 ] 
BBG RRR ROR RE Re RETR RE REA Re Mr Be Re Mr He ae BOOK ONE 23 


K . . 
. RNs Person, wells up in his heart—Devotion that dispels grief, infatuation 
ance sp » aving produced and revised the Bhagavata-Samhita, the sage (Vedavyasa) 
ght It to Nis son Suka, who loved to live in retirement. (8) 
a 
5a a Prgtatrra: eta aT Ot: |e at gediaarmrana: AawEa! e | 
aunaka said: The sage Suka is a lover of quietism and, indifferent to everything 


(belonging to this world), he delights only in his S i i 
, elf. Wh 
this voluminous work ? (9) y at was his motive, then, in mastering 


Ud sad 
aes Wat fier amgentigdecdat sfeftrermyaqor aft: 1201 
wetonferratersirars, Teta: | serra fe fauprfira: 1221 
Suta replied : Even sages who delight in the Self alone and the knot of whose ignorance 
has been cut asunder practise disinterested devotion to Sri Hari: such are His virtues. (10) 
This was true all the more of the divine sage Sukadeva, son of Badarayana (Vedavyasa) and 


the beloved of Lord Visnu's own people, who studied this great chronicle everyday, his mind 
having been captivated by Sri Hari 's excellences. (11) 


UUtfaratser Tats taeeay | GA A UVSGAU aed HeatHateay 1221 
a6 Rage aiRgett eit tI 
Felariicegrran rat ratequS TATSTT 123 | 
aq: fa sthRkia wm wa Hengaa waa fifa 
seta «fafa itr Sls fart ix 
am fat fet gaat fFera ae uae! 
deecg aherperent a raat feedentet 1241 
val ore safe «MR aagereen: $= ottetafar: | 
Trodlaqenfaeraeaiet «AIST eee SEIT. 1 2G I 
sf frat amtafoet: a  arafaareqaitarg: | 
STasaetard SAAT chfaeaait Teqa TAA 12191 
| shall now tell you the story of the birth, exploits and emancipation of the royal sage 
Pariksit and the ascent of Pandu's sons to heaven, inasmuch as they serve as a prelude to 
the story of Sri Krsna. (12) When in course of the Mahabharata war the warriors of the 
Kaurava and Pandava hosts had fallen like heroes and when Duryodhana (son of 
Dhrtarastra) had his thigh broken by a stroke of the mace dealt by Bhima (who had the 
appetite of a wolf), ASwatthama (the son of Drona) severed the heads of Draupadi ‘s sons 
while they were asleep and presented them to Duryodhana—an act which he imagined 
would please his master (Duryodhana) but which really proved most distasteful to him, since 
everybody would strongly condemn such an odious act. (13-14) Sore distressed at the news 
of the terrible slaughter of her sons, the mother (Draupadi) bitterly wailed, her eyes blinded 
with tears. Then Arjuna (who had a many-pointed diadem on his head), comforting her, 
said:(15) "Then alone shall | have wiped your tears,my good lady,when | cut off the head of 
that fallen Brahmana, that desperado, with the arrows discharged from my Gandiva bow, 


and present it to you so that you may set your foot on it and then bathe after the cremation 
of your sons.” (16) Having thus consoled his wife in sweet and charming words, Arjuna, who 





24 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


had Sri Krsna for his friend and charioteer, put on his armour and, taking his fierce bow, rode 
in a chariot with an ensign bearing the figure of a monkey, in pursuit of ASwatthama (his 
preceptor's son).(17) 


anuad OU alCTOEC CTC (<éssCTR NTT CE 
UUIsAaASUTN Seal aaa asvaie GAlch: 121 
AaIARUTATATAA aA AAA | Sta HAR AA siete FEST: 128 1 
sas «Ales MeN ACAATed: | STAAIMEN «= UT cheap Safed 1201 
ad: Weed aa: weus wedifeei sonaanimer fowl Meyjeart g 12k 
When Asgwatthama, who was now sad at heart for his having assassinated young boys, 
saw from a distance that Arjuna was rushing towards him, he ran for life in a chariot as far 
as he could on earth, even as the sun-god fled for fear of Rudra.* (18) When he saw that his 
horses were fatigued and that he had none to protect him, that son of a Brahmana thought 
of the missile presided over by Brahma (the Creator) as the only means to save his life. (19) 
Even though he did not know how to withdraw the missile, he sipped a little water and, finding 
his life in peril, fitted the same to his bow with an attentive mind. (20) A fierce flame blazed 
forth from the missile and enveloped all sides. When Arjuna saw the danger to his life, he 
addressed Visnu (Sri Krsna) as follows: (21) 


AGT Jara 
PO AN AIT wade ad adaammaaatis Mga: 122 
MI: Yee: Watcha: Ned: Uz: | wateqee faa acd fier seh 123 | 
a wa aster aramifeddaa: | feat aa dio sat anifesenm i2ex! 


qa Madd yal UNA AA AAA Wand 1241 
fete Raced ait eaca a Acai adder «ast: | UHeTEUTL 126 | 


Arjuna said : Krsna, Krsna, mighty of arm and the Allayer of devotees’ fear, You are the 
only rescuer of those who are incessantly burning with the agony of transmigration. (22) You 
are God Himself, the Primal Person, existing beyond Prakrti (Matter). Casting aside Maya 
by the power of Your wisdom, You stand in Your absolute Being. (23) It is You who by virtue 
of Your own power confer Dharma (religious merit) and other forms of blessings on the soul 
whose mind is deluded by Your Maya. (24) Even so this Avatara (manifestation) of Yours 
iS intended to relieve the burden of the earth and to serve as an object of constant meditation 
for Your own people as well as for those who are exclusively devoted to You. (25) O self- 
effulgent Lord, | know not what and whence this most frightful flame, which is enveloping 


me on all sides. (26) 
awe ROTTER mera «safe tarat aq dent sora sufera i201 
1 @deram feet saaati ved sarge ees 2c! 


Sri Bhagavan replied : It is no other than the missile presided over by Brahma and 
released by Aswatthama (the son of Drona) in extreme peril. You are aware he knows not 
how to call it back. (27) There is no other missile that can overpower it. Therefore, quench 
the formidable flame of this weapon by a counter-flame of the same missile ex sites ou 
are in the use of weapons. (28) Rae : 

* When the sun-god routed the demon Vidyunmali, Bhagavan Rudra darted in fury against the sun-god, trident in hand. 
The SEN ne who ran before Rudra, toppled down at Kasi; where he became known as Lolarka . | 





Dis. 7 ] 


Be Ke Be Be BR He Wee We Re Ke Re Ke Ke Re we Hy 


BOOK ONE 25 


Wi Wire Sr : 2 
Be WE We Be We we We Be He Re eR He ee ee RRC ee Re ee ee ee ee RE ER eR RC EM Me eRe ee eRe ee Re Be 





Yd saq 

aa Tag Sih WIA: UT) WER uf sal Ble daa 12e1 

AeA ATES Mead | saga west GW a agealdschafead_ 130! 

Grats = dateliccter, «seeded agar: sen: wal: aradantad 1321 

TSIPAMISE cleat a mA a aa eee BTL 1321 

Wea STATE RAT TeUT heretgeL aerereeerraTar: Tl WHAT «=A «1331 

Featerera Prtterd aa saga FY Ter Hea sepa «MATa aStawT: 13% 1 

m SUL E AM seein afei asaaarra: qaraitfatat ater 1341 

Wd Sa Ge ae fet wei soa fart sit a fg ea amifadi3e 

MU A: UINTT: TGA: Wes: | deeterer fe sat aerate: Gar i3! 

sida WU Wad Went ywadt ani sree flere aa aa gare 13ci 

waa aed um stadencede i ada fate dk maqam woul: 131 

Ue uta at uel: pet afed: itm Wad Breed Aer ixol 

aaa «86a «=| Mferefraranfa: | adead frard sitar sas Sar 1S I 

aAaMIssed Aa URTeagHaTSa HASTA | 
fier peond WW: Wd amma HUM AAA TIxeI 

Jaq Mea A I et Geass sero «fat Te: 13 | 

Gee ade:  aaailadan: i arasms wad farfedt aaquerd ixx! 

a WW Was AT: Wed add | cease Used AMSG: Hat sul 

da ada nam watt pon git ad omy Ged aersitevrr: ive 

mM dee sat Matt uftdami ame yaacssal west yg: vv 

a: awalftd sales wear: iad He Nesey Aaa Berta isc 
Siita continued : On hearing the Lord's words, Arjuna, the exterminator of rival warriors, 
sipped a little water, went round the Lord in reverence and fitted a Brahmastra to repulse the 
Brahmastra (discharged by Aswatthama). (29) The two flames, surrounded by arrows, 
joined each other and, filling the heavens as well as all the space between heaven and earth, 
swelled like the sun and the fire at the time of universal destruction. (30) Perceiving the 
mighty flame of the two missiles, which was consuming all the three worlds, all the people, 
who were being scorched by their heat, thought it to be the fire of universal destruction. (31) 
Seeing the distress of the people and the impending destruction of all the worlds, and finding 
the approval of Sri Krsna (the son of Vasudeva), Arjuna withdrew them both. (82) Then he 
quickly seized the hard-hearted son of Krpi, his eyes burning with rage, and bound him with 
a rope as one would bind a sacrificial animal. (83) Having forcibly bound the enemy witha 
rope, he was about to take him to his camp, when the lotus-eyed Lord said to him in 
rage:—(34) "Arjuna (son of Prtha), you ought not to spare him. Do kill this fallen Brahmana, 
who murdered at dead of night innocent boys buried in sleep. (35) A pious man would never 
killan enemy whois drunk, unguarded, insane, asleep, tender of age, stupid, terror-stricken 
or fallen at his feet, nor would he kill a woman nor one who has lost one's chariot. (86) But 


to slay the merciless wretch who maintains his own life at the cost of another's is to do him 
good; for the man would (otherwise) repeat such crimes and thereby precipitate his fall. (37) 





26 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 
reer eErr ERR RRR EERE RRR Roe Rt et see eee eke ees Bee ae a Be Re rs ease TTR Be AY BY er HB Br ay 
t ~ a 


Moreover, you gave your word to Draupadi (the daughter of the king of Pancala) within my 
hearing: 'I shall bring you the head of the man who has slain your sons, O proud lady.' (38) 
Therefore, O valiant Arjuna, dispose of this sinful ruffian, who has murdered your own sons. 
This unworthy member of his race has done something which was loathsome even to his 
master (Duryodhana)." (39) Urged in these words by Sri Krsna who was putting his 
righteousness to the test, the great Arjuna (the son of Kunti) would not slay Aswatthama (his 
preceptor's son), even though he had murdered his own SONS. (40) Then, coming up to his 
camp, Arjuna, who had Sri Govinda for his friend and charioteer, showed him (Aswatthama) 
to his beloved consort, who had been grieving all the while for her murdered sons. (41) 
Looking intently at ASwatthama (Drona's son), who had been brought in that plight, bound 
with cords like a sacrificial beast, his face cast down on account of his shameful act, 
Draupadi,who was tender by nature, took compassion on the offender and bowed to 
him.(42) That noble lady could not bear to see him brought in bondage and said, “Let him 
be freed, let him be released,a Brahmana that he is and worthy of our utmost adoration. (43) 
That worshipful Drona, by whose grace you learnt the science of archery with its manifold 
secrets and acquired the knowledge of the various missiles as well as how to discharge and 
call them back—it is he himself who is present in the person of his progeny, his wife, his 
better half, Krpi (a sister of Acarya Krpa, another preceptor of the Pandavas) yet survives 
- she did not follow him (declined to ascend his funeral pile) only because of her having given 
birth to a valiant son. (44-45) Therefore, my blessed lord, the family of your preceptor, which 
is ever worthy of adoration and salutation for you, does not deserve persecution at your 
hands, pious as you are. (46) Let not his (ASwatthama’'s) mother, Gautami (a descendant 
of the sage Gautama), who worshipped her husband as adeity, wail even as | do, grieved 
at the loss of my children and shedding tears again and again. (47) The whole family of those 
princes of unconquered mind by whom the Brahmana race is angered is plunged in grief and 
is soon burnt up with all their kith and kin." (48) 
Yd sad 
Ti MAA cnet eich Gi vedi wen egal Usa: seregel fem: ive! 
THe: Weeas qa wWsa: 1 war canta a ara ara arf: 1401 
waa HT Ma aA: Wa: 1A UdaleMses Ase AMM FAT 142 | 
Pera itemfet Stoenst aay: i anele aat aeaene wafaa 1421 
Sita went on : King Yudhisthira, the son of Dharma (the god of virtue), O holy 
Brahmanas, greeted the queen's words, which were pious and fair, compassionate, 
guileless, impartial and noble.(49) Nakula and Sahadeva, Yuyudhana (Satyaki), Arjuna, the 
divine Sri Krsna (the son of Devaki) Himself and all other men and women (who happened 
to be there) endorsed what she said. (50) On that occasion Bhima indignantly (intervened 
and) said, “For him who wantonly murdered sleeping youngsters without any gain either to 
himself or to his master death has been declared as a boon." (51) Hearing the words of 
Bhima as well as of Draupadi, Lord Sri Krsna (who was distinguished by His four arms) 
looked into the face of his friend (Arjuna) and uttered the following words, as though 
smiling:(52) ; 
MPO Sar 
Sagi del saat aateni: | Aaatweaarard URUGTIAAaAT 143 | 
_ aia Ut aera fram fe a sieaaer use wea a ux! 
Sri Krsna said: Even a fallen Brahmana ought not to be slain and a ruffian surely 
deserves to be killed. Both these precepts have been taught by Me in the scriptures. 





Dis. 8 ] 
We Be Hr Kr Be Wr We We We We Br Ae Fre 


BOOK ONE 27 


We Be Br Hr 
BeBe eRe Be Be Re He Be Br Be He He Br Be Re RC RR HR RER RRR REE RE RET REAR RE RE RE ROR REM RERE RE RE RE RERERERE RE LORE RR BRE BER BeBe Re 





Therefore,carry out both these commands of Mine. (53) Redeem the promise you made 
while consoling your beloved consart; at the same time do what is agreeable to Bhimasena 
and Draupadi (the daughter of the king of Paficala) as well as to Myself.(54) 

Yd sara rior 


ot: wemssarawtaiduenfeer af se aaah feorer wee 144 


faq RAMS TERT aera aforat «St arferarfrcaear 14 | 
a sauna wrifsatoot aa ws fe agai aet arRisia af: 1401 
Wie: We Wet: Ge HOM SA Yai ache aaPeoneat ic 
gfe SMerad Ae URAsA Sedat yea Sse aM AaAISeATa: 11 6 II 
Suta says : Arjuna instantly understood the mind of Sri Hari, and with his sword cut off 
the gem on the Brahmana's head along with his locks. (55) Releasing ASwatthama, who had 
been bound with cords and put out of countenance by the murder of boys, and who was now 
deprived of his splendour and gem also, Arjuna expelled him from his camp. (56) Shaving 
the head (as a token of disgrace), seizure of property and expulsion from a place (where one 
happens to be)—this is the form of capital punishment prescribed for fallen Brahmanas; 
there is no other corporeal form of capital punishment for them. (57) The sons of Pandu along 
with Krsna (Draupadi), who were all stricken with grief at the loss of their sons, performed 
the cremation and other funeral rites in respect of their departed kinsmen. (58) 


Thus ends the seventh discourse entitled the"Chastisement of Aswatthama (Drona's son)", 
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita 


“ x weet o8 
PIES SS mre 


HA MSA Sera: 


Discourse VIII 
The Lord delivers Pariksit in the womb and is extolled by Kuntt; 
Yudhisthira gives way to grief 
Ud sald 

3g Ft GANA aMMeHtsd! Id AHO Wal Were aq: fra: | 8 | 

a fritaeah ad face a yet Wa: 1 stg GRUNT: Yast 1 2 | 

aR «Heat «FANS «—- We WRI Gaiam Gert Het a Area: 1 2 1 

AIRaqaTATa Urimedaepeatar| Fay BIO Me agtataniainary | x | 
Siita says : Placing the ladies at the head and accompanied by Sri Krsna, they all then 
repaired to the bank of the Ganga in order to offer oblations of water to their departed 
kinsmen seeking such oblations. (1) Having offered water to the deceased and bitterly wept 
for them, they all immersed themselves once more In the water of the Ganga, that had been 
hallowed by contact with the dust of Sri Haris lotus-feet. (2) Showing how all created beings 
are subject to death, which cannot be averted, Lord Madhava (Sri Krsna) and the sages 
(Dhaumya and others) consoled king Yudhisthira (the lord of the Kurus) and his younger 


brothers (Bhima and others), Dhrtarastra and his wife, Gandhari (daughter of the king of 
Gandhara), who was stricken with grief at the loss of her sons, as well as Prtha (Kunti) and 





28 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8 


Ve Wr Wr We We We Re Rr Re Ree Wr We Ve Ke Wee He Re Re Mee ee ee ee We We We We Wee We We Be We We We We We we we 


Re ROR ROR BERR RRR Rr RE RR MR Be Rr Br Kr Me We He Br Be 
Krsna, all of whom had lost their kith and kin, and were sitting there plunged in grief.(3-4) 


mMefaaisidaat: WG wea feeaaeds | atdferaradt Us: HaeaRaaraye: | & | 
arafacararstetet Aifreqtaete: idee: wed fear gaarenarta! € t 
se | UeUigg «= Stagadga: | eurefaffes: Ufsid: sfaghsta: | 9 | 
Tq paatista al TITRA: | SASS AETa AAT wafager | c | 
Having secured to king Yudhisthira (to wnom no enemy was ever born, in other words, 
who was too good to regard anyone as his enemy) his own kingdom, that had been usurped 
by gamblers, and brought about the destruction of wicked kings, whose span of life had been 
cut short by touching Draupadi's hair, and having helped him to perform as many as three 
Aéwamedha sacrifices with the best possible materials and with the aid of the best available 
priests, He caused his sacred renown to spread in all directions like that of Indra (whois raised 
to this exalted position only after performing a hundred Aswamecha sacrifices). (5-6) Having 
taken leave of Pandu's sons and paid His respects to holy Brahmanas like Dwaipayana 
(Vyasa), who did their homage to Him in return, He mounted His chariot and was just 
intending to leave for Dwaraka along with Satyaki and Uddhava when, O Saunaka, He 
perceived Uttara (widow of Abhimanyu, Arjuna's deceased son) rushing towards Him, 
stricken with fear. (7-8) 
SHRIATA 


ule Ule Heat taeda WII aR aeud Usd GA Yar UU! 2 | 

afusata adiet aneqear faut wrt ced at are a A et ore 1 201 
Uttara said : Protect me, O great Yogi; save me, O supreme Deity ! O Lord of the 
universe,| see no asylum other than You in this world, where everyone is death to another.(9) 


This dart of burning steel is pursuing me, O almighty Lord ! Let it burn me by all means, my 
master; but let it not kill the child in my womb. (10) 


Yd Sarg 
see AGN ATG hae: |stats «60 BIUITREIeTT 1281 
aaa WAS Wve: Us Aer! seisharctyMIseaogurag: 1221 
Sei ae AMNTAawae | Geet MATT AT att Srerfay: 123 | 
Ata: way arta ek: | aaassquirgsl agen: Hedda ex! 
qa see atta aera Ast Sal ANSI WISE Iku! 
a Fe ddd walsedadsadia sa uae gen gaat ew: 126! 


Faas: Te AMA INMNTE Hane yar ad evi 
; SUta says : Hearing her words, the Lord, whois so fond of His devotees, understood that 
it was a missile discharged by ASwatthama (son of Dronacarya) in order to exterminate the 
line of the Pandavas (sons of Pandu). (11) That very moment, O chief of the sages, the sons 
of Pandu also saw five burning shafts coming towards them, and took up their own missiles 
(arrows). (12) Perceiving the calamity of his kinsmen, who thought of none else than Him, 
the almighty Lord protected them with His own discus, Sudargana. (13) Sri Hari, the Master 
of Yoga, who is the very Self dwelling in the heart of all living beings, enveloped the womb 
of Uttara (the daughter of king Virata) by His own Maya (Yogic power) in order to preserve 
the line of Kuru. (14) Even though the missile presided over by Brahma is unfailing and 
irresistible, it proved ineffectual when it met the effulgence of Bhagavan Visnu (Sri Krsna); 
O chief of the Bhrgus. (15) Deem this not as a miracle on the part of Lord Acyuta (Sri Krsna), 





Dis. 8'] RAN ARG 
BeBe Ber Se Br He Be Ke Be He Be Ke He Be Ge Ke Ge He Be We Ke Re Me He Ke He He He Me He Be ee BOOK ONE 29 


Be Be He Be Ke Bee Se Be He Ke Ge Me Kee Kee Kee Ke Ke Me Kee Me Ke He He eRe Re He Be Be Be He Re Se Be Pe We Se He Rr Be HH Ke 


ees is an embodiment of all wonders and who, though unborn Himself, creates, maintains 
and destroys this universe by His own deluding potency. (16) When Sri Krsna was about 
to leave, the virtuous Prtha (Kunti) along with her sons (the Pandavas), who had justescaped 


from the fire of the missile presided over by Brahma, and her daughter-in-law, Krsna 
(Draupadi), addressed Him as follows: (17) 


PYM 
Tet ed wisseriet wpa: oe see Pa yada fetahera_ 12S 1 
ATE tet Poh Tees AAT EN STATA, la GeTa Yeae Ael Aleaent aarieei 
a OORT Tee AReafaera get asa fe fra: 1201 
Poa area tana wiwentamana Mier aal aa: 1221 
7a: USS Aa: Ugo ian: User ame Ussieea 1221 
am aie eS tat che watfafet «genie 


yt = qasteneReradt «= ature «= ASAT: 1 
faqe: GY A: WA ww wretisam att  arenayraaeiaq eu 
wags: War aaah a warfare 1261 
anisteafana Farurgda | Seana aaa haesada AA: 1291 


Kunti said : "I, an ignorant woman, make obeisance to You, the Prime Person, 
transcending Prakrti and dwelling inside as well as outside all created beings, the invisible 
and imperishable God existing beyond the range of sense-perception and screened by the 
curtain of Maya. You, cannot be seen by a man of perverted vision even as a dunce would 
fail to recognize an actor appearing in a garb appropriate to the stage. (18-19) How, then, 
can we womenfolk perceive You, who have appeared in our midst just to engender Devotion 
in the heart of Paramahamsas (those endowed with the eye distinguishing the material from 
the spiritual) who are given to contemplation and pure of mind? (20) Obeisance, obeisance 
to You, Sri Krsna, son of Vasudeva, the delight of Devaki (Your blessed mother), the foster- 
child of the cowherd Nanda, Lord Govinda. (21) Obeisance to you whose navel is adorned 
with a lotus; obeisance to You, wearing a wreath of lotus flowers; obeisance to You, 
possessing lotus-like eyes; obeisance to You, whose feet resemble the lotus. (22) O 
Hrsikesa (Lord of the senses), even as You delivered Devaki (Your own mother), who had 
been shut up in prison for a long time by the wicked Kamsa and was overcome with grief, 
so did You, O almighty Lord, repeatedly save me along with my sons from a series of 
calamities. (23) It is You, O Hari, who protected us from poison, from a huge fire, from the 
look of man-eating demons, from the assembly of wicked people (Duryodhana and his 
associates), from the perils met during forest life, from the missiles of many a great warrior 
(like Bhisma, Drona, Karna and so on ) in every battle, and just now from the missile 
discharged by Agwatthama (the son of Dronacarya). (24) May calamities befall us at every 
step through eternity, O Teacher of the world; for it is in adversity alone that we are blessed 
with Yoursight, which eliminates the possibility of our seeing another birth. (25) Aman whose 
birth, power, learning and affluence only serve to swell his pride Is unable even to utter Your 
name, You being open to the perception of only those who have nothing to call their own.(26) 
You are the only wealth of those who have no sense of possession. Beyond the realm of the 





OC EE eS i 
ef ot - 


Tay siete e+ - : 
"3 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8 
te Re Re Se Be RRR REA RE REE RR RR RE REE RE RR RE RA RET MRE RE RT RE HE MAE BE SRE Be PE RE HRT BE SESE A SE SSE SS 


30 
RELA AAR A RR ERE BRE RE RR TS 8 a a ee wit 


three Gunas or modes of Prakrti, You delight in Your own Self and are perfectly calm; You 
are the Lord of Moksa (final beatitude). | bow to You again and again. (27) 


wat wi medigeret fay ad aed aa Yara ahaa: chic: 12C 
a 2 aardiwattia dere FI fas 
= ae aisha aietae tes afer fase affory12e 
sat wi a fammastenaduem: ifrdeqity ale:q 9 daerdicstty i301! 
Wreaes wis Hara as alae A a aangaeHisoatasaay | 
aati feita wanreaa ferret at ai fameata siete afgsia i3e 
aes sd Wwagctee addi aet: freer ATA AGA 1321 
amt aMeael cad «aifadisamd| sea AAT eT a AEST 133 | 
WMATA Yat Aa saledti dee yee aa mMeyarfela: 13x 
qaste fezaararamfaenenrmrendte: | seaoraoretitr «9 cafteafatt «= hart 1341 
swat Waid TOA QUT: Guha aela dafed ar: | 
qT Wa Uefa Wah ava verge 136! 
Wa Aed Wandied sat fHerafa feacggelsasitien: | 
aa A areisad: Vela UN wag ahaa i3y 
& ad ameara sal: Ge Wea: | Aadiseeid 49 ate eatenronfsafera: 13! 
wa fed daa ateri aaeiaadisea wala woaufacfad: 13¢1 
SQ wae: wal: quenisfedea:ianhgdead ded da atfad: ixot 
aa fate fame faaqd ang ai aera fer qe ugy gfrg ixe 
aa aAstafasear afaeadsaee| tadgedtect TISatagqeata 121 
Te PWG qe Wrddeearias | 
Teg Westhead  araafaert wana ixet 
‘1 believe You to be Kala ( the Time-Spirit), the almighty Ruler of all, having no beginning 
or end and moving alike among all the creatures, although it is You, again, who serve as an 
occasion for them to contend with one another. (28) None, O Lord, can know what You intend 
doing when You are acting like men. No one is ever dear or loathsome to You; itis men alone 
who think of You in terms of diversity. (29) O Lord, You are the Soul of the universe, nay, the 
universe itself. You are, as a matter of fact, devoid of birth and actions; Your birth and actions 
in the sub-human species as well as among men, Rsis and aquatic creatures are mere 
sport.(30) When You offended (Your foster-mother) Yagoda (by smashing the pot of curds) 
and she took a cord to bind You, the way in which You stood full of fear, with Your face cast 
down, Your eyes rolling about in confusion and their collyrium dissolved in tears, fills me with 
bewilderment. To think that even He of whom Fear itself is afraid should appear so stricken 
with fear! (31) Some people aver that, though unborn, You have appeared in the race of Your 
beloved Yadu of sacred renown justin orderto enhance his glory, even as a sandal tree takes 
root on the Malaya mountain in order to bring reputation to the latter. (32) Others declare 
that, though birthless, You were born of Devaki, Vasudeva's wife for the protection of this 
world and the extermination of the enemies of gods, as solicited by the couple (in their 


previous existence). (33) Still others assert thatin response to the prayer of Brahma (the self- 
born Creator) You have appeared (in our midst) to relieve the burden of the earth, which was 


Dis. 8 ] : 
BOOK ONE 31 
Sr Br Hr : 
* SSSA Be Be Se BY BE Be Be Be Be Be MY Be Be Be Me Be Me Be Be BBY Be BRE RR RAE BE AE He Be He bre he hr te te te te tr tr ee er eo eee ee he 


groaning under a heavy load like a vessel sinking in the sea. (34) Some others maintain that 
You have descended on earth with the intention of performing deeds fit to be heard of or dwelt 
upon by those who are being tormented in this world by ignorance, desire and selfish 
acts.(35) That is why Your devotees constantly listen to, sing, repeat to others and 
contemplate on Your stories and rejoice; and it is they alone who behold before long Your 
lotus-feet that put an end to the stream of births and deaths. (36) O Lord, (we know) You have 
always granted the wishes of Your own people. Is ita fact, then, that You intend this very day 
to leave us, Your relations, who exclusively depend on You and who have no asylum other 
thanYour lotus-feet, having alienated other monarchs by inflicting suffering on them ? (37) 
When You are out of sight, the Yadus and ourselves, the Pandavas, are of no more 
consequence In name or form than the senses when their ruler, the soul, has quitted them. 
(38) This earth will not look so bright then, O Wielder of a mace, as it does now, adorned by 
Your foot-prints, which are easily distinguished by their characteristic marks (of a lotus, 
thunderbolt, banner and goad etc.).(39) These territories, so highly prosperous and so rich 
in their ripe crops and vegetation, as well as these woodlands and hills, rivers and oceans, 
flourish only under Your benign looks. (40) O Lord, You are not only the Ruler and the Soul 
of the universe but the universe itself; kindly cut asunder the strong bond of affection that 
binds me with my own people, the Pandus and the Vrsnis (the Yadus). (41) Even as the 
Ganga incessantly pours its waters into the ocean, so let my thought, O Lord of the Madhus, 
constantly and exclusively find delight in You. (42) O glorious Krsna, friend of Arjuna, 
foremost among the Vrsnis, You are fire as it were to burn the whole race of princes who are 
proving the bane of the earth. Your prowess is infinite. Govinda, Your descent on this earth 
is intended only to relieve the distress of the cows, the Brahmanas and the gods. Obeisance 
to You, O Master of Yoga, O divine Teacher of the universe!" (43) 


Yd sald 
gaat ed: «= Ooefaeted: 1 We Hera aqpust aleafaa area ixx! 
at aefguasa sfaea meet! Faas agi ae WM TaN Farka: 1s! 
SAAT aes: PMs | atfrciscifteretigqert Yai: xe 
ame ue edad deel ae Medea $= fam: Aedteaet 7a: Ive 
aT A URdI Be HS QUeH: |URaaea tea seal Asaitfevitéan: ive 
Tefestaqeraatad Md TeSe: la A etfacartat afa astaqarad: ixe! 
Sl wa: senadettge aet fear sit A ag atera acud West aa: 1401 
Sit aed Bet aserfadtferd: | adirfeetaate edt arated 142! 
am usa UgTH: GI al Gea yest att A ayaigneet 142 
sf sEriad AER IRAE Sedat sae Srikegcsfatsaga ATEAISeAT: YA. 

Sita went on: In this way when Prtha (Kunti) extolled in sweet words the consummate 
glory of Lord Vaikuntha (Sri Krsna), He gently smiled as if bewitching her by His Maya 
(deluding potency). (44) "So be it,” said Sri Krsna and, taking leave of her,entered the city 
of Hastinapura once again; then, after bidding adieu to the other ladies as well, He was about 
to leave for Dwaraka when king Yudhisthira detained Him out of love. (45) The king, who was 
seized with remorse (for his having been instrumental in bringing about the destruction of 
his own kinsmen), could not be consoled even though Vyasa and others, who understood 


Ay forted him by means 
Providence, and even Sri Krsna of marvellous deeds com 
Nace aris Brooding over the death of his kinsmen with a bewildered mind, O holy 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9 


dete te tte Soke Ree tote sede ke Rea eee Re Re Re Re Rea Re Re RE Re RTE BERR ERE RR Re Re ae ae a a 


Be BeBe BERR LER RE ME RRR BE Re REE EME BERET AT EM 


Brahmanas, and overpowered by affection and _ infatuation, king Nudhisthita (the son of 
Dharma, the god of righteousness) said:—(47) “Oh, look at this ignorance rooted in my 
heart! Evil-minded as | am, | brought about the destruction of many Aksauhinis* for the 
sake of this body, which is the food of other creatures (such as jackals and dogs). (48) 
There can be no redemption from hell even after millions and millions of years for me, 
an enemy of children, Brahmanas, my own kith and kin, friends, uncles, cousins and 
preceptors. (49) The saving clause found in the scriptures that the destruction of enemies 
in a righteous war on the part of a monarch seeking the protection of his subjects is no 
sin, fails to satisfy me. (50) The wrong that | have done in this life to the womenfolk whose 
husbands and other relations have been slain by me or on my account | shall not be able 
to expiate through sacrificial performances enjoined on a householder. (51) One cannot 
atone for the destruction of a single life by any number of sacrifices (that involve the wilful 
slaughter of animals), any more than one can purify muddy water by dissolving more mud 
into it or counteract the pollution caused by spirituous liquor by adding more to it. (52) 
Thus ends the eighth discourse entitled “Kunti’s Song of Praise and Yudhisthira’s 
Remorse” in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


3g Aaa Seara: 
Discourse IX 


Yudhisthira and others call on Bhisma and the latter drops 
his mortal coil, extolling Sri Krsna 
U7 sdd 

git 0 iit: «6 UstIsteraderdfafacdan | act fag wena ax eaadtsaad 
qal ad Wie: Wa Bak: autyfed: | sans Wao earadhereaat | 
ware 6 fot RE 1 A dehbad qo: gar ga wer: 
ger Praitd «yet feayeqaitara woty: uvsar sitet ar: ae eieaoTr | 
wa wea: Wi datas anid aa ae wa 
dat ARG eet sear SUA: | geeat weg: Ufeet Xora: | 
as = gexumeftadt §=—-eaedtsfera: | malta atenishrsy atiraisar Gate: t 
aa a Wat wey SeNIAeatsAeM: | Rreeta sey: HyaufSTarea: | 
ay SAA AMT aT | Yara enteit Serereiferernferet 2 
Su A aes Se wIctae! eet ystaraa ATeataraferert| 0 
Suta went on: Thus afraid of the wrongs perpetrated against humanity, king Yudhisthira 
thereafter proceeded to Vinasana (the battle-field of Kuruksetra)—where Devavrata (Bhisma) 


lay (on his bed of arrows), seeking enlightenment about all sacred duties. (1) Thereupon all 
his celebrated brothers (Bhima and others) followed him, O holy Brahmanas, in chariots 


CO © M ££ K ww A WwW 


~ Ain Aksaubinl consists of 21,870 chariots, an equal number of elephants, 1,09,250 foot and 65,610 horses. 


Dis. 9 
ee ee BOOK ONE 2 
SS NRG GG LR RRR BRE TRAE BRA RRR ARE RAT RESALE 


decked with gold and driven by excellent horses, as also the sages Vyasa, Dhaumya (the 
family priest of Yudhisthira) and others. (2) Lord Sri Krsna Himself, O Saunaka, rode in a 
chariot along with Dhanafijaya (Arjuna, so-called because of his having fetched as a tribute 
from his enemies untold riches for Yudhisthira, thereby enabling him to perform his famous 
Rajasuya Sacrifice, which earned him the title of Emperor). Accompanied by them, king 
Yudhisthira shone brightly like Kubera (the Chief of the Yaksas, a class of demigods) in the 
midst of Guhyakas (Yaksas). (3) Perceiving Bhisma lying on the ground like a god fallen from 
heaven, the Pandavas and their attendants as well as Sri Krsna made obeisance to him. (4) 
At that time, O Saunaka, Brahmana_ sages, celestial sages and royal sages, all had 
assembled there in order to see Bhisma (the foremost of the Bharatas). (5) Parvata, Narada, 
Dhaumya, the divine Badarayana (Vedavyasa), Brhadaswa, Bharadwaja, Parasurama (the 
son of Renuka) with his pupils, Vasistha, Indrapramada, Trita, Grtsamada, Asita, Kaksivan, 
Gautama and Atri, Viswamitra (a scion of Kusgika), Sudargana and other holy sages like 
Brahmarata (Suka) and even so Kagyapa, Angirasa and others arrived with their pupils, O 
Saunaka. (6—8) Seeing those highly blessed souls assembled there, Bhisma* (the 
foremost of the Vasus, a class of gods) who was well-versed in the principles of right conduct 
paid his respect to them with due regard to the occasion and place. (9) Bhisma was also 
acquainted with the glory of Sri Krsna, the Lord of the universe, who had sat before him in 
a personal form assumed through Maya, and was also enthroned in his heart, and he paid 
his homage to Him. (10) 


qMgqarqar ar WMASIAASA | SLAB Tae AT 122 
ae ers ae ret: | silfead area fee faserteqasran: 1%?! 
AkeraseaA Ast GN ass ag: lqeichd Tel HA ATA Alea Wes: 123! 
ad miepd FA Naat a aaa aaet aaa oll arta arate: 12 
at oadadl «Ue | Tenftrdanter: | Hwisel Mited ara Yecperedd faa 124 | 
q wel alesis Far ae fafertads! afer at qara waarst fe 126! 
aan *aqat aaa wards dediafedsaen are ofe son: Wat ie! 

Eyes blinded with tears of affection, Bhisma looked at the sons of Pandu, who sat beside 
him, full of modesty and love, and spoke to them as follows :—(11) “How painful and how 
unjust it has been that you, the progeny of righteousness, and votaries of the Brahmanas, 
Dharma (goodness) and Lord Acyuta (Sri Krsna) should have lived a life of suffering, which 
you surely did not deserve. (12) When the great warrior Pandu breathed his last, you were 
all tender of age, and my daughter-in-law, Prtha, along with you, her children, had to suffer 
many hardships on your account more than once. (13) | believe that all your unwelcome 
experiences were attributable to. Time (Providence); for the whole world with its guardian 
deities is ruled over by Time even as the clouds are by the wind. (14) Where king Yudhisthira, 
the son of Dharma was the ruler, Bhima held the mace in his hand, Arjuna was the archer 
and Gandiva the bow, and where Sri Krsna was the friend and well-wisher,to think of 
adversity even there ! (15) Indeed no man, O king, can ever discover the intention of Sri 
Krsna; even seers get bewildered in their seeking to find it out. (1 6) Therefore, knowing it for 
certain that all these events depend on the will of Providence, O chief of the Bharatas, follow 
His will. O ruler of men, and protect the helpless people. as you are their sole monarch. (17) 


3 amar Waa ARAM: AML! Area wie yeanta after 12 
eae aman aq dead fara: 1 cata: Marta cHitet 718s! 


* The Mahabharata tells us that Bhisma was an incarnation of Dyauh, the formost of the eight Vasus. 


SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9 


a Re BeBe BeBe RRA RRR EER RR EERE RE RE SE RTE RR SERRE SRE RE SE BRE BEB AE  SE ES SE  Aese $e Rr kee, 


LAAKKAKKAARKKLHRAKLRAKRLAKN A NLA See nO 
q ur med fa fa qeqaqi aad: ated ad Aleqat Aner 1201 
gaia: aaa eereEge: iaepd Afrawe Frame A what Re 
Say Ue THRU SARI: AAT HOM SAAT: 1221 
STaRISSASA TA TAL STH SATA AA | SS, HAL, ait Weald cH: 1231 

q satal We sda meat aaied feral 
THAR RUAN COA Tara STATA HS: 1 2¥ 


"Sri Krsna is God Himself. He is no other than the Prime Person, Lord Narayana. 
Deluding the world by His Maya, He lives incognito among the Vrsnis (a branch of the 
Yadus). (18) No one else than Lord Siva, the celestial sage Narada and Lord Kapila Himself, 
O Yudhisthira, know the most hidden glory of Sri Krsna, whom you think to be your cousin 
(maternal uncle's son), beloved friend and greatest well-wisher and whom out of affection 
you made your counsellor, envoy and charioteer ! (19-20) In Him,who is the Soul of the 
universe, who looks upon all with the same eye, is one without a second and is free from 
egotism and blemishless, there can be no sense of diversity in regard to these divergent 
functions on any account. (21) Yét, O king, look at His compassion for those who are 
exclusively devoted to Him, in that Sri Krsna has appeared in person before meat this hour, 
when | am about to give up the ghost. (22) A Yogi (mystic) who casts off his body with his 
thought fixed on Him through devotion and chanting His Name with his tongue is rid of all 
. hankerings and released from the bondage of actions. (23) May that Lord, who is adorable 
even for gods and possessed of four arms, whose lotus-like countenance beams with 
gracious smiles and reddish eyes and who appears to others only in their meditation stay 
on here till | shuffle off this body." (24) 
aa | 
Gaipedanvt 8a 8 8wAsti sgeighaMeMiqgion Awad 
UERataateds aMael 9 AMSA! ANNA «LR I 
aMeaidt, Uses, Teresi fara: | ate vagal aarenrdanta: 1291 
aaaMaMas ea aM Wl AMreMAdeag avlamra ardladircl 
a saat a ale: sei a  alhrescqalatsenaaranm: 12°! 
aeladee Rr: Aeauitiaamags TW smegee | 
SN wadidae  wadeust ay: ferstitfeaqrerencad 130! 
faxgat 8 UTC is TTI TATA, «= TTaTgqeTeTT: | 
Pavactsagqitiasnaera wa feagserietr, 132 | 


? Suta continued: Hearing this, Yudhisthira asked Bhisma even as he lay on his cage- 
like bed of arrows questions concerning a variety of Dharmas (sacred obligations or courses 
of conduct) in the presence of the Rsis. (25) Thereupon Bhisma, who had realized the Truth, 
discoursed upon, one by one, the various Dharmas (duties) determined by the innate 
disposition of men and apportioned with due regard to their Varna (Social grade) and ASrama 
(stage in life) and the twofold Dharmas (the Dharmas involving worldly activity—Pravrtti, and 
those marked by withdrawal from such activity—Nivrtti) severally recommended for those 
endowed with dispassion and those who are full of worldly attachment, the Dharmas relating 
to charitable gifts, the duties obligatory on monarchs, the courses of conduct which are 
conducive to liberation, the duties of women and the courses of conduct that are intended 





He 
“4 
aI 
uf 
‘ 
a 


ed 





es BOOK ONE ©: 


Wr Wr Sr Br Sr tr 35 
We Br ¥e Fr tr Br Be Be Wr Ke Ke Ke Ke He Hr Ke We Hr We We We Kr He Ke Hr Se RES Re Me Re Re Re eH Be Be Re He Be Re He Re Re Re Re Re Re He He RH He Re Be Re He RR Re Re RR RR Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Rr hr he 


to propitiate the Lord, both briefly and in detail. He also explained, O Saunaka, the four ends 
of human pursuit, viz., Dharma (religious merit), Artha (worldly riches), Kama (Sensuous 
enjoyment) and Moksa (final beatitude or liberation) as well as the means to them in their 
true perspective with the help of many illustrative anecdotes and stories. (26—28) While he 
was thus discoursing on Dharma, there arrived the time when the sun changes its course 
towards the north—a time whichis coveted by Yogis (mystics) who drop their body according 
to their pleasure. (29) Thereupon Bhisma (who had led on the battle-field thousands of 
warriors) wound up his speech and €xClusively fixed his mind, which was absolutely free from 
worldly attachment, as well as his eyes, which knew no winking, on Sri Krsna, the Prime 
Person, who was present before him in His four-armed form, clad in shining yellow robes. 
(30) The last traces of sin (if any) left in him were obliterated by his concentrated thought on 
the Most Holy and the pain which he felt on account of the weapons (arrows piercing his 
body) quickly disappeared at a mere glance of the Lord. Now, while casting off his body, he 
Stopped all the activities and wanderings of his senses and extolled Lord Janardana (Sri 


Krsna). (31) 
MAT SAT 
ead fated sephrqaay UGATATE: 1321 
fayatannt TATA Caen onary cars | 
aqgeaperqdeaet fata wig Asqaer i331 
are Tens remtrrgnageasrraie ge | 
aq fafraattafremrrata famamnadsed PT SIT 13h 
wae wdraaat frera wea foomideat wi fae 
ferrafa ude eat ume titan 134 
aera fier wramae daqe | 
paaneeaiada 4 asunit: wae aa Ase 1381 
aPrTaadera Terfagrataterend ara TA: | 


yaya agit a Aad z Mar Waited: 1321 
fares OGLE} qdeateat 4 8§««- Afeaperaroital | 
anata ted «A aaeldie Pret eda Te: AAA IRR! 
aa fora fat ero [STATUTE a aTOTch er SAAT: 
peda § SAeM: pl feo aa Waae: Ixol 
THOS: aata DID IESCUSESC Tar | 


ofagaituet Saenhtc aafermdist fagadante: 1x2 
of my departure (from this mortal world) | offer my mind, 


Bhigma said : Now on Tee Idly enjoyment), to the supreme Lord, Sri Krsna (the 


which is free from all thirst (for wor 





36 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9 


foremost of the Yadus), who, while retaining His own blissful character all along, sometimes 
assumes His own Prakrti (Maya) in order to carry on His sport, from which flows the Stream 
of creation. (32) May! cherish motiveless love for Sri Krsna, the friend of Vijaya (Arjuna), who 
has assumed a personality charming to the: three worlds and dark as the Tamala tree, and 
is clad in excellent robes, brilliant as the rays of the sun, and whose lotus-like countenance 
has curly locks floating about it. (83) May my mind, body and soul rest in Sri Krsna, whose 
face is hemmed all round by flowing hair soiled with the dust raised by the horses’ hoofs on 
the battle-field and is bedecked with drops of perspiration, and whose skin is being pierced 
by my sharp arrows, though protected with a shining armour. (34) May | develop love for the 
friend of Prtha's son (Arjuna), who at the request of His friend immediately drove and placed 
his chariot in the middle of the Pandava and the Kaurava hosts and, planting Himself there, 
cut short the life of the hostile warriors by His very looks. (35) May | be blessed with devotion 
to the feet of that Supreme Being who by imparting spiritual knowledge (in the form of the 
Gita) dispelled the (temporary) delusion of His friend, who on seeing us (generals of the 
Kaurava forces) at the van of the hostile army arrayed at a distance felt disinclined to kill his 
own kith and kin because he regarded ita sin. (86) Breaking His own vow (not to take up arms 
during the Mahabharata war), to fulfil and exalt my vow (of compelling Him to take up arms), 
Sri Krsna jumped down from the car on which He had taken His seat and, like a lion that 
pounces upon an elephant to kill him, darted towards me with a wheel of His chariot in His 
hand, the earth trembling under His feet and His upper garment dropping behind Him. (37) 
Hit with the piercing arrows of a desperado like me and bathed in blood, and with His armour 
broken, He who rushed forth to kill me, disregarding the remonstrances of Arjuna—may that 
Lord Mukunda (the Bestower of blessedness) be my asylum. (38) May | in my last moments 
develop love for the Lord who, having taken upon Himself the responsibility to protect the 
chariot of Vijaya (Arjuna), took the charioteer's whip in one hand and held the horses' reins 
in another and looked most attractive in that charming role, witnessing which (at their last 
moment) they who fell on this battle-field attained a form similar to His (or Sarupya-Mukti as 
the scriptures Call it). (89) Having had the signal honour of enjoying the sight of His charming 
gait, graceful movements, winsome smiles and amorous glances (during the famous Rasa 
dance at Vrndavana), the cowherdesses in their mad ecstasy imitated His plays (when the 
Lord suddenly disappeared from their midst—vide Discourses XXXII and XXXIlIl of Book 
Ten) and attained identity with Him (for the time being). (40) In an assembly crowded with 
hosts of sages and foremost princes during the Rajasuya* sacrifice performed by Yudhisthira 
Sri Krsna, who attracted the eyes of them all, had the honour of being worshipped first of 
all before my very eyes. It is He, the Soul of the Universe, who has appeared before me (at 
this moment). (41) Having shaken off the foolish idea of diversity, | have realized that unborn 
Lord, who though one, is severally enthroned in the heart of all embodied creatures brought 
forth by Himself, even as the sun, though one, appears as many to every eye. (42) 


Sara 
Pa wa waTata Saas eee 
Ta Ai sat fenciad ayqe quit aadia feared ixv 
oI sera AqcauMaanted: | MAG: Beat Wat Weld: Wequa: vu! 
wa Peunet meme 9 ounfal afeiie: arf aed |-fadisva xe! 
Cia wi: get ae: acest Hoge: Bem waa: Wa: Ive! 


* A sacrifice performed by a universal monarch with co-operation and help of his tributary princes at the time of his 
coronation as a mark of his undisputed sovereignty. 


Dis: 10 , 
, -* BOOK ONE — . 37 


Li tiit rT Tier r te eet TTT TST eee TT TT TTT TT TTT TTT TTT TT TT Te 

qlee area WEPO TRiet! Tat aaa Wem a aaa 1s! 

egret TT aTMeaated: | tea wed efor faqdarme fay: xe 

Sie ATETTa Fa WACa feds Wea aA S AA AAAISHATA: 12 | 
Suta went on : Having thus merged his soul with all the activities of his mind, speech 
and the visual sense in Sri Krsna, the universal Soul, Bhisma expired, his breath being 
dissolved into the atmospheric air. (43) Perceiving that Bhisma had entered into the one 
indivisible Brahma, all those present there became silent even as birds do at the close of 
day. (44) Then sounded kettledrums beaten by the gods and human beings; the pious 
among the princes shouted applause and showers of flowers poured from heaven. (45) 
Having had the funeral and other rites performed in respect of the deceased, O Saunaka 
(descendant of Bhrgu), Yudhisthira was plunged in sorrow for some time. (46) The sages 
(who had assembled there) extolled Sri Krsna with great delight, uttering His secret names; 
and then, with Sri Krsna in their heart, they returned each to his own hermitage. (47) 
Thereafter Yudhisthira, accompanied by Sri Krsna, returned to Hastinapura and comforted 
his uncle (Dhrtarastra) as wellas his aunt (Gandhari), who was known for her austerity.*(48) 
Then, permitted by his uncle and with the approval of Sri Krsna (the son of Vasudeva), the 
king ruled over his ancestral kingdom with righteousness.(49) 


Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled “Recovery of the throne by Yudhisthira," 
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita 


St PAT PERT HS 
PID 


BIA SRTAISeATA: 


Discourse X 
Sri Krsna's Departure to Dwaraka 


aie Sara 
cat wkarga anda get atyar afte: | 
west: seaegdse: wet sad:  feenepreted: | ¢ | | 
Saunaka said : Having got rid of the ruffians who sought to rob him of his lawful heritage, 


how did Yudhisthira, the foremost of pious rulers, proceed (to rule his kingdom) with his 


younger brothers and what did he accomplish later, averse as he was to the gratification of 


his senses ? (1) aa 


sera 40a SaATISTATTSTa: ueqardrtystidaidd: 1 3 t 
ari aad Use: adem cat | fata: HI ASI Wa: Gaetenadidear 1 x 1 


er blind husband Gandhari kept her eyes blindfolded till her death ever since her marriage, an 


forh j 
* Out of sympathy h has no parallel in human history. 


instance of wifely devotion whic 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10: 


Br Sr Br Br er ir Rr Re Ry Wr Be Be ee Hr Be By Br BY Be We Be He Be He We Be Be Be Be Hs Hr Rr ay rg, 


38 
SEEK LLEHERAELAHN HHL AMAL KK LH KA KN LHS SNH S He eH ee eee 
~ 
: Wal: aa ALG | 
qa: wast firma: warerfadtee: | merwteea: ard, 


aa enea: aan sayqieeda: enmeeavaaya Ui pfefad © 
sfiat aiaagt ara, afar eft: | deat a faetera was Baars wo | 
ST ana: URyenftars al atete wt chfsraftgeisferiad: | 
quar stadt at faced aemi mem qs Faaeiaat aati e 1 
qa drags feat seater ia Aft fagedt fate myers: 1k01 
Gags: ae eld | Aled Ga: | HAA GaN AA AHharnvd Weary 1ke 1 


dhasrediera: ule: dew, fad HA | Sa AAA aoa: 1221 
ua AshtaseaAqetada: | dlerd: Perse facet aA FIs 


Wea eee ualenuSaledchlaa | Patemmraisustata  ewrerdataa: 1 ex 


Sita continued: Having revived the race of Kuru, that had been consumed by the fire 
of internecine feud—even as the wild fire produced by the rubbing of bamboo stems against 
one another consumes a whole forest of bamboos—and established Yudhisthira on his 
throne, the almighty Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), the promoter of the world, rejoiced at heart. (2) 
Having shaken off his infatuation by force of the wisdom that had dawned on him as a result 
of his hearing the teachings of Bhisma and the exhortation of Lord Acyuta (Sri Krsna), 
Yudhisthira ruled over the whole earth, stretching as far as the ocean, like Indra (the lord of 
paradise), enjoying as he did the protection of Sri Krsna (the invincible Lord) and the loyal 
submission of his younger brothers. (3) The god of rain poured down copious showers; the 
earth yielded all that was desired; while cows that had large udders, gladly sprinkled the 
Stalls with milk. (4) Rivers, seas, mountains, trees and creepers and other herbs and plants, 
all bore him abundant products in due season. (5) Living beings had no worries or physical 
ailment nor afflictions of any kind—whether brought about by a wrathful Providence, any 
fellow-being or by one's own self (in the form of bodily or mental suffering) at any time 
whatsoever so long as Yudhisthira (who regarded none as his enemy) reigned as king. (6) 
After spending some months at Hastinapura for the consolation of His friends and relatives | 
as well as for the satisfaction of His sister (Subhadra, wife of Arjuna), Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) 
asked leave of king Yudhisthira (to return home) and, permitted by him, He embraced him 
and bowed to him and, embraced or greeted in turn by others (those who were of the:same 
age or younger) mounted His chariot. (7-8) Subhadra, Draupadi, Kunti and Uttara (the 
daughter of king Virata), and even so Gandhari, Dhrtarastra, Yuyutsu (the only surviving son 
of Dhrtarastra, born of a Vaisya wife), Krpacarya (born in the line of the sage Gotama), 
Nakula and Sahadeva (the twin-born half-brothers of Yudhisthira), Bhimasena and Dhaumya, 
and Satyavati (Bhisma’s stepmother) and other ladies almost fainted (with sorrow), unable 
to bear separation from the Lord (who wielded the Sarnga bow). (9-10) A wise man, who has 
abjured evil company through the fellowship of saints cannot even afford to forgo the 
privilege of listening to His sweet praises being sung by others, having once had the 
opportunity to hear them. (11) How, then, could the Pandavas (the sons of Prtha) bear 
Separation from the Lord, on whom they had bestowed their mind and heart, having had the 
privilege not only of seeing Him (at close quarters), touching His person and conversing with 
Him, but also of reposing, sitting and dining with Him ? (12) Regarding Him with unwinking 
eyes, boundas they were by ties of affection to Him, they all hurried to and fro (to fetch parting 
presents for Him), their heart running after Him. (13) As Sri Krsna (son of Devaki) was about 
to depart from the palace, the ladies who were boundto Him by ties of kinship restrained their 
tears of affection from trickling down, anxious as they were lest any harm might come to Him 


Dis. 10 ] 


Be Re Be Be Ke Ke Be Kee Ke we Hr He Re Re He Br 


BOOK ONE °°: 39 


wr 
SEES SRR ERE Be Re REAR RR RR MRR MRR RE EE RE RE MEER ER ER ERE ROR REMEMBER RE TERE REA ERR Re BeBe 





(through such shedding of tears, whichis regarded as unpropitious at the time of parting from 
a beloved friend or relation). (14) 


Fegqrrg vas STOO: | Yyatrenav|ren AGS SUAMAAT 1241 
STaeRTac: «= etat «= gata aay: Hal: Het Yaslereratam: 1261 
fama Te Aerafayfeai wens usta: fra: frame 21201 
saa: Weise et Od i fata: pan WW ueufa: ufc 
STR: dare aa fester: targets «= efor «= ques: 1281 
SRT STRATE TAROT Aas faaatet: 1201 
Tabors, conchs, kettledrums, lutes, cymbals, trumpets, Dhundhuris, drums, gongs and 
other musical instruments sounded, as also Dundubhis (another type of big drums). (15) 
Going up to the top of their mansions in order to have a look at Sri Krsna, the ladies of the 
Kuru race rained flowers on Him, greeting Him with smiling looks through mingled feeling 
of affection and bashfulness. (16) The thick-haired Arjuna, the favourite of Sri Krsna, held 
over his most beloved friend His white umbrella which was bordered with strings of pearls 
and had a handle of precious stones; while Uddhava and Satyaki held a pair of most 
wonderful chowries. Greeted with showers of flowers on the way, Sri Krsna (the Lord of the 
Madhus) shone brilliantly. (17-18) Everywhere were heard true benedictions pronounced by 
the Brahmanas, which were unsuited to the Lord as viewed in His unqualified (absolute) aspect 
but were quite appropriate to Him in His qualified or personal form. (19) Then began a talk 
which ravished the ears and hearts of all, among the women of Hastinapura (the capital of the 
Lord of the Kurus), who had rivetted their heart on Sri Krsna of excellent renown :—(20) 


a a fam gee: qual a wm aidiefasa sna 
aa Wa waneedieat 6 fdifearar 8 86-qgarfeg 1221 
a wa Yat fedttatfent esitanrt sefa fagadt 
seTaecrafa «= ease STL 22 1 
a a wa wae an Rate § fia: | 
ward wadehioddema ae aa ufepadia 1231 
aa aa weniicaest acy Way a Agariatt: | 
qT Ue gi Weaeion gia A dA Asid 12x! 
aer gemfor aateat quar silafa aan fe aad: fo! 
aa wt aad cal aa wart wal at Brie 
Ta 3 BoA Al: Hemel Bee Waa Aeiteay | 
aq deren: fra: uf: wera deat areifa 1241 
aa oad See | pueret Waa ya: | 
usaha frat aaquefad faaacte walt W aAshM: 1201 
A | - Ade Meiqtae: ante = aet eterorfurisy: 1 
fraha oat: ween  yedeifea:  aaqqedarer: 1221 
a dkigead gt: waat smear dese fe yer: | 
TRAraTaaAeaISTT «=| TET AIST MEET: 12R1 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


Rr Ree Boke er Sr Keer Sr Mr er Sr er Ar HY Br Rr Ke Me Br Br Hr Se Br He Be Br Sr Hr Se Se Se Sr He Me Hr By Be Heer ey Hy y, 


40 


KHKVEKKEHL KKK KVE HAL KKH HH KH AT oHe Lee Ke eee Hee 


wm: wt wanna Pei at wy Fad | 
arat yerqerera: ufed 9 smeaderefatieie Wario! 


"Verily He is the same eternal Person, who abides in His singular undifferentiated Self 
even during the night of universal dissolution prior to the manifestation of the three Gunas 
(modes of Prakrti), when the individual souls retire into God, the Universal Spirit, and when 
all the forces of creation (the Mahat and its evolutes) too lie dormant (in the Unmanifest).(21) 
ltwas He whowith the intention of endowing with a form and name the Spirit, who has neither. 
then inspired His Prakrti—which deludes the Jivas,who are identical in essence with Him and 
which, impelled by His own energy (the Time-Spirit), is disposed to create—and revealed the 
Vedas and other scriptures. (22) Indeed, He is the same Supreme Spirit whose reality in this 
world is perceived by seers who have subdued their senses and fully controlled their breath, 
with a mind yearning for His sight and cleansed of all impurities through Devotion; for it is 
He alone who can thoroughly cleanse our heart (which cannot be so purified by any other 
means, such as Yoga etc.). (23) Again, O friend, He is the same supreme Lord, whose 
sacred stories have been sung again and again in the Vedas and other esoteric scriptures 
by seers (like Maharsi Vyasa) that have expounded profound truths, and who in His own 
sportful ways creates, maintains and reabsorbs the universe all by Himself (without any 
material), and yet does not set attached to the same. (24) Whenever kings whose intellect 
is clouded by Tamas (ignorance) live by unrighteousness, verily it is He who by recourse 
to the quality of pure Sattva (goodness) reveals in Himself the divine attributes of 
omnipotence etc., as well as truthfulness, righteousness, compassion and superhuman 
activity, and assumes various forms from age to age for the good of the world. (25) Oh, how 
supremely praiseworthy is the race of Yadu, that has been honoured by this Supreme 
Person, the Lord of Sri(the goddess of prosperity), through His descent therein. And oh! how 
supremely sacred is the forest associated with the name of the demon Madhu (the area of 
Vraja near about the city of Mathura) that has been graced by Him through His ramblings.(26) 
Ah! the city of Kusasthali (Dwaraka) overshadows the fame of heaven and brings merit and 
renown to the earth (by its association); for the people of that city always behold their Lord 
(Sri Krsna) casting His smiling looks on them whenever He graciously moves out of His 
palace. (27) Surely God Almighty (who is no other than Sri Krsna) must have been 
thoroughly propitiated (in some previous birth) through fasts, ablutions (in sacred waters) 
oblations to the sacred fire etc., by the ladies whose hand has been espoused by Him, in that 
they constantly drink. O friend, the nectar from His lips, the very thought of which maddened 
the women of Vraja. (28) Oh ! how blessed are His eight principal consorts, Rukmini (who 
gave birth to Pradyumna), Jambavati (the mother of Samba) and Nagnajiti (who bore Amba) 
and so on—who were carried off as prizes of valour at an assembly of suitors after 
vanquishing powerful princes like SiSupala (the king of the Cedis), and those others who 
were brought in thousands after slaying the demon Naraka (the son of goddess Earth). (29) 
These women have brought sanctity to and exalted womanhood, which has not been 
allowed freedom andis wanting in purity, inasmuch as their lotus-eyed lord, who ever delight 
their heart by His charming behaviours and loving presents (like the celestial tree of Parijata 
etc.) and never moves out of their mansions even for a moment."(30) 


; waa exit a fim: Rane | Uae Baa dal eft: 1321 
e Seda: «OAT «Ss Terral Heiss: | UNA: sea: Melegeah asus 132! 
2a AMM wR: war, fea! dead ze fara wrasse fra: 1331 
PONFOUMOM WAM, AAA! Had Peat AIA Una 13x 








Dis. 11 ] BOOK ONE 41 


Re We Be Be We We We Ke Ke Ke Ke He He He Hr Hr 


We We we He 
SESEREBEBS RE HEME Me He RAE RE RRR HE REHM RE RER MME RE RE HERRERA ME HERRERO RE RE ROME ME REO ERE MERE RE REA OME He 


Teentaal aretha: WM SMa UPfarantresrdalel AAA: 1341 
wg WAGER: Tel: | aT AA feet argast at weet 1361 
Sid APE AEN US Sea Te AaroeM RUNS RSTTA ATA SEPISEATA: 120 | 


_ While the womenfolk of Hastinapura were uttering such words, Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) went 
His way, greeting them by His smiling looks. (31) Apprehending danger from His foes, king 
Yudhisthira despatched out of sheer affection an army consisting of all the four limbs, (viz., 
elephants, horses, chariots and foot soldiers) to serve as an escort for Sri Krsna (the Slayer 
of the demon Madhu). (32) Sri Krsna (the grandson of Strasena) now sent back the 
Pandavas (the descendants of Kuru), who being strongly attached to Him had come very far, 
distressed at the thought of separation from Him. He then departed for His own city 
(Dwaraka) with His favourite companions (Uddhava, Satyaki and others). (33) Passing 
through the territories of Kuru-Jangala, Paficala and Sirasena (Mathura) and the tract 
stretching along the banks of the Yamuna, as well as Brahmavarta and Kuruksetra, the 
kingdoms of Matsya and Saraswata (the territory stretching along the banks of the 
Saraswati) and Marudhanwa, the Lord reached the kingdom of Anarta (Gujarat), lying 
beyond the principalities of Sauvira and Abhira, O Saunaka, His horses being a bit 
exhausted by that time. (34-35) In every part of the country He passed through, the people 
residing there honoured Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) with presents (of various kinds). At dusk He 
would alight from His car and, repairing to some lake, say His Sandhya prayers. (36) 


Thus ends the tenth discourse entitled "Sri Krsna's Return to Dwaraka", forming 
part of the story relating to the Naimisa forest, in Book One of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


Wet 0. 2t ft. e 
PII 


31 Nehleant Seals: 


Discourse XI 
Right royal reception of Sri Krsna at Dwaraka 
Yd said 
SAH A SU GSE SM! eet arat ast fase wrafaai gt 
GH saat Wala USaEmrATacgnorsntors | 
Sena: awinaaye aMetavs Hest se: | 2 | 
aya 480 ST RTT ag: eM: at deeltoteat: | 2 | 
aaa Taalaaled: | SAKATA Wiens stems freer i ¥ 1 
Sapo:  Waedrscat Fret | ax Aagqeentadnaansicar: 1 & 1 
Sita continued : Reaching His highly prosperous territory of Anarta, Sri Krsna blew His 
great conch (Paficajanya) to soothe as it were the grief of His people (caused by His long 
absence). (1) Being thus blown, the conch, with its white bulb turned red on account of its 
contact with the rosy lips of the almighty Lord, shone resplendent in His lotus palms like a 


inaing swan perched on a pair of red lotuses. (2) Hearing that (familiar) blast, which 
searedaweyiie ternal of the world, the entire population (of Dwaraka) sallied forth to meet 


[564] B. M. 4— 








SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ['Dis. 14 
42 ered tre et ARR RATA eR AS HS Br Se esr Se Se Re Me Me Me Me Ae Ber Hr Be Re ee He He Hew, 
Se Me Ke We Kr Be Ke ; __ 


SAR RASS RRR BR DR BERR BARR ABER ERED SS 
eir lord. (3) They respectfully brought their presents to the Lord—who 
rejoiced in His own Self and was ever perfect in His own inherent bliss—even as one would 
offer lights to the sun-god (the ultimate source of all light); and, their countenance beaming 
with joy, they addressed Him, the friend and protector of all, in a voice choked with delight, 
even as children would speak to their father -—(4-5) 


aa: wa ae wets fakBrafeagtsarat 
ua aaeapat Ul A aA wis: Wad UW: Wye 1 
qa aed wa faawmaqt aaa ara qecta: fort 
a wae: wa aw ad seg Fit ayers 0 | 
SR CIC CME CCM IC EAC MRCEIEL: OL 
jafnakeastead wat wi da adam cl 
ahaa at Aa HEL AB aA Pelagara | 
decalienaa: aut ude va faneuita weary | ¢ | 
sft aldihat ata: seal Uma: | YaMsAAS GoM fad Ta 1 Fo | 


"© Lord, we ever bow down before Your lotus-feet, adored even by Brahma (the 
Creator), Lord Siva (Brahma's son) and Indra (the ruler of the gods), the supreme resort of 
those aspiring for the highest bliss (final beatitude) and beyond the realm of Kala (the Time- 
Spirit), the supreme Ruler (of all created beings). (6) Be pleased to promote our happiness, 
O Creator of the universe; for You are our mother and disinterested friend, our lord and 
father; nay, You are our true preceptor and supreme Deity; we have become blessed by 
serving You. (7) Oh, how fortunate are we in having You as our lord, since we behold Your 
lovely form, the abode of all charms, and Your countenance with its loving smiles and 
affectionate looks, a rare sight even for the gods residing in heaven ! (8) Whenever, O Lord 
with lotus eyes, You depart for Hastinapura (the capital of the Kurus) or to Mathura (the 
capital of the Madhus) to see Your friends and relations, every moment that passes without 
You appears to us as long as a myriad years; and we feel as miserable as eyes without the 
sun, O Acyuta".(9) Hearing the words (of praise) uttered by the people (of Dwaraka), the 
Lord, whois so fond of His devotees, entered the city, extending His grace to all through His 


looks. (10) 
: laneqeraertat 8§«-asifsradiiftrar 122 1 
Pa dadiavaquag sedis: | SIMMS aceon ste. 1221 
mgERarTy Sdchidead oe | FAST SHI: Seearaqayy 123 | 
SATs ASMA ATA Sea, fei Tareeat wegerenngt: 1261 
aX GIN Je a qemaMHcA: | stepdt © -YuaSielfesfirefadiach: 1241 


Even as the city of Bhogavati (the capital of the region of Patala) is guarded by the Nagas 
(a race of serpents, that are capable of assuming any shape they like), the city of Dwaraka 
was protected by the Madhus, the Bhojas, the Dasarhas, the Arhas, the Kukuras, the 
Andhakas and the Vrsnis—branches of the Yadava race, who were their own equals in 
strength (were equalled by none). (11) It was adorned with lotus-lakes that were surrounded 
by orchards, gardens and parks full of sacred trees and arbours rich in all the products of 
every season. (12) The gates of the city and the palaces as well as the thoroughfares were 
adorned with festoons as a mark of festivity. The city was further decorated with flags and, 
banners of various shapes and designs, the fluttering ends of which intercepted the sun here 


Him, longing to see th 








Dis. 11-], A. BOOK ONE*' ~~ 43 


Pr Br Be We He Re Hr Ke Be Be ACHE RE HE He ee 
MUSE We We Mr re Be Be Be Be Me Me Re He Re HR Be RRR AR RR RE RE REE A Ree Be Me Be Be Re Re Re Re RE RE REA REET EERE RE REL REREREREREAE RE EME EMH 





and there. (13) Its highways, streets, bazars and quadrangles had been thoroughly cleaned 
and sprinkled with scented water and were strewn with fruits, flowers, unbroken rice and 
sprouts (that had been rained on the Lord as something auspicious). (14) The entrance of 
every house in the city was adorned with cu rds, unbroken rice, fruits andSugar-cane, pitchers 
full of water, offering, incense and lights. (15) 


Pera Seared «= ageal )« HeTAT: | STATA Wagga: 1K 

TYRAC Ua  wraadhya: | Wedesao endear sseT: 1219 | 

aU UPA Met: Wqage: | agddtaer  mereteor |= age: | 

TASTY WEST: TOATTATATATRT: 12S 1 

aR Wat «aedeagal: | SaHusaaldtenaleaaaisra: 1221 

qeadenTral: qrrtetaker: | Tad ahead A120! 

Wear A UMM aaa ade | Amare 1221 

Welstareareerar en eas ea AAT: lsat ase aranfraday: 1221 

wa a ouefhids: wart: watt | amifitikerisddtefrantesraa 1231 

The noble-minded Vasudeva (Sri Krsna's father) and Akrura (Vasudeva's cousin) and 

king Ugrasena (Sri Krsna's maternal granduncle) and Sri Rama (Balarama, Sri Krsna's elder 
brother) of marvellous prowess, and Pradyumna and Carudesna (Rukmini's sons) and 
Samba, Jambavati's son, in transport of joy, quitted their beds and seats and even meals on 
hearing of the return of their most beloved Sri Krsna. (16-17) Excited with emotion and full 
of joy and esteem, they placed a lordly elephant at their head (to serve as a good omen); and 
accompanied with Brahmanas reciting benedictory hymns and equipped with articles of 
good omen, they mounted their chariots and sallied forth to meet the Lord, amidst the blast 
of conchs and trumpets and the chanting of Vedic hymns. (18) The chief among the 
courtezans, whose faces looked very charming with their cheeks irradiated by splendid ear- 
rings, proceeded in their hundreds in palanquins, eager to have a look at Him. (19) Even so 
actors, dancers and songsters as well as panegyrists, bards and minstrels glorified the 
wonderful exploits of the Lord of excellent renown. (20) The Lord on that occasion met His 
kinsmen and attendants as well as the citizens in the appropriate manner and showed His 
consideration to all. (21) Gratifying them all down to the pariah by bowing down His head, 
greeting in respectful terms, clasping to the bosom, pressing the hand of and greeting with 
smiles and endearing looks, and granting them boons of their choice, and Himself blessed 
by His elders, the Brahmanas and their wives, the aged folk and others, including the 
panegyrists, the almighty Lord entered the city. (22-23) 


WAAR Wa HO gNcHlal: Hoke: | Palvarenghas adtaureraar: 1 2X1 
frat freon aaa gateania faqea fe ea: Bratermreneqad 12h 1 
fra fart Gait: WAI Wa SIM! Seal SlHdISM! ARS deragqsry 121 
farardaneasteaed: Taaasaataa: Ufst | 
fraigara aati att et 9 aainigteamdgd: 1201 


As Sri Krsna was passing along the main road, the women of respectful families of 
Dwaraka went up to the top of their mansions, O Saunaka, to enjoy the grand feast of His 
Sight. (24) The bosom of Lord Acyuta (Sri Krsna) is the abode of Sri (the goddess of 
prosperity); His countenance, a cup of nectar for all eyes to drink from; His arms, the habitat 
6f the guardians of the different worlds (who ever reside in them); His lotus-like feet, the home 


44 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11 


Be We Re Be Me Re Re Be Me Re Be Bee Re RE RE REE RE ERE RE RE RE RE RE REE REE BEBE ERE BREE ERE Be ERE BeBe Be BeBe He He Br Br He He He Sr Hr Be Hr He Ke Re He Be Br Br Be Be Ke Be Ke He Ke Wr Br Hr Ke He Br Hr kr 





of the bee-like devotees; nay, each of His limbs is an embodiment of elegance. That is why 
the eyes of the residents of Dwaraka knew no satiety, even though they beheld Him 
everyday. (25-26) With the white umbrella spread over His head and a pair of chowries 
waving on both sides and flowers raining all round, the Lord, who was clad in yellow robes 
and adorned with His garland of sylvan flowers, shone on the road like a cloud with the sun 
shining overhead, a pair of moons moving in a circle about it, stars scattered all round and 
a rainbow and flashes of lightning illumining it. {27) 


sas we fat: age: ead: iaae Reet aa eawingal Yair 
qT: Umasana  waeqdraten: | Waele: fafiraasisios: 129 | 
sina «ANA )«©=—- AAHIAAGMALI ae «AA Ueilat Geerier a alsa 130! 
Uca: Ula ster yeu faster aenasamelca: | 
FARR, AeA Ale  aAdsilfSsdetearat: 1321 
TCE | GATE: UR UL 
Peguareaag afiesdiat  wyqat  agarisei 
aaa urinal vwraan amet ad zwar 
uw ue wt fama daddetu aatt sea cofefad 133 
wa 89 garet:—CtstsésfettfTHattfeuiif: 9 a eqasrayr 
fama at weat aaa fat aera fra: iax 
a W Relnshaaadl: Waar ta Gkaeet War Mend Bar i3e 
SeMaaAMeaeleraisidelhded Aeatstt arr 
ay amassed aelrsa ferried qed step: 136! 
wa Wad weal Paguy afeqqi siete agi emgvart adisqe: 1301 
UWielediar «= Nenirensfa «= dex: 1a Gea BalssHeron afegederstat 13¢1 
aq Utsaet Yel: GUI Udad we: 1 aaa wdélat uaa aerise 
Sq Sead AS TRAE Beda WaseHel Aaa 
APMsKHAaaM AMAGAMSAA: | 22 Il 


First of all He entered the palace of His parents (Devaki and Vasudeva) and gladly bowed 
His head to all His seven mothers, Devaki and others, who in their turn clasped Him to their 
bosom. (28) As they placed their son in their lap, milk flowed from their breasts (even in their 
old age) due to their affection for Him; and beside themselves with joy, they bathed Him in 
tears. (29) He next entered His own palace, unsurpassed by any other, which was equipped 
with all that could be desired and had a separate mansion for each of His consorts, sixteen 
thousands and odd in number. (30) The ladies felt overjoyed at heart to behold from a 
distance theirlord, who had returned home after a long absence; and, with bashful eyes and 
faces, they quickly abandoned their seats as well as their thought of Him (not that He was 
present before them in person) as also the vows of austerity* (that they had taken during the 
absence of their lord). (31) Full of infinite love, they embraced their Lord, first mentally, then 


* The Yajnavalkya-Smrti says :— 
Hisl MACH AAS | SIA We AA Asi WaT It 


“ A woman whose husband is away from her. should give up amusement, decoration of her body, visiting social functions, 





yesting and calling at another's house.” 


Dis. 12 ] 
Be Be Br Be He Ke Sr He He Be Se My He he He Me Bre Ke eRe Hr Hr He Hy ae BOOK ONE 45 
EEL LEE EE EAE ERA LRA LALA ELLER SAR 


ae poets ee net body as well through their babes (under the pretext of offering 
thatitis thetatneenimeer 2 In the person of the babes themselves according to the maxim 
they had’so ae eee rte ie is borninthe shape of his son—areara stad qa:). The tears which 
Aawricin Seite ARSE = corners of their eyes out of their bashful nature now trickled 
seeeeeee neck : és, O Saunaka (foremost of the Bhrgus), since they could no longer 

) emotion. (32) Although He (ever) remained by their side and that too in their 
private chamber, His feet appeared to them as full of fresher charm every moment. What 
woman would cease to love those feet, which even Sri (the Goddess of Fortune) cannot 
abandon even for a moment, though noted for Her fickleness* ? (33) Even as the wind burns 
a whole thicket of bamboos by producing fire (through the abrasion of one bamboo against 
another), So did Sri Krsna work the mutual destruction (in the shape of the Mahabharata war) 
of princes who had proved a burden to the earth since their very birth and grown very 
powertul in the meantime, by pitting one against another, and in a like manner brought about 
the extermination of their hosts as well, Himself adhering to His vow of not taking up arms; 
and (having thus accomplished the object of His descent on earth) He became silent. (34) 
It was the same Lord who, having appeared in this mortal world in His own playful way, 
sported in the midst of thousands of most charming women like a worldly man. (35) Stung 
by their guileless and winsome smiles and bashful looks, that bespoke their profound love, 
even Cupid (the conqueror of the world) fainted and dropped his bow. These jewels among 
women, however, could not disturb the serenity of His mind by their amorous gestures. (36) 
Finding Him actively engaged like themselves, the people, ignorant as they are, look upon 
Him who is absolutely unattached as a human being full of attachment. (37) Herein lies the 
divinity of the almighty Lord that, even though abiding in Prakrti (Matter), He never gets 
tainted by the Gunas (modes) of Prakrti, just as a mind that has taken refuge in Him is never 
contaminated by the Gunas of Prakrti abiding in it. (38) Nay, those ignorant ladies (Sri 
Krsna's consorts) themselves, little knowing His greatness, looked upon Him as a hen- 
pecked husband, devoted to their service in the private chamber, even as the notions of 
Aham (I-ness) conceive of God as sharing their own characteristics. (39) 


Thus ends the eleventh discourse entitled "The Entry of Sri Krsna into Dwaraka", forming 
part of the story relating to the Naimisa forest, in Book One of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


x ioe x 
SS SIS 


ZIM gleaseara: 


Discourse XIl 
Birth of Pariksit 
Si sara 
AAA ATTSA AaAtMieastar | Saal «edi WH serailfad: ga: 1 g 
aq WA Hele: Half a vee: | fed a ater NaI Adar aa | 2 | 
ae atdirert uafeq afe aaeiafe A: AEM AM Weare: | 2 | 


Saunaka said : (You have already told us that) the infant in the womb of Uttara, though 
destroyed by the formidable Brahmastra discharged by Aswatthama (Drona’s son), was 


* Fickleness is attributed to the Goddess of Fortune only in Her material form viz., riches. 


mae x 





46 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA _ [Dis. 12 





brought back to life by the Lord Himself. (1) We now wish to hear about the birth and exploits 
of that noble soul of great wisdom, to whom Sukaimparted (true) knowledge, how his death 
came about and what destiny he attained after death. Kindly narrate all this to us, who are 
so earnest about it, if you deem fit. (2-3) 

qd sara 


smiaeatus: fagdie We sen: | sae: aaa: Homraetaaar | x | 
Sita continued : Freed from thirst for all enjoyments through the service of Sri Krsna's 
lotus-feet, the righteous king Yudhisthira protected his subjects like a father, gratifying them 


in everyway. (4) 
Wwe: cadal Gla Afest wad Adti smagiafead a aus fafead wa! & | 
fe aq wm: Geena! qeranaal fem: | sifergde owe: = afere aetaT  g I 


He had (untold) riches and had performed many a sacrifice and earned thereby a place 
in the highest worlds. His consort (queen Draupadi) and brothers were all devoted to him. 
His suzerainty extended over the entire globe, while he enjoyed the sovereignty of 
Jambudwipa. Nay, his fame had reached as far as heaven. (5) But could all these objects 
of enjoyment, coveted even by the gods, O Brahmanas, bring delight to the king, who had 
given his mind to Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), any more than things other 
than food gratify a hungry soul. (6) 


agit dk: @ del Yirettiaael gee afeegarisedstat | © | 
SE SAAT Vee | staat «Ra afegreraeAL ¢ 
sitetterdane ddcheeplse | Aastet dares: 9 Addliear | 
GRWAA eH MAA Wel Wg: 18 | 
staat: Wem Alena wolfe: fared dad utara wm gaat 1201 
faya dada wanareriqa fay: ifasat cgrrae daardda aft: 1221 
While being scorched by the fire of the Brahmastra, that hero (Pariksit) in the womb of 
his mother (Uttara), O Saunaka (the delight of the Bhrgus), beheld some effulgent Being of 
the size of a thumb, most charming in appearance and swarthy of hue, clad in yellow robes 
that shone like lightning and wearing a brilliant diadem of gold. He was no other than Lord 
Acyuta (Sri Krsna). (7-8) He had four long and graceful arms, was adorned with pendants 
of refined gold, had bloodshot eyes and held in one of His hands a mace that shone like a 
firebrand even as He waved it in a circle again and again, Himself revolving round the child 
all the time. (9) He was quenching the fire of the Brahmastra with His mace, even as the sun 
disperses the fog. Perceiving Him by his side, the childin the womb wondered who it was.(10) 
Having quenched that fire, Lord Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), the Protector of virtue, who is infinite 


by nature and omnipresent too, disappeared | in the womb itself, that (unborn) child of ten 
months still looking on. (11) 


Wd: Adah  Mdposweledi sl agen: arveida: uaroghatsrar 1221 
qa Sitatat tis fasettaporfefa: | sacs earara areafacat A Ase 123 | 
fea TM el War eetarsaidtd| Melnaa a fase: sends a dieffacd 1 ey! 
TEMS Wid Weahamiua ged wend Teo ahaa 12k! 
catsideaiet Ae aAenqdaaiud atsqzeia fase safasa ie! 
aaa fasd sit Cle geese: | afeerfs a deel Velma Aerio! 


Dis. 12 ] 
Be We We He He Be We We ee We We Pe We Ke Ke Ge Ke He We He Hy . Bs BOOK ONE : 47 
ERR R RR ARAA RRARR RARE ARR IAL SSRIS AA IER 


Then, at an hour which was favourable for the development of all noble traits and when 
the stars in the ascendant were propitious, was born that child, who maintained the thread 
of Pandu's line and was another Pandu as it were in bodily strength. (12) Delighted at heart 
(at the news of his birth), the king had benedictory hymns recited and rites connected with 
the birth of a child performed by holy Brahmanas like Dhaumya, Krpa and others. (13) The 
king, who knew the right moment for making gifts, bestowed at the sacred hour of the birth” 
of Pariksit (before the navel-stringis cut) gold, cows, lands, villages (as revenue-free grants), 
excellent elephants and horses and the best foodgrains on the Brahmanas. (14) Pleased 
with the gifts, the Brahmanas addressed the king, who was all humility, as follows:—"O jewel 
of the Pauravas (descendants of king Puru), by the will of Providence, which cannot be 
balked, this stainless race of the Purus had all but died out; yet the almighty Lord Visnu (Sri 
Krsna), in order to shower His grace on you, preserved it by saving this child. (15-16) Hence 
he will be known in this world by the name of Visnurata (one who has been saved by Lord 
Visnu). His fame will extend far and wide and he will undoubtedly turn out to be a great 
devotee of God and an exalted soul. (17) 


ea Sara 
BAG ATA UA WOM Aes: | Sqafdal faererat AlYalea AAA: 121 
Yudhisthira asked : Will this child share the good reputation of the glorious and high- 
souled royal sages of his own line, O most worthy souls? (18) 


MAN HA: 
at sstfant aenfesaaha ama: i neva: aes wat arrester 2c 
Wa Bat aay aa Maite: fare: 1 aan fade ami dearafta asaany 120 | 
ttaaraaanta qasniated: |eaar sag: AR SAC GRAE: IRR 
aia ga fart feet fanaa fatiacaeart afesy: faaaiad 1221 
frarean: ara were fiftetaa: ism: ada aa cal Ts: 1231 
waagEa wa PUTA: | tedea galant aartakta emits: 121 
gat afeaa: Hel weld sa Vale: | stedssatet qari WAUTAH: 1241 
Testo waar sre arama Fada Hewes yal eta BNONIT IVE! 
aaa ya fargtuatiei sod saa Wag: We zt: 1201 
fanfare eaaddaat | fate FI Agra areretaa AA 1CI 


The Brahmanas replied : O Yudhisthira (son of Prtha), this grandson of yours will 
protect his subjects just like Ikswaku, the eldest son of Vaivaswata Manu (who presides over 
the present Manwantara), and will be devoted to the Brahmanas and true to his word like Sri 
Rama, the celebrated son of DaSaratha. (19) He will be munificent and kind to those who 
seek his protection like Sibi, the king of the Usinaras; and, like Bharata (the son of Dusyanta), 
he will extend the fame of his own people as well as of those who perform sacrifices. (20) 





* The scripture says :— 

Basha At Waa Aahy | fot acl dd: Wad Aah _ faeitad i 

“A family does not contract Sutaka (impurity caused by childbirth) till the navel string is cut. It is only after the 
umbilical cord is cut that the Sitaka actually commences as a rule." 

A gift made before this operation brings an inexhaustible store of merit to the donor. The Smrti says :— 


Ta Ma Sada Sei Aah AMAA | 


ey 





48 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12 


BeBe Re Ke Ree Me Ree Re eR Re Re Re RR RR ERE RE RE RE RRR RRR RRR RRR RRR RET BREE BY BY BEBE Re Be RT Be Me BEE Be Be BY Be Be ee Be He Be Hr Hr He Be Ke Hr Hr Kr He Hr 4, 
el a el a tl tt tel ct tt a A SS SE tl 


As a leader of bowmen, he will be a match for both the Arjunas (Sahasrabahu and his own 
grandfather); nay, he will be unassailable as fire and unconquerable as the ocean. (21) He 
will be heroic as a lion (the king of beasts), worth resorting to as the Himalayas, enduring 
as the earth and forbearing like parents. (22) In even-mindedness he will compare with 
Brahma (the Creator) himself; while in graciousness of disposition he will be equal to Lord 
Siva. And he will be the support of all living beings like God Visnu (the Abode of Rama, the 
Goddess of Prosperity). (23) In high-mindedness accompanied with excellent virtues, he will 
follow the example of Sri Krsna; he will be. generous as king Rantideva and pious like 
Yayati.(24) He will be equal to Bali in firmness, and unflinching in his devotion to Sri Krsna 
as Prahlada. He will perform a number of ASwamedha sacrifices and will wait upon the 
aged.(25) He will be the progenitor of a race of royal sages and chastiser of those who stray 
from the path of virtue. Nay, he will subdue Kali (the spirit presiding over the Kali age) in the 
interest of mother Earth as well as of righteousness. (26) Hearing of his impending death at 
the hands of Taksaka (a chief of the Nagas), impelled by the curse of a Brahmana's son, he 
will renounce all attachment and take refuge in the feet of Sri Hari. (27) Having ascertained 
the truth about the Spirit from the sage Sukadeva (the son of Vyasa), he will cast off his mortal 
coil, O king, on the bank of Ganga and attain the fearless state (the state of blessedness).(28) 


Sia Ua safesa fast wideeantfad: | menufada: cel wis: eH Wer 12° | 
a wa oie faena: aifafefa aay: im eager aaa = atiye 1301 
a UMA aql say Ae galea: | erga: faqi: areata aster 132 
qeaonsaaerdt FMEA | USS «SATA HKUST: 1321 
Mala aA MMISAtaied: | at Welurnstgedtat fafer after: 1331 
wt wae aut afefe: i asrmafatndia ad: arash ex 
Te Ward tal asian festa sara afaferaran Yeet Freaeprear 1341 
ad UM: POT Ge aay: 1 aat grad! se RY aehda: 136 
gid AAEM ad AS GRAS Sedat WAH ASAT 


Rash AA SleaSeAs: 1221 

Having thus told the king (about the future of the new-born babe), the Brahmanas, who 
were all well-versed in astrology, returned each to his own home after receiving their fee. (29) 
It was this very child who was known all over the world by the name of Pariksit, because this 
gifted boy used to look for, among those whom he saw, the Person whom he had perceived 
in his mother's womb and who always lingered in his thought. (30) Being fostered everyday 
by (the love of) his grandparents, the prince (Pariksit) grew up very soon, even as the orb 
of the moon, waxing by degrees in a bright fortnight everyday, becomes full very soon. (31) 
The king now made up his mind to propitiate the Lord through the performance of a horse- 
Sacrifice in order to atone for his hostile conduct towards his own kith and kin; but since he had 
no money (to defray the expenses of the sacrifice) other than that collected as revenue or fines 
(which was evidently not much), he became thoughtful. (32) Perceiving what was in his mind, 
his younger brothers, at the instance of Acyuta (the immortal Lord SriKrsna) fetched abundant 
riches that had been left in the north (by king Marutta and his priests*). (83) Having thus 


“ In the line of Dista (the fourth of the ten sons of Vaivaswata Manu, the Manu presiding over the present Manwantara) 
there flourished a universal monarch, Marutta by name, who performed a sacrifice which was unequalled by any other sacrifice. 
All the vessel used in that sacrifice were made of gold and most beautiful in shape (vide Srimad Bhagavata IX. ii. 27). At the 
conclusion of the sacrifice the king had all the vessels thrown in the north. Besides, he gave untold wealth to the priests by 


Dis. 13 ] | 
BBB BERGER HMR Ree BERR KR ER HB Re He RHR He hr HH Hr ee BOOK ONE: >. 49 


BER Be BeBe Be Be Re He Ge Ke Br Be Ke Ke He Ke Ke Hee Ke Ke REACH REBT HERE REE RE BEBE ERE REM LAER BE BEBE ABH: 


equipped himself with all the re 


: quisites for the sacrifi j isthi f Dharma 
(the god of righteousness), wh mice, king Yudhisthira; the son'e 


q wno was afraid of sin, propitiated Sri Hari by performing three 
horse-sacrifices. (34) Having enabled the king to perform the sacrifices with the help of 
the twice-born (the Brahmanas), Lord Sri Krsna, who had been invited for the occasion, 
stayed with him for some months for the gratification of his friends and relations. (35) Then, 
with the leave of the king and his younger brothers, as well as of Krsna (queen Draupadi), 


O Saunaka, He proceeded to Dwaravati (Dwaraka) accompanied by Arjuna and surrounded 
by the Yadu chiefs (Uddhava, Satyaki and others). (36) 


Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled " The Glory of birth etc., of Parikstit," forming part 
of the story relating to the Naimisa forest, in Book One of the great and glorious 


Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita 


PISS 


BID AAERNSeATA: 


Discourse XIll 
Departure of Dhrtarastra and his wife Gandhari, 
for the forest at the instance of Vidura 


Yd Sara 
fagreteiarrat «= areert «a aramratietagt «= datteafafetcad: | & | 
Tad: FAA SAA AM BINA: | tks «MAMI el 2 


a ayaa apt adua: aes: 1 eaSt Fas Ga: Wad: Yar! 2 | 

THI stadt Sat FAs ara Sut | ARAM AM: WvSiaida: MAM: Raa: 1 

Tey: wet wot aa sary latrama «fafad uoftgeiitaret: 1 & | 

qyq: daarata faxghenvoraniad: | TT qed 48 Haase & I 

a mad fash Gaara | WHA Ws Ms AS A Aaa! 9 | 
Sita continued: Having ascertained the truth about the Spirit from the sage Maitreya 
in the course of his pilgrimage, Vidura returned to Hastinapura; for he had thereby come 
to know all that he wanted to know.(1) Exclusive devotion to Sri Govinda having welled up 
in his heart even before he could elicit replies to all the questions he had urged for solution 
by Maitreya (a descendant of the sage Kusaru), Vidura pressed no more for a reply to the 
remaining questions. (2) Seeing him, their kinsmen, come back, O sage, Yudhisthira (the 
son of Dharma, the god of righteousness) and his younger brothers (Bhima and others), 
Dhrtarastra (their eldest uncle and Vidura's eldest brother) and Yuyutsu (Dhrtarastra's only 
surviving son, born of a Vaisya wife), Suta (Sanjaya), Krpa (son of Saradvan), Prtha (Kunti, 
the mother of the Pandavas), Gandhari (Dhrtarastra's devoted spouse and daughter of the 
king of Gandhara, the modern Afghanistan), Draupadi (daughter of king Drupada), Subhadra 
(Arjuna's wife and Sri Krsna’s younger sister, the grandmother of Pariksit) and Uttara 
-(Abhimanyu's widow and Pariksit's mother), Krpi (Drona's widow and Krpa's younger sister, 
the mother of ASwatthama) and all the male and female relations of the late king Pandu (the 


a ee 
way of their sacrificial fees. It was more than they could carry home; hence they came away leaving a major part of it on the 
‘sacrificial ground. Since all unclaimed property vests in the ruler as a matter of right, the Lord had all this wealth transferred 


to Yudhisthira and devoted it to a sacred cause. 





50 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA _.. [ Dis. 13 


Se Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re RE RRR RRR RE RE RE RE RE RE RE RE RE EERE REM RE RT Re Re ER Re Re RS Re Re Re Re RE RE REM Re KE Re He Me He Re He Re Be Ber Ke Br Ke Kr Be He He He Ke Be Hr Ke He Ke Ke He Hy 


father of Yudhisthira and his brothers) as well as all the other ladies and their sons went forth 
in great joy to meet him even as the organs would be roused into activity when life returned 
to a dead body. They all duly received him by embracing or greeting him and shed copious 
tears of love, overwhelmed as they were with anxiety caused by (long) separation. When he 
had taken his seat, the king (duly) paid his respects to him. (8—6) When after finishing his 
meal and having reposed (for some time) he was comfortably seated,the king addressed him 
in the presence of all, his head bent low with humility.(7) 
aX Java 


af era at gaaesrarantiar farguniisarncatfardt == aActaldeel: | < | 
Sa Ga aida ashe: fafuseqidat aaqenth afaarte wari e | 
wae wamaddidya: wa fadidiiiodta dai ara:@y Telyar 1201 
aia a: Qeaeid Aa: HUA: | SS: Yat al Aaa: WGA GaArad 122! 


Yudhisthira said : Do you remember us, brought up under your fostering care (like 
young birds that flourish under the protective wings of their parents)—how with our mother 
we were delivered by you from a host of calamities like poisoning and fire ? (8) How did you 
manage to keep your body and soul together during your peregrinations on the terrestrial 
globe? And what places of pilgrimage and principal sacred spots did you visit on the face of 
the earth? (9) Devotees of God like you, my lord, are not only consecrated themselves; but 
itis they who revive the sanctity of sacred places (that get polluted by the contact of sinners) 
by the living presence of Lord Visnu (the Wielder of a mace), in their heart. (10) Dear uncle, 
are our friends and relations, the Yadavas, who look upon Sri Krsna as their deity, doing well 
in their own city (Dwaraka) ? Did you happen to see or even hear of them ?(11) 


sal as Aa CCAM aera «sae faat Gamat 122| 

Tasa gee FT waquiaa adead Ane gad sw: 1231 

aerated cada weds saepeder sire 1 ex 

saweda4 aus AMACUAING | Aaa Bad Wek AA: 124 

ae Senha est Ga Hera wqietnaedae ue feraries 

Ud Fel Pha WAM acest | aeHMelagd: His: UMSe: 121 
Thus interrogated by the pious king (Yudhisthira) he narrated in order all that he had 
known at first hand (from Uddhava) omitting, of course, the extermination of the Yadava 
race. (12) Compassionate by nature, he could not bear to see his kinsmen in distress; hence 
he did not break to them that unpleasant news, which was more than they could bear; for 
he knew that it would come to be known to the people of its own accord. (13) Adored (by his 
kinsfolk) as a veritable god, he lived comfortably (at Hastinapura) for some time, anxious to 
do good to his eldest brother (Dhrtarastra) and bringing delight to all. (14) Aryama (the 
second of the twelve sons of Aditi, who preside over the sun successively every month, 
vide Srimad Bhagavata XII. xi. 32—44) duly carried on the duties of punishing the evil- 
doers during the hundred years Yama (the god of justice) tenanted the body of a Sidra 
(as Vidura) under a curse (pronounced by the sage Mandavya.* (15) Having got back his 
kingdom and seen the face of a grandson capable of upholding the traditions of the family, 


* Once upon a time the members of a king's police force apprehended some thieves at the hermitage of a sage, 
Mandavya by name. They naturally suspected the sage of complicity in their nefarious activities and arrested him as well, who 
was transfixed on the stake along with the thieves under orders of the king. When, however, the king learnt that the suspected 
accomplice was a saint, he immediately ordered the latter to be released and obtained his forgiveness by falling at his feet. 


Dis. 13 ] 
BRA EB ARR LER RR RRR RH HH MRE MMH He eee ae BOOK ONE) « 21 


BR Re BeBe Be Me Hr Re He Hee BERR RE REE BER RRR E RE ERERERE REREBE BE RE RRB BEBE BE BEBE RE 


Me ae pa supreme splendour rejoiced with his younger brothers, who were as 
Ee oe taiiaa Sheen of the various worlds. (16) In this way time, whose movements 
S icult to control, passed unnoticed by them, attached as they were to theirhome 


and had lost sight of their goal (for the time bei ini 
in worldly activities. (17) ing) on account of their remaining engrossed 


fagrerahe RIA | Uehara aie age TAAL RCI 
SIGIR 1 aee salsenffaast 1a wa wa are: Bae A: BAMTA: 12e1 
a wenfraatsa srt: framifti wa: wel fasta feamtefaref: 1201 
aquiqdeda wie fet aa:ianen a Wen et: uequraa 1221 
ae Fett srisiffacan aa wart simafsid fausmred yeaa 122 
sahigst amg mt aug affa:igd at edt ast aedeaty: fea i23! 


wemy da egisd pour finitfast: 1 atamreasa tof scar aradt ga ex 
Tea te fae «| aera: | atfageafastaets, OR Sele: 1241 
q: Weld de wWefde anarige weal et Aelesatead AMAA: 1261 
aad «feet ag «=weranfastart sdisatemreast: are: Gat Was: 1201 


Perceiving this, Vidura said to Dhrtarastra,"Look here: a terrible time has come. Let us, 
therefore, soon be away, my royal brother ! (18) That all-powerful time (the time of 
death) has come upon us all, which cannot be averted on any account and under any 
circumstance.(19) Overtaken by it, a man is immediately made to part with his life, which is 
most dear to him, to say nothing of other things such as wealth and so on. (20) Your uncles 
(Bhisma and Somadatta), your brother and cousin (Pandu and Bhurisrava), your relations 
(such as your brothers-in-law, Sakuni and Salya, your son-in-law, Jayadratha and so on), 
nay, your own sons (Duryodhana and others) have been killed; your days are almost ended 
and your body is overcome with old age, and (what is worst) you are living under the roof of 
another (king Yudhisthira, who was your mortal enemy till yesterday) ! (21) Oh, how strong 
isthe desire in a living being to survive, impelled by which you accept the morsels of food 
thrown to you by Bhima even like a dog ! (22) What do you expect to achieve through a life 
depending on the good-will of those whose dwelling was set on fire, to whom poison was 
administered, whose wedded wife was subjected to ignominy (in open court), nay, whose 
lands and other possessions were seized (all with your connivance) ? (23) How foolish of 
you that you still desire to live ! Like tattered clothes, your age-worn body will nonetheless 
leave you, however reluctant you may be to cast it off. (24) Therefore,free from worlcly 
attachment and shaking off all bondage, he who drops this body, which is no longer of any 
use to him, away from and unknown to his kith and kin, he alone is spoken of as wise. (25) 
Fed up with this world either by himself or by another's precept and with a subdued mind, 
and holding Sri Hari in his heart, he who leaves his home (as a recluse) is foremost among 
men. (26) Therefore, unnoticed by your kinsmen, proceed to the north (the Himalayan 
region); for the time which will come hereafter will be mostly such as would take away the 


Ee ES SS ne Nan 
The sage now approached Yama and wanted to know for what sinful act of his he was made to suffer such terrible agony. Yama 
told him that he had in his childhood pierced a live locust with the point of a blade of Kusa grass, and that was responsible for 
the pangs of impalement suffered by him. The sage felt that the punishment meted out to him was out of all proportion with the 
crime, which must have been committed by him through ignorance. He, therefore, uttered an imprecation against the god, 
consigning him to earthly life as a Sudra for one hundred years. It was under his imprecation that Yama was reborn on this 


earth as Vidura. 





5D SRIMAD’BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13 


BeBe Ree Ke Wek Be Re Re Ke ee ee Re Be Ree Hr AY BEY Br Wr Be BeAr Be Ke Be We Br Kr Be Sr Wr Hr Hr Re Br Be Be We We Mr Be Ke Be Be Be We Kr Ker Ke He Gr Ke He He Ke Be He He We Ke Re Be He Ke VERE Hee We He ve Hr wy 





virtues of men." (27) 

wa wn fag osaaasied 8 86sec: | 

fea SS Acteisen amma  wlqealeicteat 1c! 

aa wad qa wt art arma area 

feared ARIeuSIEa Takara AME: 1221 

Thus instructed by Vidura, his younger brother, the blind king Dhrtarastra (a descendant 

of Ajamidha) had his mind's eye opened. Cutting asunder the strong ties of affection that bound 
him to his kinsmen, he departed, his brother (Vidura) himself acting as his guide. (28) 
Perceiving that her husband was proceeding to the Himalayas—which afforded great delight 
to recluses (lit., those who have taken a vow of non-violence) even as a righteous combat (on 


ihe battle-field) delights a heroic warrior—the virtuous Gandhari (the daughter of king Subala) 
too, who had taken a vow of devoted service to her lord, followed him in his journey. (29) 


SIstidala: dal Ratiaesy Acal faerie: 
Te Sast Wrea aA wausahant atast wWiz0l 
a asaqdd wrelfeaama: | Wael wm Aad adel daa Aa: 1321 
Sta UU edgessal faqed: H Wd: Padi aa wads eda: a vresar 
SRIGAM: Wes Mga q:fadtsadd, 1321 
faddord ult wala: yea: fatal aremdt arena: foqell wm varied: 1331 
Having said his Sandhya prayers and poured oblations into the sacred fire, and having 
bowed to the Brahmanas and bestowed on them gifts of sesamum seeds, cows, lands and 
gold, king Yudhisthira (who looked upon none as his enemy) entered the apartments of his 
elders for his daily salutations, but failed to perceive either of his uncles or even his aunt 
(Gandhari). (30) With an anxious heart he asked Safijaya (Dhrtarastra's counsellor and 
trusted servant), who was sitting there, “Safjaya (son of Gavalgana), where is our aged 
uncle, who is blind too? (31) Where is my aunt, grieved at the loss of her sons, and where 
is my younger uncle gone, who was so kindly disposed towards us ? Distressed at the loss 
of his near and dear ones and apprehending ill treatment from my foolish self, may it be that 
he has thrown himself into the Ganga, along with his wife? (32) After the death of our father, 
king Pandu, it was our uncles who protected us all, their children, against a series of 
calamities, tender of age as we were. Ah, where have they gone from here ?" (33) 
Ud sald 
qual Aedeetcdd  farenista: i snm@amaaot A yewreatea: 3x1 
fags ofa fase | SST, A: WET RTTL 34 
Suta continued: Sore afflicted with grief and overwhelmed with affection at the sudden 
disappearance of his master and feeling very sad on account of his separation from him, 
Sanjaya (who too was a Sita by birth) could not utter a word in reply. (34) Then, wiping the 


tears with his hands and steadying his mind by recourse to reason, he replied to Yudhisthira 
(as follows) with his thought fixed on the feet of his lord (Dhrtarastra) : (35) 


Waa sar 
Te aq Adfad footd: 9 Head 1 Weal ar aerael Aadisher Aerts: 1261 
SAMs «Wa ARE: = Pedae: | senate  waAlysiswedataa 1301 


Sanjaya said : “| know neither the resolve of your uncles nor of your aunt, O delight of ’ 


is. 13]. 
apassaalasesensensenssenentesnns si APM ONEWINE ae 
EAA RELA AAR REALL RRA RRR AR RAR 
your race. | have been deceived by those noble s 
meantime came the divine sage Narada, accom 
went forth with his younger brothers to rec 
great reverence: (37) 


ouls ! O lord with mighty arms.” (36) In the 
panied by the sage Tumburu. Yudhisthira 
elve them and, after greeting them, spoke with 


; aS Sarg 
ay aq ut farina, a Tea: | SNS AT SAGSISSa eH WaT A AURA 1321 
aah SATA Welt Unestch: | steers War, ARet Wada: 1381 
A Get Bel Use adlenast STL | Gleal: AUST TAA agit afeitara: | 
a tether yh a wa fags a ixot 

aa Tet afe starr seq: arate: l aaa Aas Geka Atodtiara: 12 1 

et atstoeReutt | Ratrferrnfeg | gave witfeq: Eat aestevaT TOM 1s: | 

Tae Yt ways at a deni aden a fe aera Sees ASSL 13 | 

ESSN ES 59 AGAMA: | He ATM: aU aac a Ut faa iv 

mIoedyonet eetst ceifaen: | wee Mores aT WELISGl 

See wea  aCMeni wel aq deal slat Was saa ive! 

did WAH Usa AMSA Meh | semista Ula wea a Araaleat ix! 

MST FEN Wa WANE: | edsadiuisamarena Pisary isc 

frat  ewamanate wdladidmeea yanderd wae areata: ise 
Yudhisthira said : "| know not the movements of my uncles, O divine sage; | wonder 
where they have gone hence. Nor do | know where is gone my aunt, so well-known for her 
austere penance and distressed at the loss of her sons. (38) Your Holiness alone can guide 
us across this endless ocean (of grief) as a pilot in the deep.” Thereupon the worshipful 
Narada, the foremost among sages, spoke (as follows) :—({39)"Grieve not for anybody, O 
king; for the world is under the control of God. It is to Him, the supreme Ruler of all, that all 
these worlds along with their rulers offer their homage. It is He who unites and He again who 
parts living beings from one another. (40) Even as oxen, controlled individually by small 
strings passed through their nostrils and held together by a strong rope, Carry loads for their 
master, so these human beings, tied down to the rope of the divine word (the Veda) through 
the smaller strings of their different denominations (such as Brahmana, Brahmacari and so 
on), offer their worship to God (through their respective duties). (41) Evenas playthings here 
(in this world) are brought together and separated by the will of the player, so do the coming 
together and parting of human beings depend on the will of God. (42) Whether you consider 
human beings to be eternal (as the soul or spirit) or ephemeral (as the corporeal body) or 
both eternal and transient (as embodied souls) or as neither eternal nor ephemeral (as the 
unspeakable Absolute, which is devoid of all attributes), they are not worth grieving for 
unless through affection born of infatuation. (43) Therefore, O dear Yudhisthira, shake off 
the uneasiness of mind, caused by ignorance, as to how those people (your uncles and 
aunt) may be faring without you, helpless and miserable as they are. (44) This body, 
constituted as it is of the five elements (viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether), is sudject to 
the control of time, fate and the three modes of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas). How 
can it protect others any more than a man fallen in the jaws of a python can help 
another?(45) The handless (such as the quadruped) serveas the subsistence of those that 
have hands (such as human beings); those that have no feet (such as grass etc.) sustain 
the life of the four-footed animals; and.(even among the handless) the smaller ones serve 





| 
} 


54 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13 
BeBe Br Be Re Be Re Be Re Be Re Re Re Re REE RE EERE EE BE REBEL BT Bee Bee Ree Bye Ge Br He Ke We Ke Br Ke Ke Me Ke Be Ber Ber Be He Be We He He We Be Be He We Bi He He Be Ae We Be He He Ke Ke Be Ke we gy 
RAVE ELK KAKARKHAA KE ss ee eee ———————— a 


as the sustenance of the bigger ones. (In this way) life sustains life. (46) All this, O king, 
is the one self-effulgent Lord, the Self of all embodied souls. It is He who appears as the 
subject and the object. Perceive Him as manifested in multitudinous forms through Maya 
(illusion). (47) It is He, O mighty ruler—the same Lord who brings into being this living 
creation—who has now appeared on this earth as living Death (Kala) for the extermination 
of the enemies of gods. (48) The work of the gods has now been (well-nigh) accomplished 
and the Lord awaits the completion of that which yet remains to be done. You too should 
wait so long as the Lord is still here: (49) 

GUIs: We Wa Weta a waurari cava femad wT Td: hol 

@iae: aaa a wet AA AM! AAA wat AM aged: seed 1421 

aeaaat 9 dereat 9 arienfafer | stetat Saeraen A sted farsa: 1421 

fara «9 faara: «= _- NetTactsfefsa: | eftsracar CART AAMT AA: 143 | 

fasta dasa aad sfasra ai severe WeranAarayt 14x | 

eqn unacht Fegan: | Ratiakaerer sed eqroftareac: | 

TAMIA Hay: Garena: 1441 

@ al Medal Us Wd: was i moat wet Ww aa vettufaes iu 

canmsfaiice Ud: Ul aelediatfe: fer ula aed anfaqdeaa iu! 

fagtel dais fem petcdi gdalegqadeene Ta diefeam: uci 

saraaited Gl Ane: eras: | afaie aac we Habtelepa: 142! 

Sf Sad Ae GAee Seda were ASEM Aalesnseara: 123 | 


“Dhrtarastra with his younger brother and his own wife, Gandhari, has gone to the 
hermitage of sages to the south of the Himalayas, where the Ganga (the celestial river) has 
for the pleasure of the seven celebrated sages (Saptarsis as they are called) split herself into 
seven streams to flow through seven different channels, which they call Saptasrota.(50-51) 
Bathing in the Saptasrota thrice a day (in the morning and evening as well as at midday), and 
pouring oblations into the sacred fire according to the scriptural ordinance, he is living on water 
alone, serene of mind and free from all cravings. (52) Having controlled his pose (sitting in 
one pose continually for hours together) and breath and withdrawn his six senses (the five 
external senses and the mind, which is known as the sixth or internal sense) from their 
objects, he has shaken off through contemplation on Sri Hari the impurities of his mind in the 
shape of Rajas, Sattva and Tamas. (53) Nay, merging his ego (sense of I-ness or 
individuality) in Buddhi (the principle of intelligence and the source of I|-consciousness) and 
dissolving his Buddhi in the individual soul (the Ksetrajfia as it is called), he has identified 
his individual soul with the Absolute (Brahma), the substratum of all, as the space within a 
jar is united with the unlimited space. (54) Again, having thoroughly controlled his senses 
and mind, he has given up all enjoyment and uprooted the effects (in the shape of latent 
desires) of the Gunas of Maya. Nay, having abandoned all his duties, he sits motionless like 
a post now. Therefore, do not stand in his way (by trying to contact him). (55) On the fifth day 
hence, Oking, he will cast off his body, which will be reduced to ashes. (56) Finding the body 
of her lord being consumed along with the hut (he is occupying) by the sacrificial fires, his 
virtuous wife, standing outside, will enter the fire in order to follow her husband. (57) And, 
witnessing this wonder with a mixed feeling of joy and grief, O delight of the Kurus, Vidura 
will go out (again) on pilgrimage to sacred places." (58) Having told him all this, the sage 
Narada with Tumburu immediately ascended to heaven; and, treasuring up his words in his 


Dis. 14 ] 


Re We Re Re WR AVYB 5 
Wr Bc Fe We CSR MORE R EH Re REM MER HERR RE Re HEH we OT OOK ONE 55 
SESE S ESE SEM R MOME RE WERE RE MERE EME EERE RE MEER MERE RE REMEMBER LOA 


heart, Yudhisthira ceased Sorrowing. (59) 





Thus ae the thirteenth discourse, forming part of the story of the Naimisa 
est, in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


$ 


SEES 
DOT EROS IS 


AY ACR SeAe: 


Discourse XIV 
King Yudhisthira grows apprehensive at the sight of evil omens 
and Arjuna returns from Dwaraka 
Yd Sard 
wahud greet font seyfecaani ad a qualia pore a fate! 2 | 
cada: chidfarardal aearddisea: | aeat areecifin §« fafanfa RQ 
SI Hse 

wea aA mid west faudenderftior: | oda zon aral mlaerargaresary | 3 | 

Id Aaed aeafast a urea ftanqugeweudal aA eA xX | 

Ria ae aad ym oatmeanispit Breas Fa: 1 4 | 
Sita continued: Arjuna had left for Dwaraka in order to see his relations (SriKrsnaand 
others) and to know the doings of Sri Krsna of sacred renown. (1) He, however, did not return 
from that place even though many months had elapsed. In the meantime Yudhisthira, the 
illustrious scion of Kuru, saw portents of a fearful nature. (2) Time had taken a dreadful turn, 
(as was clear from the fact that) the characteristics of the seasons had totally changed. 
People had taken to sinful ways of living, their heart possessed with anger, greed and 
falsehood. (3) Their dealings had become crooked; even friendship was marred by deceitful- 
ness: there were quarrels between parents and sons, relations and relations, brothers and 
brothers, and even between husbands and wives. (4) At the approach of the Kali age the 


nature of individuals was vitiated by evils like greed and so on, while omens boding the worst 
type of calamity appeared (in the cosmic nature). Witnessing all this, king Yudhisthira spoke 


to his younger brother (Bhima) as follows : (5) 
esx Jara 
aafia grat  faadefecear | ada aia pure a fadisdd | < | 
Tat: PAA Aral We Tals: are HA al eddie AcqHeaT | 0 | 
arfy dafdonsss: a mreisaqafe: | aeisseissuinis = Taira 1 ¢ | 
AAA: MUS URI SRI: HOM: Ses WS: | SN, AUafastal HieHIs AaqAeI | < | 
Usa AIA RSI MAL Aelsehr | CSU, Waasaa Al AhegateqAl 1 Yo! 
adfsareal vel Beds GW: Ga: i aagenfa ea amend fata 122! 
AEA AARRIAOAT lame andaisaafinia weitead 122 
Sei: Haka Al Wet sat Ugtalsay | aes FSI MAA Fadl AA 1231 
Wag: HUSA: HU Aa: iNest Herat Yraftrasa: 1ex1 
gat feat: uf: mad Y: ells: | aids Aelia Ah A ela: 1e41 
argaifa wreaatt weat fags: | arg, adfa ae atcata ada: 126! 


ya 





56 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14 


See Ree Re Re Re RE A RE RE RR RR RR RR RR RRR RR RRR RR RR Re RR RE BR ERE Be RE Re BeBe BeBe MT He Be Re BeBe Me EME ee He Ke Ke Be He Ke He Ke See He He He Ke Fr 
a eS LL 


ai wart usa wend Ret fifa i eapouardied ga weet ie 

Aa Acisy afi: wife a Aaa a1 A Oe Heise fer fare 1861 

q ffata A A A aiid A AMR: | SSRIS Wal A CNA AT 1281 

Sadia ~wedia fata deehd Alga Wael AMT: CUENTA: | 
aptstan freer: fad aatafa A: 1201 

aq Waa 9a: «Ue: | Sraensitfretar FETA 122 


Yudhisthira said : "Arjuna was sent to Dwaraka to see our relations (Sri Krsna and 
others) as well as to find out what Sri Krsna of sacred renown was doing. (6) Although seven 
months have since elapsed, O Bhimasena, | do not quite understand why your younger 
brother has not yet returned. (7) May it not be that the time predicted by the celestial sage 
has arrived, when the Lord intends to cast off the form assumed by Him for the sake of sport— 
the Lord to whose grace we owe our fortune, our kingdom, our spouses, our life, the 
continuance of our race, our progeny, our victory over the enemies and our title to the higher 
worlds. (8-9) Observe the fearful portents, O tiger among men, in the heavens as well as 
on the earth as also in our own person, boding some calamity near at hand, that will distract 
our mind. (10) My left thigh, left eye and left arm, dear brother, are throbbing again and again 
and my heart quakes every now and then: all these will Surely bring some unhappy news.(11) 
Lo! the she-jackal, vomitting fire, howls at the rising sun and this dog, dear Bhima, fearlessly 
bays at me. (12) Good animals (such as the cow) pass by to my left, while other 
(inauspicious) animals (as the donkey etc.) turn to my right. Nay, | see my horses weeping, 
O tiger among men. (13) This dove, the harbinger of death, as well as the owl and its enemy, 
the crow, keeping awake all the night, make my heart shudder with their horrible cries and 
would have the world converted into a desert. (14) The quarters look smoky; the orbs of the 
sun and the moon appear with a misty halo encircling them; the earth with the mountains 
quakes (every now and then); and there are frequent thunder-claps accompanied by violent 
lightning-strokes, dear brother.(15) The wind blows very hard, spreading darkness with dust; 
the clouds rain blood, thus creating a ghastly scene everywhere. (16) Look at the sun, which 
has lost its brilliance, and the planets contending against one another in the heavens. The 
heaven and the earth seem to be set on fire due to multitudes of ghosts and other creatures 
congregating here and there. (17) Streams and big rivers no less than lakes and minds (of 
the people) are (all) agitated. The fire does not burn (even) with clarified butter. | wonder what 
Surprise is this (fateful) time going to spring on us ? (18) Calves refuse to suck the udders 
and their mother do not allow themselves to be milked. Cows weep, tears trickling down their 
faces; while bulls too do not rejoice with the herd. (19) The images of gods appear to weep; 
nay, they perspire and move from their seats. These outlying districts and villages, cities and 
gardens, mines and hermitages look cheerless and robbed of their splendour. (God knows) 
what evil they portend for us. (20) From these grave forebodings | am led to believe that the 
earth has undoubtedly lost its charm, having been deprived (of the touch) of the Lord's feet, 
that possess a grace (graceful marks of a thunderbolt etc.) unknown to the feet of any other 
person.” (21) 


git fara aIRBA | Ada | Ua: Ser Ae Gqual: Hfteast: 1221 
d UicaiMuadaa aaa | Maer Psd AAAledtat: 1231 
faciettenecat «faa «qu: i uefa wt qed Geared 1261 


As the king was thus expressing his concern with a heart full of anxiety at the sight of 
these portentous phenomena, O Saunaka, Arjuna (whose banner was emblazoned with the 


pis. 14 ] 


SRA AAAS AA TRAN HK e REE Ree eo OOM ONE 57 


Wr Fr Hr wr 
POSE SE SE EM RE We we Me We Re we mE Re ME ME EME ME ERR RE MEM ER RE ARM ee RR RE a 


figure Of a monkey) returned f ee 
ounger brother fallen at his fe rom Dwaraka (the capital of the Yadus). (22) Seeing his 


et wi 
face cast down andtears frieeiee a a sir ange look about him, lacklustre and ill at ease, his 
9 down from his lotus-like eyes, the king felt anxious at heart 


uestioned him i i 
and q him in the midst of his other kinsmen, recalling the words of Narada. (23-24) 


caergat A: RSA: Geared | aesisegneivaraarerenagana: 1241 
: RICA ater urfie: | 


Yudhisthira said : "Are our relations, the Madhus, the Bhojas, the Dasarhas, the Arhas, 
the Satvatas, the Andhakas and the Vrsnis, happy in Dwaraka (the capital ofthe Anartas)?(25) 
Is my revered maternal grandfather, Sura (SUrasena) doing well ? And are our maternal 
uncles, Anakadundubhi (Vasudeva) and his younger brother, enjoying good health ? (26) 
Again, are our maternal aunts, the seven wives of Vasudeva, Devaki and others, who are 
related to one another as sisters, quite hale themselves as also their sons and daughters- 
in-law ? (27) Does king Ahuka (Ugrasena, the father of Devaki), whose son (Kamsa) was 
notorious for his wickedness, and his younger brother (Devaka), still alive ? And are Hrdika 
and his son (Krtavarma), Akrura (a cousin of Vasudeva), Jayanta, Gada and Sarana (Sri 
Krsna's brothers) as well as Satrujit and others faring well ? And is the divine Sri Rama 
(Balarama), the Lord of the Satvatas (Yadavas), happy ? (28-29) Is Pradyumna (Sri Krsna's 
eldest son), the greatest warrior among all the Vrsnis, well ? And is the divine Aniruddha 
(Pradyumna's son) of marvellous dash (on the field of battle) prospering ? (30) Susena and 
Carudesna (two of the ten sons of Rukmini, of whom Pradyumna was the eldest) and Samba 
born of Jambavati, and all the other great sons of Sri Krsna, including Rsabha, as also their 
sons, and even so Srutadeva, Uddhava and the other attendants of Sri Krsna and other 
Principle Satvatas (Yadavas)—Sunanda and Nanda being the chief of them—are all these 
doing well, protected by the arms of Sri Rama and Sri Krsna ? Do they ever enquire after our 
welfare, bound as they are by ties of affection to us ? (Silo) 

smart Ta neat wae: lahat WaeHlal Tea Teagd: 13! 
dso a cleat aaa a Aaa A | Hee AGHOTMAAM STATS: FATT 13 | 
ageeusyarat | gat | aedisfeter: | aisha WTA FeMteticst Ft 13E | 


arena qUBAeaaad: | 
eS eee aha anlqtaratitad: 1301 


aglgquenyearasieara qeraet =— NSTAT I 
arnraetrired 9 ACT aut gaat Weddin 13! 
a friend of the Brahmanas and full of affection for His 


"And is Lord Govinda (Sri Kee) |-chamber, Sudharma, at His own capital, in the midst 


. ; s council : 
ie peppy ion neice the protection and prosperity and well-being of all the worlds 





58 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14 


Sr is living i he Yadava race with Hj 
that the Prime Person (Sri Krsna) is living in the milk ocean of t 1B 
constant companion, Lord Ananta (Sri Balarama). (35) Respected by all, the Yadus revel, 
like the attendants of Lord Visnu, in their own city (of Dwaraka), protected by His long 
arms.(36) By virtue of their service to His feet, which they regard as their foremost duty, 
Satyabhama and the other sixteen thousand and odd spouses of the Lord prevailed on the 
latter to conquer gods on the field of battle and carried by force the objects of sense- 
enjoyment (such as the celestial Parijata tree) sought by the gods themselves and fit to be 
enjoyed by goddess Saci (the spouse of Indra, the wielder of a thunderbolt). (37) Nay, the 
great Yadava warriors, who depend on the might of His stout arms, always fearlessly tread 
the council-chamber, known by the name of Sudharma, which was snatched by force (from 
Indra) and was worthy of the foremost gods." (38) 

afastaa da wean famfa a1 aeemmisagm: fe at aa fatea: 13°! 

afaatsedsaa: ediefange: 1a adgmafthsa sneer aetterixot 

Hid ME ae TM ag Uh faa anulagd Ba Areal: AUS: 142 

Akad ATASTA Teal arena aa aaiat ara wararaataa: uafe ive 

ofa Racdyecured GIN Geelohr | ated ad fHfacndart aearix3i 

afd sedda  eadardtaear! qeashh ced ea aaa Asa ASH sx! 
Sid AAPA AEG UAE Heda AAAS Aetelace AM Aqeanseara: 12% 

"Are you enjoying good health yourself, dear Arjuna? You seem to have lost the 
brightness of your countenance. Did you fail to receive proper attention or were you ever 
treated with disrespect during your prolonged stay (at Dwaraka), dear brother ? (39) | hope 
no one tormented you with words etc., devoid of love and full of inauspicious import. Did you 
ever fail to grant the prayer of suppliants who approached you with some hope or to give 
something which you might have promised of your own accord ? (40) | hope you never turned 
away any Brahmana, child, cow, aged or ailing man, any woman or any creature whatsoever 
that might have approached you for protection, noted as you are for affording shelter (to the 
needy). (41) | am sure you never shared the bed with a woman unworthy of you nor did you 
copulate flippantly with a woman worthy of you. | further hope that you were not vanquished, 
while on your way back, by your equals nor by your inferiors. (42) Did you ever take your 
meals ignoring the aged or children deserving to be fed ? Or did you perpetrate any 
loathsome act which was unbecoming of you ? (43) Oris it that you have been torn from your 


ever most beloved and intimate friend and relation (Sri Krsna) and thus consider yourself 
desolate; for there can be no other cause of your agony." (44) 


Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled "Yudhisthira’s Doubt", 
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagava ta-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PITS 


Dis. 15°] 


We We Me We Hr We He We Hr 


BOOK ONE ©’ 


99 


EME ERE RENE He Re BERT RE Ree We Re Re ae Re Re Re Me A Re Me Be Re RE eR RR RRR MR Re He Be Re RR RRR RR RRR RR RR RR ee Rete 





Stricken with grief at their separation from Sri Krsna, the Pandavas 
instal Pariksit on the throne of Hastinapura and ascend to heaven 


Wa POMS: HO War Uaissfacniead: | ARISTA wa qHenrfascuenfsta: 1 2 | 
Mert WRsetas easy: fay =—-_ AAalqeaaararenratasrlaa | 2 | 
Pa Teg Ba: uforisssT Aga: | aaa  —- WH agHOTAeHUaIHIA: | 3 I 
wei tai ate a areafeg dere qatar aerrgat «= fet 1 x I 


SID USean SeaTa: 


Discourse XV 


Ud sad 


Sita continued : Sri Krsna's friend, Arjuna (also nicknamed as Krsna), who had 
grown lean and thin on account of his separation from Sri Krsna, was stormed with a 


number of questions by his (elder) brother, 


king Yudhisthira, since his (gloomy) 


appearance gave rise to many a doubt. (1) His lotus-like face and heart were withering 
with grief and his brightness gone; and wholly engrossed in the thought of that very Lord, 
he could not make any answer. (2) Overwhelmed with anxiety, caused by love, that had 
swelled due to the disappearance of the Lord, and recalling the friendliness, beneficence 
and good-will shown by Him while playing the role of a charioteer and so on, he managed 
with difficulty to restrain his tears within his eyes and wiped with his hands those that 
had trickled down his cheeks; and in a voice choked with tears he addressed his elder 
brother, king Yudhisthira, as follows: (3-4) 


Soft SATA 
atasé Ferm een agqeftoriaa asugd ast eafaemod Fed! & | 
aa aufaatta olet aiiaeata: 1 sae edt GN Yaw: Bred Bari « | 


Tease, NST «Ue aa GHAI 
atl Gd US AaMeds ae: Asi seq A PUT | wo | 
TaMadeH 4 Gusanaasdits a aaa aca fats | 
wen AU Hadden feraisequda afeweat ai 2 | 
Rae TRIE saeiisysrera Aad: | 
Aled: waa wa alfadedeta afoneat ai 2 | 
US ATeTA TAA HARM ATOM AVATAR fda: aarti 
we fate ceat: afrasmen aaiearaisad edatlarmenan: 1201 
a al wa aqqdal qedpane qaiaaishaaeqaay a: | 
Meas Maat Taq ales fataag: 122! 
ATA War aa qournistentta: akiistsaraast A 
SAS AEA HOA MH Aestad AecktatesdA 1221 
aa a fae weveqnt mediamaummfaaena ear: | 
aa: fn aeauifaqsenic aarener aiva: qeaut sar 123i 
agra: pected Wa  ddseiddtara | 
Waled ae Gt A Aa Wat asad afora a ed Rta: 1ev 





60 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15 


BeBe Re eRe Re Re Re eRe eR RE RRR RR ER ERR RR BRB BER BE RE MERE A Be RY Be MRT He Hr Ke GMT Hr He Se BeBe He He Be Hee Be Ke Hr Ree Be He He Be He We Ke He Ke Hr He He Hy Sr eH, 


ay efietnulpeaiesayqye mst aaa aS USAT 
sitet Ha fast wags A EA Te Sst srs kG | 
aarq om Nitfed § qestwrnulagiandaeeecentecntel: | 
stanamenfena 4 ofreaftnft at ceaefteramargaitr 1961 
Ga qd: HAfaissae GaN A aaraaaavaa ws AeA: | 
a sidan wat yas a wee aaqulatadad: 1291 


angers & wet et Aa Hperaiic | 
Usui Aca ewe wddeta ead AA Alea 1k! 
WaeAletianeansrieganera wdattafa fase: | 
wey: waa faqanrtaes ad Ge verted Had Ae 
@isé Fs wed: Geahaa wen aor geal eet Yu | 
seqeahaenSs «86 (aaa = fafafstatsfat 1201 
de dae Soa: A Wl eared Alse Tet Fda aa aaatra | 
Gd al deyeudiith We wd HeHteealqqery 1221 
Arjuna said : "| have been deceived, O great king, by Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), who 
appeared in the form of a friend and relation to me, and who has now robbed me of my 
mighty valour, which was once the wonder even of gods. (5) At a moment's separation 
from Him the world presents a loathsome sight, even as this body is called dead when 
bereft of life. (6) Through His might | was able, on the occasion of the self-election of 
a husband by Draupadi, to outshine the princes that had assembled at the house of king 
Drupada, intoxicated with love, to hit the revolving fish (hanging from the roof as a target) 
after duly fitting the bow with an arrow, and in this way to win the hand of Krsna 
(Draupadi). (7) In His presence | speedily conquered Indra and his heavenly hosts, offered 
the Khandava forest to the god of fire and secured the council-chamber built by the demon 
Maya, which was of wonderful workmanship and full of conjuring devices; and tributary 
chiefs brought presents from every quarter during your Rajasuya sacrifice. (8) It was by 
His might that the revered Bhimasena (your younger brother),possessing as he does the 
strength and vigour of ten thousand elephants succeeded in slaying Jarasandha—who 
was haughty enough to set his foot on the heads of vanquished kings—in order to 
accomplish the Rajasuya sacrifice.* Nay, it was He who set free a number of princes that 
had been (made captive and) brought by Jarasandha (to his capital) for being sacrificed 
fo the god Mahabhairava (the chief of the Pramathas or attendants of Lord Siva) and 
who in return brought presents for your sacrifice. (9) When your wife (Draupadi) fell at 
His feet with tears rolling down her cheeks, and loosing her lovely braid—which, though 
rendered most sacred and praiseworthy by being sprinkled with holy water during the 
Rajasuya sacrifice, had been roughly handled by miscreants (like Duhsasana and others) 
in Open court—He requited the wrong done to her by widowing their own wives and 
thereby compelling the latter to loose their hair.t(10) Nay, it was He who saved us from 
a terrible pitfall contrived by our enemy (Duryodhana)through the sage Durvasa—who 
took his meals ahead (in the company) of not less than ten thousand pupils (wherever 
he went)—by going to the forest and accepting a stray remnant of some vegetable stuff 





“He alone can perform a Rajasuya sacrifice, who has reduced to submission all the living monarchs of his time. 
+ Hindu widows keep their hair unbraided and unkempt and even shave them as a sign of lifelong mourning for their 
husband. 





cccompahied Dacveee vane His doing so the whole host of students (that had 
Haiinalinrentent eae . le yet omersed in water (for ablutions and prayers), felt as 
(with my valour) in a. sin nee surfeited.* (11) Again, it was by His might that I astonished 
sé! thane glean 2 eee Lord Sankara (who holds a trident In His hand) no 
Suniainey iE AE , Goddess Girija (the daughter of Himalaya, the king of the 

Ins), the former of whom was pleased to impart to me (the secret of using) His 
own missile (called the Pasupatastra), as also did the guardian of every other quarter. 
Nay, (ascending fo heaven) in this very body | shared with the mighty Indra the exalted 
throne in his court.(12) While | was enjoying a holiday in the same celestial abode, Indra 
and the other gods sought the help of my powerful arms, which bore the celebrated 
Gandiva bow and owed their strength to Him, for the destruction of their enemies (the 
Nivatakavacas and other demons, who often molested them), O Yudhisthira (a descend- 
ent of Ajamidha) ! Alas ! by that Supreme Person | stand cheated today. (13) Befriended 
by Him, | was able to cross on a chariot all alone the boundless and unfathomable ocean 
of the Kaurava host, which was rendered further impassable by formidable aquatic 
creatures (in the shape of Bhisma, Drona and others). Again, it was with His help that 
| not only recovered from the hands of our enemies (the Kauravas) the abundant wealth 
(in the shape of cattle of king Virata) but was also able to snatch from their heads their 
glorious turbans as well as the precious stones from their diadems. (14) Keeping in front 
of me (as a charioteer) as | stood face to face with the armies (successively) led by 
Bhisma, Drona (our preceptor), Karna and Salya and adorned with the chariots of a host 
of Ksatriya chiefs, my lord, He stole away by His very look the life-span, the heart as 
well as the strength and vigour of the great car-warriors who commanded the various 
troops. (15) Securely placed as | was in His arms, the missiles of unfailing power hurled 
at me by my preceptor (Drona), Bhisma, Karna, Bhurisrava (the grandson of Bahlika), 
Susarma (the king of the Trigartas), Salya, Jayadratha (the king of the Sindhus) and 
Bahlika (the younger brother of Santanu) and others did not even touch my person any 
more than the weapons of the demons (in this service of king Hiranyakasipu, Prahlada’s 
father) did Prahlada (a devotee of Lord Visnu). (16) Stupid as | was, | chose for my 
charioteer the Lord whose lotus-feet are adored by noble souls for exemption from birth 
and death, and who surrenders to His devotees His very Self. Nay, dazzled by His glory, 
great car-warriors who were arrayed against me could not strike at me even though | 
stood on the ground, my horses being exhausted. (17) The jokes of Lord Madhava (Sri 
Krsna), brightened with His hearty and charming smiles, and His captivating manner of 


*On a certain occasion prince Duryodhana showed great hospitality to the sage Durvasa. Pleased with him, the sage 
desired him to aska boon. Finding ita splendid opportunity to bring ruination on his cousins, the Pandavas, by inviting the sage’s 
curse on them, he persuaded him to seek the hospitality of Yudhisthira, the principal member of his race with his ten thousand 
alumni. But he advised the sage to call on the Pandavas, living in the forest, ata time when their consort, Draupadi, had finished 
her meal after feeding all the other people of their camp, so that the virtuous lady might not have to starve. Draupadi had in 
her possession a miraculous kettle, bestowed on her by the sun-god, the contents of which would not be exhausted till she 
had partaken of them. Durvasa, as advised by Duryodhana, called on the Pandavas with his ten thousand pupils in the 
afternoon after Draupadi had taken her meal and, after meeting Yudhisthira and asking him to get food ready for him and his 
pupils, he proceeded with them to the river bank for ablution and prayers. Much concerned over this, Draupadi in her deep 
agony invoked the succour of Sri Krsna, the friend of the distressed, who immediately responded to her prayer and called at 
her door. No sooner had He stepped into her cottage than He asked her to get Him something to eat, as He was feeling awfully 
hungry. Draupadi felt overwhelmed with gratitude at the Lord's unique grace in asking her for food, even though He sustained 
the whole universe, but pleaded helplessness, as there was nothing left in the kitchen to satisfy His hunger. The Lord wouid 
not however, be easily put off; He insisted on seeing the kettle Himself. Draupadi could no longer resist His importunity and 
brought the kettle before Him, when lo! He found a fragment of the vegetable food cooked in it sticking somewhere in the neck 
of the kettle. The Lord, who is the Soul of the universe, satisfied His hunger with that fragment, thereby satisfying the whole 
universe, and asked Bhimasena to call the sage and his host of pupils for dinner. The sage and his pupils, however, had already 
disappeared since they felt no appetite and feared lest they should incur the displeasure of the Pandavas, who like Ambarisa 


were great devotees of the Lord, for declining their hospitality. 


:: 
AC AEN 





62 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15 
SR Re Be Re Ee Re Be Re Re RRR AER RR RE RE LE EERE RE REE RB ART RE RE Be RE HH MEME SESE SESE SESE SE Be BESS BEA SE AE EAT TE SB Be We Rr He Hr wy 


Lien eee ee ee he RE REO 


addressing me as son of Prtha (Kunth), Arjuna, beloved companion and delight of the 
Kurus stir my heart to its very depth, O ruler of men, even as | call them to mind. (18) 
Since we treated each other on an equal footing while in bed or sitting together, while 
rambling or indulging in self-praise, or even at dinner and so on, | occasionally twitted 
him and said, "Friend, you are indeed a veracious man !" Yet, in His unlimited greatness, 
that exalted soul put up with all my faults, fool as | was, even as a friend would bear 
with his friend or a father with his own son. (19) Bereft of that Supreme Person, who 
was my beloved companion and friend, O suzerain lord, | am left without a heart. That 
is why while escorting the Lord's spouses on the way, dear brother, | was vanquished 
like a woman by the wicked cowherds. (20) The same indeed is my Gandiva bow, and 
the same my shafts; the same my chariot and drawn by the same horses; nay, | am the 
same car-warrior before whom monarchs bowed their head. Bereft of the Lord, however, 
all these were reduced to nothingness in a moment, like an oblation poured into ashes, 
service done with some covert motive and the seed sown in a barren land. (21) 


Iieaaisgsrt deel za: YWeartifasanfagert frat afstsfie: 1221 
aru wet thar aerafaaddan semadaiarara = aq :ussraehiwat: 1231 
wide wad gaa fadieaq feet fara yor caaha a aha: 12x! 
Tea We Aetddiseaviae: | edersedt wearaerdt afer fier: 1241 
W aiepdeittetake fay: ae agitate YAM Gee FIRE! 
waned gaa wailed erdisd Weafafat F121 


"O king, as regards our relations at Dwaraka (the city of the Yadavas) about whom 
you have made enquiries just now, they all lost their reason under the influence of a curse 
pronounced by the Brahmanas, and drank wine; and their mind having been thrown 
completely off the balance through revelry, they struck one another with their fists like 
Strangers and perished with the exception of only four or five. (22-23) In fact, it is a 
diversion of the Almighty Lord that living beings now kill one another and now foster one 
another. (24) Even as in water (the deep), O king, the larger among the aquatic creatures 
devour the smaller ones, the stronger consume the weaker and the larger and the 
Stronger ones eat up one another, even so the Lord caused the other powerful princes 
to be exterminated by the mighty and most powerful Yadus and had the Yadus killed by 
the Yadus themselves, since they had now grown to be a burden to the earth. (25-26) 
The words of Lord Govinda (Sri Krsna), appropriate as they were to the place and 
occasion of the talk and pertinent to the subject in hand and soothed the agony of the 
heart, ravish my soul even as | call them to mind." (27) 

Yd Sa 
ta fadadt freon: gqerceateed| Gleaner sredssdifenen aft: 1221 
anqemesruseara ha fedeat aaa  friferarsracnaraferautissfa: 1291 
edt Wee WH Ad ad Pe | areendanesg «ogame faq: 1301 
fei see «| _Ufeaadeara: | Hlasenherrvaeieeaeaera: 132 


Sita said : As Jisnu (Arjuna) was thus contemplating on Sri Krsna's lotus-feet with 
most intense devotion, his mind became tranquil and free from passion. (28) All the 
impurities of his mind (in the shape of lust, anger and so on) having been wiped out by 
Devotion that had grown in intensity through contemplation on the feet of Lord Vasudeva, 


‘he now recollected the gospel which, though preached by the Lord in the battle front, 


is. 15 7 
PA een BOOK ONE 63 


We We We We Re He We Ke He we 
We We Ke Ke He He He He 
Be SERE ME Re Me Me Wee Re MERE Re RR MERE ERE RE RE REE HE RE MERE ROME ME ST RE RE RE MEME MERE RE Me Ws Me MEME HEME He 


Hie diy ceive Gaerne mental obscurity occasioned by lapse of time and intense 
through the sine oP Bey of Maya (Nescience) having been withdrawn from him 
Prakrti). His illusion i rahma, Arjuna transcended the three Gunas (modes of 

Sion In the shape of (the sense of) duality was fully resolved, his astral 


body was dissolved and he was finallv ri 
transmigration. (31) y rid of sorrow and secured immunity from 


WTS A aWgsPeoa Al wauaa aft ah yarn afeisr: 132! 
Wares weed ARI aet wnadd aw ai 
Rerdsae  aaeretart = referee Ha: 133 | 
aaa Yat A at ad fags: | mvedh queda ga ania: AAA 1ay! 
Fa AMC ee Hae AM Fe WN: aad Aa sel AT ASATL S41 
aa Yet waht wal wet weal saul: | 
deletamiitagecdameded: cietdadd 13&1 
qubeaakadtt gy: gta uw a qe aussaf 
fauna HAGahalearaertah =O TATaS—( (tise BVI 
we, at faafaanre: gad WW: i dtadiem: ufa wawafase m|a 1321 
Aga aM aR aa: | SST Preetisrniatvadiar: 139 | 
fagea aA ad ad aHedaeaienn fda fan: dearer: ixol 
ad Were wafa damm sat a AMI yaaUM Get ad vara Toiledid xe! 
fa GTT wad dandsgerqh: | adareraaedig ARITA 182 | 
sikarn fret agate neat: alae «=e re eefeera_ 163 | 
araeraron «= remmeuaaient «= aT Scteit Sfaetanart yat Aerts: | 
ale Hal Ut eaaalada Adal Wa: 1s¥! 
aa aad Frainguidt: PAAAa: | Hiarerafaaut |B Ws: sil fa isu 1 
a wWepdeatat Wreaissafdnaree: | ATA TATA a HUSAUIPGSA 1 SE | 
qf ve fasion: ati afer aera Unrdada wma Iv! 
srargdzarat Ss al sTahsfaaaran: i faagencnerend 4 fawrrera sof 1s 
faatsti uResa sare Sena! HEMTAaA afd: frqf: ward aat ise! 
sact «a delssqla UdiMMeaaadn | area «aft Merdaiaa «=A Iho! 
q: sgade wafer uel: aaratt ara | 
quae wert ulead cet at aimquit faher 14g! 
far SRATTa FE TeTSeH Shera MAA GSAT A TeRTISEAA: 12 
Hearing of the Lord's departure (for His divine Abode) and the extermination of the 
race of Yadu, Yudhisthira, whose mind was now completely set at rest, resolved to ascend 
to heaven. (32) When Prtha (the mother of the Pandavas) heard from Yudhisthira of the 
destruction of the Yadus and the Lord's mysterious departure, as told by Arjuna, she 
fixed her mind with exclusive devotion on Lord Adhoksaja (Sri Krsna) and turned her back 
on this world consisting of birth and death. (83) Lord Sri Krsna (who is ever free from 


birth and death) cast off (in the eyes of the world) the very body with which He had relieved 
the earth's burden, just as a man throws away the thorn with which he has extracied 





| 


64 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15 


POs tetrete er eet teerd tote to tettetioeete torte tae tot tt tore ste es tog wr sr ee Fr We We We He Be We We We We Ree We Meee BE EME HT ee We Re Br He Ve Hr 





another: for both were equal in the eye of the Lord. (34) Even as the Lord, like an actor, 
assumes and then drops the forms of a fish etc., so did He shuffle off the body with 
which He had removed the earth's burden. (35)* When Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of 
Liberation) bodily departed from this earth, leaving behind His stories which are charming 
to the ear, that very day entered the Kali age, which leads men of unawakened 
consciousness to unrighteousness. (36) The wise king Yudhisthira saw the growth of 
vices like greed, falsehood, deceit and violence etc., not only in the city (of Hastinapura) 
but in the whole of his state, nay, in every home as well as in the mind of the people, 
and, concluding therefrom the advance of the Kali age, prepared to depart from this 
world.(37) At Hastinapura the emperor installed his grandson (Pariksit)—who was not only 
well-disciplined but was his own compeer in virtues—as the sovereign of the ocean- 
girdled earth; while at Mathura he enthroned Vajra (the son of Aniruddha and the only 
surviving member of Sri Krsna's family) as the lord of the Sdrasenas. Then, having offered 
a sacrifice to Prajapati (the divinity presiding over procreation), Yudhisthira, who had 
mastered his self, received the sacred fires into himself (renounced his home and became 
a recluse). (38-39) Leaving at the palace his fine clothes, bangles and all he renounced 
the feelings of "I" and "mine" and completely severed all his worldly ties. (40) He mentally 
merged his speech into mind, the mind into Prana (the vital air, which has its seat in the 
lungs), the Prana into the Apana (the life-wind which goes downwards and out at the 
anus), the Apana with its function (of excretion) into Mrtyu (the god of death) and merged 
Mrtyu into his body made up of the five elements. (41) Thus realizing his body as nothing 
but death, the royal sage (Yudhisthira) merged the same into the three Gunas (modes 
of Prakrti); these three Gunas, again, he merged into the one fundamental Prakrti 
(Nature). This Prakrti, which is the universal Cause, he merged into the Jiva (individual 
soul) and the Jiva into the imperishable Brahma (the Absolute). (In other words, he began 
to feel that the whole of this phenomenal universe is the same as Brahma). (42) Clad 
in rags, and abstaining from food and drink, he took a vow of complete silence, flung 
about his hair in a disorderly way and exhibited himself like a dullard or a madman or 
a fiend. (43) Waiting for none and hearing nothing like a deaf man, he came out of the 
palace; and contemplating in his heart on the supreme Brahma, he took the path towards 
the north, a path trodden by exalted souls even in the past, and treading which one does 
not return. (44) Finding the people on earth in the grip of the Kali age, the promoter of 
unrighteousness, all his brothers too followed him with a similar resolve (to attain the 
divine Abode). (45) Having fully achieved all the ends of life and knowing the lotus-feet 
of Lord Vaikuntha (Sri Krsna) as their eternal abode, they clung to them with their 
mind.(46) Their intellect being purified by Devotion that had grown in intensity through 
meditation on those feet, their mind was exclusively fixed on the supreme Reality of 
Bhagavan Narayana (Sri Krsna), which is the abode of only those who are purged of all 
Sin. With that pure mind they attained that goal which is difficult of attainment for the 
wicked and sensually-minded. (47-48) Vidura too, whose mind was fully controlled and 
possessed by Sri Krsna, cast off his body at Prabhasa (near Dwaraka): and with his 
thought fixed on Sri Krsna, he returned to his abode (the realm of Yama) accompanied 
a annmnin anne 


* Verses 34 and 35 are missing in the oldest manuscript yet found of Srimad Bhagavata, existing in the Saraswati 
Bhavana Library attached to the Queen's College at Varanasi. The well-known commentator Vijayadhwaja (who represents 
the Madhva school) has rejected these two verses as well as the one immediately preceding them as interpolated. The divine 
form of Lord Sri Krsna, which is spiritual and of the same essence as the Lord Himself, is eternal; and to say that the Lord cast 
H# off as something adventitious or superfluous would be a contradiction in terms. Hence the votaries of the Lord have rejected 
these two verses as Spurious. Their omission from the manuscript existing in the Saraswati Bhavana Library also confirms their 
questionable authenticity. 


Dis. 16°] - ~-BOOK ONE 65 


BeBe We Ke Be Re Be Re We Ke Ke Kee Kee He Re He 
ser te Se Rr Be He MY He SSE AS AEN R CENA R eee rth ene nnei hae nena 





by the manes (who had called there to take him back). (49) Draupadi also, when she 
came to know of her lord's indifference (to the world), concentrated her mind on the divine 
Sri Krsna (the son of Vasudeva) and attained to Him. (50) He who listens with reverence 
to this most sacred and blessed Story of the departure in this manner of Pandu's sons, 


the beloved of the Lord, develops devotion to Sri Har (Sri Krsna) and attains perfection 
(final beatitude). (51) 


Thus ends the fifteenth discourse entitled the “Ascent of the Pandavas to Heaven", 
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


X a = at = <3 * 
PITS 


SIM Wears: 


Discourse XVI 
Conquest of the world by king Pariksit and the dialogue between 
Dharma (the god of piety) and Mother Earth 
Yd Sa 
dd: uitfaa fesadiert adi agmmad: ware =z 
am fé qerfendaifag: wares fax aegureei ¢ | 
a Sea wae 9 sad waasadigaqeengaedd «SLI 2 
VTE «MsTat wRaaon | Wed WS Heal ear aarfamret: 1 3 | 
fomesta ak: af fefasd afi qaeset as ud mf verti x 1 
Suta continued : After the ascent of the Pandavas to heaven king Pariksit who was 
a great devotee of the Lord, ruled over the earth according to the instructions of the 
foremost Brahmanas. He possessed, O Saunaka, the same noble virtues as had been 
predicted by expert astrologers at the time of his birth.(1) He married Iravati, the daughter 
of Uttara (his own maternal uncle*) and begot through her four sons, Janamejaya and 
others. (2) Taking Krpa (the son of Saradvan) for his Guru (guide), he performed on the 
bank of the Ganga three ASwamedhas (horse-sacrifices), offering liberal sacrificial fees 
(to the officiating priests). In these sacrifices the gods accepted the offerings before the 


t of the world the hero caught 
eyes of all. (3) Somewhere in the course of his conques | aL 
and uities - his superior might the spirit of the Kali age, who in the form of a Sudra 


Was disguised as a prince, striking with his foot a cow and a bull. (4) 
aie SATA 


are sarhisere antes fefiastal 3a: | qeafereR Ya: sisal Ti a: vetetet t 
aaneddl Agu ale HPUIHAAA | & | 
sere uamnitemenceleet | Wa feertteaerga =| AGHA: | € 


ase qos qatar! Sere TAT A; WAEHAT | ot 
‘aces in those days to marry the daughter of their own maternal uncle (mother's 
n 


“ItSeems it was customary among the pil ) 
the scriptures. 
brother), which is otherwise regarded as incestuous and prohibited by 








—— 
— 
— 


BERGER HERR AAR ARAM TE NM AEH 


66 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16 


SR RR RE RE RERRARR RR RRRRAAART ARA RE RRR RE RE RE BE LEME RE BE REE A SCRE RE FE ME BE SE FEE BT Be BY BH Hr 





3 aiyhaad aaa alaqed gerd: i ued fe wiated: off: 
Hel Farh Wad ekasteryd Aa: | ¢ | 
Tew ua aa wages ai fis fead am feat a cenit: |< | 
Saunaka said : Why did the king (merely) subdue the spirit of the Kali age in the 
course of his conquest (instead of killing him outright and thus ridding humanity of his 
evil influence once for all) ? For, though disguised as a prince, he was after all a vile 
Sidra, who took it into his head to strike a cow and a bull with his foot. Therefore, O 
blessed one, tell me all that, if it is connected with the story of Sri Krsna or with that of 
saints who taste the honey flowing from His lotus-feet (are devoted to Him). Of what avail 
are other idle discourses, in which life is wantonly spent ? (5-6) For the good of mortal 
men who, though shortlived, are yet eager to realize the Truth, the all-powerful god of 
death has been invited here to perform propitiatory rites. (7) Nobody will die so long as 
the god of death is here. That all-powerful god has been invited by the great sages so 
that even in this mortal world people may get to hear and enjoy the ambrosial discourses 
depicting the sports of Sri Hari. (8) The life-span of the unfortunate men of this world, 
who are dull of understanding and shortlived too, is frittered away in sleep by night and 
in frivolous pursuits by day. (9) 
Ud sald 
aq ad |S estigesadd aie sfas fastamatdd | 
fara aiid dd: aed aaaifvsued gol 
Meomd Mead WW  wWrseacsa: ad! 
qa woafgaahtamar 4 waaat 8 feftasara feta: 1221 
Wa mq A Ud UM Hed! eyes agin fata age afer 1221 
qa cava: Wyse ARIAL! Waal A aa: HPOMEldagany 123 | 
Wed A uUkRaMaeaisadste: | Ae a qormreatat asi wkh a chara 12x 
a: UeGs: dieeyiacteaa: | neem araifa al ER Wert: 1241 
AR AUS AAAS TATA TARTS STOTTT 
ferry ugg sania a faondih aaa qaftscomiere 126 
qa ddaaa yest afataeqiatact fens acrid afsates 21201 
a4: uded Ue fase Mi gest eieacat faaanta waa iecl 


suta said : While Pariksit was living in the Kuru-Jangala country, he heard the 
unpalatable news that Kali had entered the territories protected by his army, and 
accordingly took his bow, fond of war as he was. (10) Mounting his well-decorated car, 
driven by dark horses and bearing an ensign with the device of a lion, he sallied forth 
from his capital for the conquest of the world, surrounded by his own army consisting 
of chariots and elephants, horse and foot. (11) Having conquered Bhadragwa, Ketumala, 
Bharata, the northern Kurus, Kimpurusa and other countries, he levied tribute from 
them.(12) Everywhere he heard the people sing the praises of his high-souled forbears 
(the Pandavas), revealing at the same time the glory of Sri Krsna. (13) He also heard 
the story of his own deliverance (at the hands of Sri Krsna) from the fire of the missile 
discharged by Aswatthama (the son of Drona), as well as of the cordial relations existing 
between the Vrsnis (the Yadavas) and the sons of Prtha (Kunti) and of the latters' devotion 


- 


Dis. 16} _ "BOOK ONE” ~~” 67 


be Be Br Be Be Be Sr Be Hr Ge Hr Me Hr Be Br Hy Hr Ke Hr He Ge Kr Ke Ke He Se Gr Kr Ke Me Ke Ke Me He Ke Me Re Ke He He Ke He He Be Ke Ree Re Re eR ee RE RO BER EH Re ME Be He Ne He We Ke He Hee Ke He He He 





to Lord KeSava (Sri Krsna). (1 4) Highly pleased with them (those who sang these stories) 


the noble-minded emperor bestowed on them costly garments and necklaces, his eyes 


wide open with joy. (15) Hearing how Lord Visnu (Sri Krsna) had played the role of a 
charioteer (to Arjuna), attended the councils of the Pandavas, waited upon them, played 
the friend and ambassador, kept watch outside their camp at night in the pose of a warrior, 
followed them as a waiter, eulogized Yudhisthira and bowed to him not only Himself but 
caused the whole world to bow at the feet of His beloved Pandavas (made them worthy 
of adoration for the whole world), the emperor (Pariksit) developed devotion to His lotus- 
feet.(16) As he was thus following in the footsteps of his forefathers from day to day (in 
the course of his conquest of the world) a strange incident occurred not very far from 
his territorial limits. Hear of it from me. (17) Hoofing about on one foot in the form of a 
bull, Dnarma (the god of virtue) saw mother Earth in the form of a cow, shorn of her lustre 
and bathing her cheeks in tears like a mother that has lost her child, and enquired of 


her as follows: (18) 
qf Jaq 


cha Se SATA AA fara ToRATa | 
sTeaa «= Madey see ie HATS 129 | 
Wedd wea Aenea at querer 
set «| Ge CTCsad—isé RTA fa RO 
asneaarm: faa afd aem aera yeackand 
art edt sage pedvarwd wide Hea 122! 
fe ween afenugsm usift a aration | 
Saetat aRMINae: AMAaa ea asilaethy 122 | 


agra a aatadpdladeea Saar | 
sifeqat sit Sst SO ei «= rattorfamraat 1231 
s wma caf aget a4 faenikinfa 
aed al a afeat acta Pula fe gama as 12% 

Dharma said : Are you keeping well, good lady ? With your somewhat withering 
face you look quite pale. | perceive there is agony in your heart. Do you grieve for some 
relation living at a distance from you, madam ? (19) It may be you are sorrowing for me, 
deprived as | am of three of my feet and left with but one. Or you may be feeling sorry 
for yourself, knowing that Sddras are going to rule over you hereafter ? Or you are grieving 
for the gods and other heavenly beings that have been robbed of their share (offerings) 
in sacrifices ? Or do you sorrow for the people who are suffering due to Indra (the god 
of rain) withholding rain ? (20) Do you feel concerned for women who are unprotected 
by their husbands, or for children who are being persecuted by their own parents as if 
by man-eating demons ? Or are you sorry for the goddess of speech (the Vedic lore), 
that has fallen in the hands of Brahmanas of reproachful conduct or for the foremost 
Brahmanas who are in the service of royal houses that have no respect for the Brahmana 
race? (21) Again, do you grieve for the fallen Ksatriyas dominated by Kali, or for the 
kingdoms that have been devastated by them? Or do you sorrow for the world of living 
beings, who are intent upon eating and drinking, clothing and washing themselves or on 
sexual intercourse, disregarding all barriers? (22) Or deserted by Sri Hari (Sri Krsna)— 


. 
| 
: 








68 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16 


de Br he Be Pe BeBe te Bee BeBe eRe Be Re Re RE RE Re RR RRR RRL RL RR ERR RRR ERE RE RY ROR BERR BE ERE BEE BEER BY BEBE BER BE BEBE BEB BEBE BR 





who had come down to the mortal plane only in order to relieve your onerous burden 
and has now vanished out of sight, mother Earth—are you reminded of His exploits, the 
very thought of which is conducive to final beatitude ? (23) Tell me, Earth (storehouse 
of all riches) ! the cause of your mental agony, on account of which you look so emaciated. 
Or is it that Time, who is more powerful than all powerful beings, has robbed you, mother, 
of your good fortune, which was once extolled even by the gods ? (24) 


ORS Cee | 
wan fe ac aad aa aatqgefaiagtidda aa odefaqared: 1241 
eat BS a AAI: AAT Bisias WA aaa: are fafaataa: ser LIVE! 
an fixated alt as ac ola: | aad aa aad adata a ie 
WARN NI: Bes Ae Biel ae WT: | Mad Wadahkaadt aifdatisténfa: 121 
W aa a wate at Aen: | weal Aeatrotet faaha w afetad 1281 
qe Worn sifted arya aren ted ote oer wHfo-faay 130 | 
SIM Aaa Teed AAA | tar fq ae Balt aUireressstAry 138 | 
Hee Agta AaMSMaHae: WAM Wasa: t 
a sit: waramtecat fag aenedisme wastasqent 1321 
a: 6 Staesitad: = AaeeeheTST 
eS aah Gara wt mqraeradt ard 133) 
at a 9-H AaltlevitardnUrseeradsa: | 
a genre ued warea aay wanfewest 13x 
at al aed fare gear sactneferiaaaricd: | 
Ba warnecagaia 4 Wareaat aa aeafifaeisaran: 1341 
dana px:  ofedterfarder aifaam use: sq: sre aeade 136! 
gfe AG eMad AS ASA Sleds WHA Yeataaarel A VrSaiseara: 126 | 
Earth replied :—‘"Dharma, you surely know all that you ask me. It was due to Him 
(Sri Krsna) that you were endowed (till the other day) with all your four feet, that were 
conducive to the happiness of the world. (25) Nay, truthfulness, purity, compassion, 
forbearance, liberality, contentment, guilelessness, composure of mind, subjugation of the 
senses, austerity, evenness of temper, endurance, quietism, sacred knowledge, self- 
realization, dispassion (absence of thirst for sensuous enjoyment), lordship (power to 
rule), heroism, majesty, strength, right judgment, independence (absolute freedom), 
dexterity, loveliness of form, fortitude, gentleness of disposition, exceptional intelligence, 
modesty, amiability, quickness of mind, acuteness of the senses and bodily vigour, good 
fortune, sobriety, steadiness, reverence, good reputation, respectability and absence of 
egotism—these and many other excellent virtues, which are sought by men aspiring for 
greatness, are ever present in Him and never decline, O blessed one. (26—29) By Him, 
who is the receptacle of all noble qualities and the abode of Sri (the goddess of prosperity) 
has the world been deserted today and has thus fallen under the eye of the wicked Kali. 
It is such a world that | am grieving for. (30) | am equally concerned for myself, for you, 


the chief of divinities, and the other gods, manes sages and holy men as _ well as for 
the generality of men belonging to all grades of society and stages of life. (81) Though 


Dis. 17] ~ BOOK ONE 69 


Be Br Br Br Be BeBe Be Re He He He Ke Be HEHE He Hr Me He Be Re Ke Ke Ke He Ge Ge Ke He Me Ke Ke Ke He Kee Re Kee HERE eR He Ree Be He Bee Re RE R ERE RE RE RERE RE RERE Be Be Be Be Be REE BEREBERE RE REDE RE REE BE 





exclusively devoted to the Lord, Brahma and the other gods practised austere penance 
for a long time in order to secure a kind look from Sri (the goddess of prosperity). Even 
that Sri seeks with excessive fondness the lovely shade of His feet, leaving Her home 
in the bed of lotuses. (32) Exquisitely adorned by the glorious feet of the same divine 
Lord, that bore the marks of a lotus, thunderbolt, goad and flag, and deriving great 
splendour through them, | once outshone all the three worlds; and when that good luck 
ceased, He forsook me, proud as | was (of my great good fortune). (33) Absolutely 
independent as He is, He assumed a charming personality in the race of Yadu in order 
to make you whole (with all your feet restored) as a part of His own Being* by His own 
might, finding you grieved at the loss of your two feet. Nay, He removed my oppressive 
burden in the shape of a hundred Aksauhinis of kings who belonged to the demon race 
in their previous incarnation. (34) What woman could bear separation from that Supreme ~ 
Person, who stole away by His endearing looks, bright smiles and sweet words the 
patience as well as the pride of loving and proud ladies (like Satyabhama and others), 
and adorned by whose footprints | felt a thrill of joy?" (35) As mother Earth and Dharma 
(the god of virtue) were thus talking, the royal sage Pariksit arrived at the bank of the 
Saraswati where it flows towards the east. (36) 


Thus ends the sixteenth discourse entitled "The Dialogue between goddess Earth and 
Dharma", in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


EER EAT SS 
COSI ES SIS 


BIA Aaa SATA: 


Discourse XVII 
King Pariksit subdues Kali 


Yd Sara 
a WM UW eAAAAAMad! aqUsed A ques cael FWSM! 2 
qi yoewas eda feamiaut watt led Yadieay! 2 | 
Tm a adeat dat yal Yauated! faa Aaa aa aaa | 3 | 
UTS WHS: Ada Amita art Aad: | x | 
Sea USM Gls ASUdeM aati aeasha AMT AcacHdunigst: 1 & | 
ee HE WA st Ae Woslarad | Mensa wi Neel ates | & | 


* The term 'Bhaga' has been defined in our scriptures as below :-— 
Dardeg sane ica aera: fara: | Aaraaeaa FOOT AT SALT I 
"The word 'Bhaga' denotes power, virtue, fame, affluence, wisdom and dispassion, each in its fullest measure." 


Sri Krsna, who has been referred to earlier as Bhagavan Himself (#@&q *1a17q 444) naturally possessed all these six 
attributes in their enti rety, Dharma (virtue) as part of these six attributes thus existed in Him complete in all its limbs, although 
in the Dwapara age, when the Lord appeared on earth, it had lost two of its limbs. This is what mother Earth seeks to convey 


in the above lines. 











70° SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17 | 
LERAKKKKLAAKKKLLLLK ALAA RAA ALKA ALLE AAR AAA AA A A AAA HA A AAA EH HH he 

Sita said There (on the bank of the Saraswati) the king (Pariksit) saw a Sudra, 
bearing the insignia of royalty, and with a club in his hand belabouring a cow and a bull 
as though they had no protector. (1) The bull, who was white as a lotus stalk and stood 
with difficulty on one leg alone, was seen trembling and urinating as it were with fear while 
being beaten by the Sudra. (2) As for the cow, who yields materials (in the shape of milk, 
ghee etc.) useful for religious acts (Such as the performance of sacrifices etc.), the king 
found her most miserable, being kicked by the Sudra and bereft of her calf. Her cheeks 
were bathed in tears, and she had grown very lean and thin and was hungry. (3) Mounted 
on his gold-plated car and stringing his bow, he challenged the tyrant in accents deep 
as the rumbling of a cloud:— (4) "Who are you that are powerful enough to strike the 
weak so violently in this land protected by me ?° Like an actor on the stage you have 
put on the garb of a king; but by your action you are a Sudra. (5) By striking harmless 
creatures in a lonely place and at a time when Sri Krsna has gone far away (ascended 
to His divine Abode) along with Arjuna (the wielder of the Gandiva bow), you have proved 
yourself to be an offender and therefore, deserve to be slain. (6) 


@ al YNedas: Weds: uel ai qaaan fh wise cat 3: ultaaaz! © | 
I Wd URason  adueufetsrd 1 yaesquaater faa a snforat aye: 1c 1 
MW aaa Ad A quenre WaT MT Veet Vs A Goat ala are @ 1 
Ta US Ws: Aaa ALATA: | aa AMA Akaka calitargsiMt Aa: 101 
We Ua at eat admits: ia wi afeenf’ yYyagsaadaieei 
wisdad da Uletety GAT Agee | AT WaeATga US Ue HOTA 182 | 
seme Ga Vs a: AeA! sieaaeaet « oetat atftesor i231 
SAAT Ga Addisa A USA As waa Measyent sd evi 
srMieate YY A aMTephage: | sedis ast Maranatha Aga e4 | 
Tat fe cet at: weerterqed aedisa aaamernaroeraenre 1261 


(Turning to the buil, he went on:) "As for yourself, are you some divinity in the guise 
of a bull, white as a lotus stalk and moving on one foot only, having lost your other three 
feet, and thus causing us great sorrow? (7) On this earth, securely guarded by the stout 
arms of the Paurava kings, tears were never seen to drop from the eyes of creatures 
other than you. (8) Grieve no more, O bull; let your fear of the Sudra be gone. Weep 
not, mother; may all be well with you so long as | am here to punish the evil-doer. (9) 
The good reputation, longevity, fortune and prospects in the other world of that wild king 
go to the dogs, in whose dominion, O virtuous one, the people are indiscriminately 
oppressed by the impious. (10) To put an end to the suffering of the distressed, this indeed 
is the foremost duty of kings. Therefore, | shall slay this most wicked fellow, and enemy 
of living beings that he is. (11) Who is it that amputated your three feet, O bull, a 
quadruped as you are ? Let there be no afflicted souls like you in the realm of kings who 
are votaries of Sri Krsna. (12) Tell me, O bull, who it was that mutilated innocent and 
good souls like you, and thus sullied the fair name of the Pandavas (the sons of Prtha). 
May good come to you. (13) He who does evil to an innocent creature must have fear 
from me on all sides. Pious souls are surely benefited when vile creatures are subdued.(14) 
| shall certainly cut off the arm, along with the armlet adorning it, of the individual, be he 
a veritable god, who in his unbridled madness inflicts injury on harmless creatures. (15) 
It is, indeed, the paramount duty of a monarch to protect those who stick to their own 
Dharma. Punishing according to the injunctions of the scriptures those other people who 


Dis. 17 ] T BOOK ONE» 71 


Br Br Be Be Ke Be He Ke He Hr Hear Me Me Br Me Kr Ke Gr Ke Kr Hr He re Me We ee We Ke Ke ee Re Re Ree Ke eRe He Re He Re Be Be Re Ree He He Hr We We We We We Be We We We We Me We Be Ve He Ge Ge We Fee We We Ge He He He He 





in this world have strayed from the path of virtue otherwise than in adversity.” (16) 
qt Sara 


We a: WUsdaM gwmardiva aa: | Aat Worl: Hot alelel War Ha: 129! 
1 aa gecknt aq: @: yeadsiges a fasta araatefemtfed: ie 
chfaq facia SAI: cant at ae Mat TLS 
smidediettaxaiatt ayia fsya:iserged wet fags water izot 


Dharma replied : "Such an assurance of protection to the distressed is quite 
becoming of you, the scions of Pandu, whose hosts of virtues compelled the divine Sri 
Krsna to accept the (humble) role of an envoy etc., to you (your forbears). (17) Bewildered 
as we are by the conflicting statements of various thinkers, we know not the person who 
is responsible for the causes of suffering, O jewel among men ! (18) Some, who deny 
all difference, declare their own self as responsible for their suffering; others attribute it 
to Providence; yet others ascribe it to their own doings; a fourth school avers nature to 
be the cause of suffering; while still others declare God as the bestower of suffering. (19) 
Some, again, hold that the cause of suffering is something beyond the reach of speech 
or mind. Now investigate, O royal sage, by your own judgement, which of these views 
is sound."(20) 

Yd sald 
wa af sac a ame feranni aoe ava faee: adap aire 


Sita continued : When Dharma spoke in this strain, Emperor Pariksit, O Saunaka, 
was disillusioned and with a calm mind, replied to him as follows: (21) 


UAT 
ay sdaife ada anise queqapiaeiiod ei gamely asadiee! 
a7al cana Ta ace 0 aaaanta sraaia 4 fsa: 1231 
aU: aa cat Gelala Wel: Ha Hal: | Beier «= MT: «9S HSA 12¥1 
set «oat «Crem Oe SCO addddatera: 1 dt S| frgereeisaagqeafa: «= fos: 1241 
za oa yinan =fadena adtisiataeaeam: ada: adele 126! 
BMaasenent «atest «| atta ere | StstevET PASAT: Bot Ataaha AA 19 1 


The king said : You speak what is right, O knower of Dharma (righteousness). 
Evidently you are Dharma (the god of virtue) in the guise of a bull. (You refuse to tell 
_ the name of your persecutor) only because (you know that) the lot which falls to a wrong- 
doer is also shared by the denouncer. (22) Or the (right) conclusion is that the ways of 
the divine Maya (deluding potency) are surely beyond the scope of the mind and speech 
of living beings. (23) In the Krta age (Satyayuga) you had four whole feet in the form 
of austerity, purity, compassion and truthfulness. Three of them have since been 
destroyed by the progeny of unrighteousness, viz., pride, attachment and hauteur. (24) 
Now, O Dharma, you have only one foot left in the shape of truthfulness, on which you 
are somehow supporting yourself. Yonder unrighteousness in the shape of Kali, however, 
seeks to rob you of the same, strengthened as it is by falsehood. (25) And this cow is 
no other than the good mother Earth, whose heavy burden was relieved by the Lord and 
‘who was adorned all round by His charming footprints. (26) Forsaken by Him, the holy 
mother now grieves like an unlucky woman, with tears in her eyes, to think that Sudras 
who hate the Brahmanas and pretend to be kings will rule over her. (27) 








f2 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17 


We Be Re eRe Re ERE RE RE ERE RE RRR RRR RRR RRR RAR RR LO ROR RRR RR BRE ER RT RE BER RE RE BE RR Re BRT REE RE STR RE RE BE BTS HREM Re Re He rt 
sa et audi da araiaer vere: frenaeg 9 Watt Hosea 12C1 
q fara fara qersmidqaeage Rea wre walage: 1281 
uid ulead: nual 9 dMade: | eval AMaehweatad sie Ad eafaa 13z01 
Having thus comforted Dharma as well as mother Earth, Pariksit (who was a great 
car-warrior) drew his sharp-edged sword in order to dispose of Kali, the spring of 
unrighteousness. (28) Perceiving that the king was bent upon killing him, he threw off 
his insignia of royalty and placed his head at the king's feet, overwhelmed with fear. (29) 
The praiseworthy hero (Pariksit), who was kind to the meek and hospitable to those who 
sought his protection, took compassion on Kali, who had fallen at his feet, and did not 
slay him, but smilingly spoke thus: (30) 


I a Westen aged wana fae 
a afdadet adi wise AX Uda aAneday: 1321 
wal ada ATeaee yA TM SAAT: | 
MIMS wldaasdiel Vt WA A MeeM aM 132! 
a atidet dada au at aio afd 
Saad «=a (eC HT Usfadtag: 1331 
ae 0 eteineanieant = gweaadedistaT. st aT 
HAMA. ferigunmddteatahas STMT 13% 1 
The king said : You have no cause for fear when you have joined your palms before 
us, that have inherited the glorious traditions of Arjuna (who had overcome sloth). But 
on no account should you stay in my realm, a friend as you are of unrighteousness. (31) 
Ever since you took up your abode in the body of kings (gods among men), these 
numerous vices—greed, falsehood, thieving, wickedness, proneness to sin, poverty, wile, 
cantankerousness and hypocrisy—have followed you. (32) Therefore, O ally of 
unrighteousness, you should not remain in Brahmavarta, which is a fit abode for piety 
and truth, and where Brahmanas well-versed in the elaborate ritual propitiate the Lord 
of sacrifices through sacrificial performances. (33) In this land ( of Brahmavarta) Lord Sri 
Hari abides in the form of sacrifices and blesses His votaries. Nay, moving inside as well 


as outside all animate and inanimate beings like the air, that Universal Soul grants all 
their desires. (34) 





Yd sald 
uifadanies: a chiensiiadug: | ager queuTfuraterda, 13% | 
Suta continued : Kali trembled to hear this command of king Pariksit. He made the 


following request to the king, who stood ready to strike with his uplifted sword, as Yama 
with his rod of punishment. (35) 
aloeara 


A we aed aaa dai oaa at daft Maat i3él 
TH ada 38 We mepadaiaza fad aw sifasasqareaae 130! 
Kali said : Wherever | think of taking up my abode in obedience to your command, 


O emperor, | find you bow and arrow in hand. (36) Therefore, O jewel among champions 
of righteousness, it behoves you to tell me the place where | may settle down permanently 


Dis. 17 ] BOOK ONE he 


Br Br Be Br Be Br Br Ke Be Br Kr Be Be Ke He Ke Ge Be Br Ke Hr Br Br Be Ke He Be Be We Ke Ke Ke Ke He Ke Ke Be Ke Ke He Ke Ke Wr Br Hr Hr We BeBe He Re Kee Ke Re Re Re Re We Re He Be Wee Ke He Be He We Ke Be Ge Ke Gr He Be Be Be Be Ke He He 





in compliance with your orders. (37) 
Ud saad 
waite we weit wet atigqg ud faa: ga aarentsafda: 132! 
GS WA  weRCnsy: | adisdd He HM Gl Al A UAH 13e! 
sqm we weit gadsna: aie: 1 sian amit saad adfaesicd I¥o! 
aA A Aad WyE: yea: apfeaci fasted eniaitet wus clematis: ise! 
qa Asta, Wer aa: ake anf i vfrder ange wd a anaelad xe 
a we wed sired ufictiaai fameaod «usu = fafararat iw 
sTRISGT FT Usd: aasieieoa i wel  aewaesmadl geagar: 1vvl 
FUBIATAMaSAA ATA Wa: | aa Ulead: aot gat Gara diferat: 1x4 
fa areMad Fe oRASaT Seda Nea forse) AA AACaSeATA: 12191 
Sita continued :Thus entreated by Kali, the king then allocated to him the following 
(four) places—dice, wine, woman and shambles, the hotbeds of the four vices (falsehood, 
intoxication, passion and cruelty). (38) On Kali asking for more abodes, the mighty king 
assigned him gold (as the fifth abode). Thus he allotted to him falsehood, intoxication, 
passion and slaughter with animosity as the fifth. (39) In obedience to the king's command 
Kali, the progenitor of unrighteousness, occupied these five abodes assigned by Pariksit 
(the son of Uttara). (40) Hence a man seeking blessedness, especially a pious monarch, 
a leader of the people and a religious preceptor should never resort to these. (41) The 
king then restored the three lost legs of the bull, viz., penance, purity and compassion, 
and comforted and cherished mother Earth. (42) The selfsame monarch still occupies the 
royal throne which was bequeathed to him by his granduncle, king Yudhisthira, while 
retiring to the forest. (43) Shining with the glory of the Kaurava kings, that most blessed 
emperor of extensive renown,the royal sage Pariksit dwells even now at Hastinapura. (44) 


Such is the majesty of king Pariksit (the son of Abhimanyu) during whose rulership over 
the earth you have undertaken the vow of performing this sacrifice. (45)* 


Thus ends the seventeenth discourse entitled "The Subjugation of Kali’, 
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita 


IIE SS 


a 


* In verses 43 to 45 the great king Pariksit has been spoken of as if he were present at the time when the holy sacrifice 
at Naimisaranya was in progress. According to the aphorism of Panini ‘adtarrarira adaragr’ the present tense can be used even 
with reference to the immediate past or future. The great Acarya Vallabha of revered memory points out in his famous 
commentary (the Subodhini) that, even though Pariksit had departed irom this world, his renown and glory were still alive. The 
distance of time which divided him from the period of the sacrifice undertaken by Saunaka and others has been eliminated in 
order to evoke the utmost reverence for him. His soul had merged in the Lord; that was also one reason why Suta visualized 
him as present before his eyes. Not only the learned speaker but his saintly audience too felt his presence. According to the 
Vedic maxim ‘aren 4araaqa:’ (the fatherhimselfis reborn as a son ) it was Pariksit himself who occupied the throne of Hastinapura 
in the person of his son and worthy successor, Janamejaya. Considered from all these points of view, a reference to Pariksit 


in the present tense goes to heighten the effect of the discourse. 


. [$64] B. M. 5— 








74 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18 


Re Re Br Be he Be Re Be Be Re eRe Re Be Re Re Re RRR RE ERE RRR RRR RRR RRR RE RE RRB BE BE BEBE BEBE BEBE BEBE Re Be BEBE BEBE BEBE BY BE BE BRE ERE Be Be Be Be Be Be Be Re Ber ee 


STATSTSRN SEAT: 


Discourse XVIII 


The youthful sage Srngi utters an imprecation against king Pariksit 
Yd Sara 
a a surest 4 aidedt Yai stare wad: Hered: |e 
Aaa wR Adnanoagadi a WyAStae waaay: | 2 | 
sepa Ada: as famaiiadhera: | dareachsial fret weal GE Hae! 2 I 
ARaReleadial | ART | AHA! A Sensi SAA AMSAT | 
Weahied saad Basisite ada: i aradien Aeqetahmaaa wate! & | 
aiaea ada wereest mM! dddedadisaaedsea: cafe: 1 & | 
Adee wie Uwe AS sa UNYR | Haemny aga Aaa Hatt aa 9 | 
fe J aeg qu aie adkediteonrismmad: sandy at galt 7 addi ¢ | 


suaftiada a: gua unifed car) aqeanadaaeandt aaqesd |e 
a Ul: BM Wad: Headttateendur: | WorHaleran: gis: Gaeren qyars7: 120 


Suta continued : Though scorched in the mother's womb by the missile discharged 
by Aswatthama (the son of Drona), king Pariksit did not die (was saved from extinction) 
by the grace of Lord Sri Krsna of marvellous deeds.(1) Having given his mind and heart 
to the Lord, he did not feel embarrassed even when faced with the terrible fear of meeting 
his death at the hands of the serpent Taksaka, spurred on by the anger (curse) of a 
Brahmana boy. (2) Shaking off attachment to everything, he accepted the discipleship 
of the sage Suka (the celebrated son of Vyasa) and, having realized the truth about Lord 
on Hari, cast off his body on the bank of the Ganga. (3) No confusion arises, even at 
the hour of death, in the mind of those who talk of none else than Lord Sri Krsna of 
excellent renown, enjoy His nectar-like stories and contemplate on His lotus-feet. (4) Kali 
was powerless on this earth,even though he had penetrated every part of it, so long as 
the great king Pariksit (son of Abhimanyu) continued to rule over the same as its 
undisputed sovereign. (5) As a matter of fact, Kali, the progenitor of unrighteousness, 
had set his foot on the earth the very day, nay, the very moment the Lord quitted it. (6) 
The emperor, however, who like the bee, drew the best out of everything, bore no grudge 
to Kali; for ( he knew that) in this age meritorious acts bear fruit immediately (as soon 
as they are projected) but not so the other (sinful) acts, which yield fruit only when they 
are actually committed. (7) In fact, of what account is Kali, who is heroic in the midst 
of children (the ignorant) but is cowardly, before the wise (strong-minded), and who like 
the wolf is ever alert to take the unwary men by surprise. (8) | have thus related to you 
(O sages !) the sacred life-account of king Pariksit, connected as it is with the story of 
Lord Sri Krsna (son of Vasudeva); this was what you enquired of me. (9) Lord Sri Krsna 
performed many a deed which is a fit subject for discourse. Men seeking blessedness 
should, therefore, listen with rapt attention to all His stories that depict His virtues and 
narrate His exploits.(10) 





AI HF: 
Ga sia aar: aha wWarieae AE: | seat Wats Fora wats fe a: 128 


Dis.-18 «+ BOOK ONE : 75 


BERRA R RRR BEBE LER AAR R RRR RRR RR ARAL RRR RRR RARER AAA AEA A LEAL LEE ERE LED AEHE 


ata we warismaafa  wMeacenad Ale?! 
qa oat a ai agviaqiunaaseage velar feqartera: 1%31 

at At 8 6qae | 86 tafe «= Fear 

wt Werte ATTRTEETI: 1 R01 

wm WH a wnat  Aedderdawere | 

ae «uf far aged a farta faeries 

@ a uermeaa uifae aamanhemevuafe: | 

Wea aaratenatfeats ast GRATE 125 | 

aa: uw Quarta gM aA AAA ATA ASA, | 

SRM rae aniferd UPTAAUANTA 1 219 1 


The sages said : Good Sita, may you live for years without number—you who 
recount the untarnished glory of Lord Sri Krsna, which is like nectar to us mortals. (11) 
To us, whose body has been soiled by the smoke arising from the sacrificial fires, even 
while we are engaged in this sacrificial performance, the fruit of which is uncertain, you 
give to drink to our heart's content the sweet and inebriating honey flowing from the lotus- 
feet of Lord Govinda (Sri Krsna) ! (12) We cannot compare with a moment's fellowship 
of loving devotees of the Lord either heavenly bliss or even final beatitude (the cessation 
of birth and death) much less the enjoyments sought after by mortal men. (13) What man 
of good taste would feel sated with hearing the story of the Lord, who is the only and 
final goal of the greatest saints ? Even masters of Yoga, headed by Lord Siva and the 
lotus-born Brahma, have not been able to exhaust the virtues of the Lord, who is beyond 
the Gunas of Prakrti. (14) Therefore, O learned Suta, to whom, among us all, God is the 
foremost concern of life, tell us at length the noble and holy doings of Sri Hari (Lord Sri 
Krsna), who is the only and final resort of the greatest souls, eager as we are to hear 
of them. (15) That great devotee of the Lord, king Pariksit of no mean understanding, 
attained to the feet of Lord Sri Krsna (whose banner bears the device of Garuda, the 
king of the birds), which are otherwise known by the name of final beatitude, through 
wisdom taught by the sage Suka (in the form of a story). (16) Pray, narrate to us that 
most sacred story embodying the wisdom imparted to Pariksit (the story of Srimad 
‘Bhagavata), which lays bare the truth in unambiguous terms and firmly establishes one 
in the extremely wonderful Yoga (of Love), nay, which also contains an account of the 
doings of the Lord and delights His devotees. (17) 





ad Sara 
aa ad wayds eae gedaua facresna: | 
atepeerartet faeiatict 11 | HSA: 12S 1 


2 ea: | Uno) «AT RC TTT | 

MNSArdae yaaa Ae gure AAAS: 123 1 
Uae 7d faa TRaraMeaare 1 
feamm oo stadt feryitcierefroy «=| aeisasiteet: 1201 


RoE SS Sp ene 








76 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18 


Per Be Re Br Be Be Rr Re Re Re Be Re Re Re Re RE REPEL RE REREREEBE RE RE RE REE BE REE BE RE BE ROBE BEER BY BE Be BE TBE BE Be Be BE Be BeBe Be BEER Be BB Be Br Hr Be Be He He Be Br Br Be Hr Hr Hr Hr Br Hr 





asia AUS aferatearaara: qed: 1221 

a «Cf «CUSisdaut «0 Mafaraat | StaTaTaisA ATA 

ay: uUdeaad ude ad fawmia fais: 1231 
weal wera fea yal atl yaya: ar: arta FAIRS | 
Serra: saa aasrmical gaa ard aod 1241 
sfetea exeTTTOTH Ae fe, leat «= TS eA fafa 1261 
fasatisersa Wawra al faqeniaeah AMYAAATAT 1219 | 
WHAM ara aga AA: lsagidtaran 8 way | F 1RCI 
syaga: Aaa ASNT: | TIO WG, HE AA AT RRA 
Qa qd see uae eri fatrisageien faa grr igo! 
wi f& yas fede: | qurenemetkaks JY waaay: 1321 


Sita continued : Though born of a mother whose caste is superior to the father's, 
my birth (which has been deprecated in the Sastras) has been fulfilled today through the 
service of elders. For association, even by way of conversation, with the noblest souls 
quickly drives away the heart's agony caused by such despicable birth. (18) Such a 
consummation is all the more assured in the case of him who utters the Name of the 
Lord, the only and final resort of the noblest souls. For infinite is the Lord and infinite 
His Powers; nay, it is because He is possessed of endless virtues that they call Him 
Ananta.(19) In order to show that He is unequalled and unsurpassed in virtues, suffice 
it to point out that, rejecting others who courted Her, Goddess Laksmi sought the dust 
of His feet, even though He did not seek Her hand. (20) Again, the water which was 
offered by the Creator (Brahma) to wash the feet of the Lord (when He assumed a cosmic 
Form at the sacrifice of the demon king Bali) and then flowed from the nails of His toes 
(in the form of the Ganga—vide verses 3 and 4 of Discourse XXI of Book VIII) sanctifies 
the whole universe along with Lord Siva (who bore it on His head in response to the prayer 
of king Bhagiratha—vide IX. ix. 9). Under such circumstances, who else than Lord Sri 
Krsna (the Bestower of liberation) could deserve the epithet ‘Bhagavan’ in this world ?(21) 
The wise that have developed love for Him shake off in no time their deep-rooted 
attachment to their body etc., and enter that last stage of Paramahamsa's (recluses) in 
which the practice of non-violence and control of the senses become one's sacred 
duties.(22) O sages that shine like the sun, what you have asked me in this assembly 
| shall tell you according to my own lights. Winged creatures soar (in the heavens) 
according to their own capacity; so do the learned recount the pastimes of the aall- 
pervading Lord Visnu according to their own understanding. (23) Taking up his bow, king 
Pariksit was hunting in the forest on a certain day. Running after the game, he got fatigued 
and felt extremely hungry and thirsty. (24) Finding no reservoir of water (near at hand), 
he entered the well-known hermitage (of the sage Samika) and saw there a hermit who 
sat still with his eyes closed. (25) Having held his senses and breath, mind and intellect 
in perfect control, he had withdrawn himself from the world; and having reached that 
immutable state which lies beyond the three states of consciousness (waking, dream and 
dreamless sleep), he had become one with Brahma. (26) His body was covered with 
unloosed matted hair and the skin of a black deer. Finding him in this state, Pariksit asked 
him for water (to drink), his tongue being parched (with thirst). (27) Not being offered a 


Dis. 18 ] ‘y ‘BOOK ONE’ 77 


Be Be Be Br Br Re Ke Be Be Br Be Be Be Be Be Be Be Pe Be BeBe Be Be He eR Be Bee Be A Re BEER RE ERE RE BERR Be RRR REA BE BRERA BE BERR RE RE RE BEBE BEBE RE BEBE BE REE RE BEBE RE BEBE BEBE BEBE 





mat of straw or bare ground to sit on, and denied water to wash his hands (and feet) 
or even kind words, the king thought himself as treated with disrespect and grew indignant 
accordingly. (28) His mind being oppressed with hunger and thirst, there arose in him, 
all of a sudden, a feeling of enmity and anger against the sage, which, O Saunaka, he 
had never entertained before (against a Brahmana). (29) While departing, he indignantly 
threw with the end of his bow a dead serpent across the shoulder of the Brahmana sage 
and returned to his capital. (30) (He offered this indignity to the sage because he wanted 
to make sure) whether he had closed his eyes inasmuch as he had (really) withdrawn 
all his senses from their objects or he simply feigned deep meditation because he thought 
he had nothing to do with the wretched Ksatriyas. (31) 


wea Uaishtisret fae arescnisdch: i uaa sift ad sear adedsidi 132! 
ae sted: emt dat afeysnfia i ef ae cant gamit yaaa 1331 
went: aaaeafe geomet frefta: 1a wel dane gw: aus WMpAeia 13x! 
PN Ma Walt Wear dards wR wad A aa i34l 
saat | earmalt «= aaenqiieren: | alfreaa sawsa ara faaast 2 136! 
ga ofgamaig wae: «9 eset agait Hog atfedt A Adee 1301 
The sage's son, who was possessed of abundant spiritual glow, though a mere boy, 
happened to be playing at that time with other Brahmana boys. Having heard of the 
indignity to which his father had been subjected by the king, he made the following 
observations on the spot :— (32) "Oh the unrighteousness of the ruling class, who have 
grown fat like crows ! Like dogs that guard one's door, these servants (of the Brahmanas) 
dare to insult their very masters ! (33) The Brahmanas have appointed the Ksatriya as 
their door-keeper. How, then can he who has been posted at the gate enter the house 
(of his master) and eat out of the latter's pot ? (34) Now that Lord Sri Krsna, the chastiser 
of those who have strayed from the path of virtue, has departed, | shall presently correct 
those that have violated the rules of decorum. Just see how powerful | am !" (35) Having 
thus spoken (to his playmates), the young sage sipped water from the Kausiki and, his 
eyes turning crimson with anger, he hurled a thunderbolt in the form of the following 
curse :— (36) "Impelled by me, Taksaka (a chief of the serpents) shall, on the seventh 
day hence, bite that bane of his race, who has so openly transgressed the bounds of 
propriety by his hostile behaviour towards my father.” (37) 
AMSAT wet Ws Bdeoawi feat alex e-uidl Amenvsl Ele &13CI 
a al sna ae Aa Gdaema ster Weta SBI AA Falery13¢1 
far wi uss aa awents defei aa al a supa: a Adead I¥ol 
frra oo aaadee RSTO Ss STA 
ae adil eat a cpdaediafa se sect aa: ise 
a a qfvea UT aaNquealarengts | 
aaa afedeeor Wat faaha 9 wswapatda: ssi: 1621 
STeAATOT wea TaTSuToTaaaS TH: | 
aq fe arxat fareerenennuistaasaad xd 1x31 
qt 74: waqderad ass 4 aalfdemenc 
uat wba wa qed aaa fertisaly yeceal sm: isx 








78 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18 


BeBe Re Re Re Re Re Ree Re Re RE BRR RE RE EER RE RE EE EBB RT EERE REE RS Be RE RE EBT Re BE Re HE Bee Be Br Br Be He Re We Me Ke Ke Be Re Kr Hr Be Ke Be Be He Kr Br Br Br Br Br Br Sr We'Sr Br Br Br Hr Sr 


aassderiss «6s fasta SU AUISATAR AAA: 
qasdarnimakracat yet ada = aug 1s4! 
euret at: GU q ANS Feasal: | Marea TeisiearAeraye, | 
aeatagd dat tareresmateld 1s& | 

soy MOA a Hd ata Gala awdheld iv! 

fare ferent: ater: fara eet otf | are ae Sicha aaa: eTaISHG fe 1s 

sm wedea asaqmt veg: aa faved wen Aare aefardad ive 

Slaat: Uielal Gla Wesel Aisa: 1a Saba a ela Aa SISTA: 140 | 

sfa steered AEM URASe Sfecal NeeHAT aM ATATETERMSEATA: 1221 
The boy then returned to his hermitage and, distressed to see his father with a snake 

about his neck, wept aloud. (38) On hearing the laments of his son, O Saunaka, the sage 
Samika (a scion of Angira) gradually opened his eyes; and throwing off the dead 
serpent,which he saw lying across his shoulder, enquired: “Child, wherefore do 
you weep? Who has wronged you ?" Thus asked, the boy told him (all that had 
happened).(39-40) The Brahmana (Samika) did not applaud his son when he heard of 
the execration uttered against the king, who did not deserve it, but said, “Alas ! foolish 
child, you have committed a great sin in that you have visited his trivial offence with such 
a heavy punishment. (41) It does not behove you to judge a king, who bears the name 
of Visnu, by the standard of ordinary men, O child of unripe wisdom ! Protected by his 
formidable strength, the people are rid of all fear and secure blessings of all sorts. (42) 
When Lord Visnu (who wields a discus in one of his hands), appearing under the name 
of ‘king’, is screened from our view, dear child, thieves will crop forth in large numbers 
and the world, which will be unprotected then, will perish like a flock of sheep in a 
moment. (43) When the ruler is dead, thieves will rob the people of their property and 
the evil that befalls them in this way will now fall on our head (since we shall be held 
responsible for the ruler's death, the cause of all this anarchy and lawlessness), even 
though we have no direct connection with it; nay, when people take to robbery in large 
numbers, they belabour and abuse one another and snatch one another's cattle, 
womenfolk and wealth. (44) In such conditions the noble religion of the people, which 
derives its authority from the Vedas and is characterized by a course of conduct laid down 
for the different grades of society and stages of life, disappears, thence follows a 
confusion of castes among men whose hearts are given up to wealth and sense- 
gratification, as among dogs and monkeys. (45) Emperor Pariksit, moreover, is a monarch 
of wide renown and a defender of righteousness; nay, he is a great devotee of the Lord 
and a royal sage who has performed a number of horse-sacrifices. Again, he was 
overcome with hunger, thirst and fatigue and absolutely helpless; hence he did not 
deserve our curse. (46) May the almighty Lord, who is the Soul of the universe, forgive 
the wrong perpetrated by this child of immature understanding against His innocent 
servant. (47) Even when reproached, deceived, abused, disregarded or struck by others, 
devotees of the Lord never return the wrong done by the wrong-doer, though capable 
of doing so." (48) Thus grieved at the wrong done by his son, the great sage (Samika) 
did not even think of the offence committed by the king, who had treated him with 
disrespect. (49) Generally speaking, holy men in this world neither grieve nor rejoice when 
they are subjected to contrary experiences by others; for the soul is ever beyond the three 
Gunas. (50) 





Dis. 19] ~- ‘BOOK ONE 79 


BeBe RRC RRR RORE ROR RE ROROR RE BORO BERBER RRC RC RE Be Be he Be Be Beek Be heh beth bebe de te Br Br Re Be Re Re Ke Ke Ke Be Re Ke ROR BBE Re BEBE BE Be Re Be Be Br He Be BE He He BEE Be 





Thus ends the eighteenth discourse entitled "The Brahmana's Curse", 
in Book One of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


gS 
PISS eS 


S| Noplalaan Sear: 


Discourse XIX 
Pariksit takes a vow of fasting till death and Suka pays a visit to him 


Yd sara 
adufean odd oud 4 fafanaaed = aeea: | 
ae wa dranadand foo sai yedsfai @ | 
qiowt & gmat ged set fede 
qq wd aafena am A gal Wang 2 | 
wa 6 UU Noe! «= A 
au oA  asuq aia aifeseantea: 1 2 
a fadafemayie ae aa: aatet Peirce: | 
a my Ww afar agama same fatkharor! x | 
at 4 fagaand oa oh fantiat taqar yen 
PUTS HAA AAA SOT, wea ae | & | 
al a Cel aaa onatevasaetenrarat | 
Wa aay ai ae A aa afer: | & | 
sft afer a Wueda: sauder sid fasquen| 
r3| CUP RCO ESIC I Ufa amanda”: | 9 | 
aaarayat Ut wearer |} =yta: | |6= aferem: | 
sau diaisemmest: wa fe deaf gra aa él 
CIE CITE ER TEE ANEMREAA SAT | 
Gusta aferatsea TH sat samedenarat @ | 
Aenfiftas sifsaot  warget maa: footer: | 
Rea 40d: Sa: Ss PTAA = ATaTAMNG 1201 
oy a £wafisafiaat  «wusiftaal  steuneas | 
qAawarae( (iT TCR es RR OT 
qaufasga a wa: paso: wafaaiid ad = 
fasroarara fafa sufeerdisastaryetraniur: 1221 | 








80 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


BeBe Re Be Ree Re Re RE REBT RE BREE RE RE ERE REE RE RRL RE RE RE RE RE RE BYR LORE RE Re WORE RT Re Be Be Bee Me BE ME Me Be We Kee Me Ke Ke Bee Me Be He He He He Me We Hr He He Br Kr We Wr Br Br dr 





Sita continued : Now the king too felt much troubled at heart at the thought of his 
reproachful conduct, and said to himself: "Oh! like a vulgar man | have behaved very 
ignobly with that innocent Brahmana_ of hidden spiritual power. (1) As a result of the 
disrespect shown by me to the Lord Himself (in the form of that saint) some calamity, 
hard to overcome, will surely befall me not long afterwards. Let it come directly on me 
by all means for the expiation of my sin, so that | may not have the courage to repeat 
it. (2) Let fire in the shape of the angered Brahmana race consume this very day the 
kingdom, the army and the rich treasury of my accursed self, so that | may not harbour 
a sinful thought with regard to the Brahmanas, the gods and the cows hereafter." (3) 
While thus reflecting, he presently heard how death impelled by (the curse of ) the sage's 
son awaited him under the appellation of Taksaka. He looked upon the fire-like poison 
of Taksaka as a blessing; for he thought the same would speedily arouse dispassion in 
him who was deeply attached to the world. (4) Now renouncing this as well as the other 
world, both of which he had already concluded as worth rejecting, and recognizing the 
adoration of Sri Krsna's feet as superior to everything else, he sat down on the bank of 
the Ganga (the river of the immortals) with a resolve to fast till death. (5) The Ganga 
carries in it the water which excels all other waters due to its contact with the. dust of 
Sri Krsna's feet mixed with lovely Tulasi leaves borne on them, and sanctifies all the 
worlds both above and below along with their guardian deities (Indra and others). What 
dying man would not resort to this holy river ? (6) Having thus resolved upon fasting 
till death on the bank of the Ganga (which flows from the feet of Lord Visnu), and shaken 
off all attachment (to the world), king Pariksit (a scion of Pandu) took a vow to lead the 
life of a hermit and fixed his mind on the feet of Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) 
with undivided devotion. (7) There arrived with their pupils sages of great spiritual power, 
who brought sanctity to the whole world. Under the pretext of visiting holy places the saints 
generally consecrate the places of pilgrimage themselves. (8) (There came) Atri, Vasistha, 
Cyavana, Saradvan, Aristanemi, Bhrgu and Angira, ParaSara (the father of Vedavyasa), 
Viswamitra (the son of Gadhi) and Rama (more popularly known as Parasurama), 
Utathya, Indrapramada and Idhmavaha, Medhatithi, Devala, Arstisena, Bharadwaja, 
Gautama, Pippalada, Maitreya, Aurva, Kavasa, the jar-born sage Agastya, the island-born 
Vedavyasa and the divine sage Narada as well as other distinguished celestial and 
Brahmana sages and eminent royal sages besides other sages such as Aruna. Seeing 
the foremost of many Rsi families gathered there, the king received them with due honour 
and bowed his head to them. (9—11) When they were all comfortably seated, he made 
obeisance to them once more and, standing before them with joined palms, told them 
with a guileless heart what he intended to do. (12) 


UAT 
Me | aT TOTS a TTeUitaaiton: | 
Um pe Meuse ae fags aq weleediest 
daa ws Wetet  saemfne  yeystemi 
fideqet fesregect aa sem wa at iexl 
aq aad sid fa ast a edt yates 
fesiqgs: qeneaat al cae mad fame: ieui 
GE Wasaga Ufa: Taga aastag | 
Teg at ama «ois are ada ant fase: 126 


pis. 197] »BOOK ONE 81. 


The king said : We are the most blessed of all monarchs, possessing as we do 
a character which has deserved the grace of the noblest souls. Alas ! the race of kings 
(the ruling class) is generally far removed from (deprived of the privilege of bearing on 
their head) the water in which the feet of the Brahmanas have been washed: their doings 


are so reproachful. (13) TO me, so sinful and ever so deeply attached to the home, the - 


Lord Himself, who is the Ruler of the entire universe, has come in the form of a 
Brahmana’'s curse, that has aroused in me a feeling of aversion to worldly enjoymenits; 
for under such a curse one who is deeply attached to the world speedily develops 
dispassion. (14) May the Brahmanas (assembled here) as well as goddess Ganga know 
me as a devotee who has approached them for protection, having fixed his mind on the 
Lord. Urged by the Brahmana, let someone who has cunningly assumed the form of 
Taksaka or Taksaka himself bite me at will. Meanwhile | implore you to sing the stories 
of Lord Visnu. (15) Bowing once more to you, the Brahmanas, | pray : in every birth | 
take hereafter may | be blessed with devotion to the immortal Lord Sri Krsna, strong 
attachment for noble souls depending on Him and friendship for all. (16) 


st CUT: «See TG: I 
saya «= afar «TRA ASU: «=| AMARTH: 1201 
wT a df smatefas fafa eae: | 
wre ae | aeT « aggena Fg: 181 
aeat tT SCA feaqaenr: | 
wa: TATRA AT ASMA TOM ASA 128 | 


Thus resolved, and having placed the kingly responsibilities on the shoulders of 
his own eldest son (Janamejaya), the wise king sat down on the southern bank of the 
Ganga (a spouse of the deity presiding over the oceans), on the blades of Kusa with 
their roots turned to the east, himself facing the north. (17) When that king of kings 
(Emperor Pariksit ) had thus taken his seat with a vow to fasting till death, hosts of 
gods in heaven shouted applause and joyfully rained down flowers on him on the earth, 
while drums were sounded again and again. (18) The great Rsis who had assembled 
there were benevolent to the people by their very disposition and spent ail their energy 
in conferring benefits on them. They too applauded the king and approved of his resolve 
exclaiming "Splendid !" and spoke words which fitted well with the king, who was deeply 
impressed with the virtues of the Lord of excellent renown:—(19) 


7 a se wited ft wag get AAyady | 
ASA Tsien less elt WENTaAUIARA: 120 | 
ai ad males waeat mac fag 
Sas ow fase fame aed  wAMadwen: 1221 
amy deferred: «aiid aH Aaa Te cAeiela | 
aM «=| TOI = fae: 1221 
gant: wad wa awd aa amt aftercfeas: 
saute a TTT 123 | 
ag @: Yeatt fags fara fam giapadam 
eae «frais FARA MATRTTTTBTHT: 12 


b— 
— 
= 
- 
_ 
= 
= 
_= 
= 
i 
_— 
= 








82 - SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


deBe R Re Re Be Re RRR RR ER RRR RRR RR RRR OR RR RR BER RB RE RR RR RR RR RRR Re 


LKKLKKEKKLKHKHMLKKAHKAVH OK HKCHO RAL 


aaa «CT eT TIME HTAISAV AT: | 
sTmeategt frsaentagst qa AMLATTAT: 12K I 
d asad TE IRMICC RCT ICME L 
Aa aM aaa Ho aA RTT M ARIST 1 25 | 
Fryesia yadgaaraaradars araryet a I 
fara aaa tarchet WenraqaTS SARA 1 219 | 
sa 86waiiaadissoa ait ad 8 6Sfafeds | 
Tafa «a: Sowa «=a eat 121 


"© chief of royal sages, this is no wonder in you (the scions of Pandu), devoted as 
you are to Sri Krsna; for, in your eagerness to attain proximity to the Lord you have 
speedily renounced the imperial throne against which kings robbed their crowns. (20) Now 
we shall all remain here till this king, who is foremost among the devotees of the Lord, 
has cast off his mortal coil and ascended to the highest abode (of the Lord), which is 
beyond the reach of Maya and free from sorrow." (21) On hearing these words of the 
sages—impartial, sweet, full of deep significance and true—Pariksit greeted the sages, 
who had all become one with the Supreme Spirit; and, eager to hear the stories of Lord 
Visnu (Sri Krsna), replied to them as follows :— (22) "Shining like the Vedas, that abide 
in visible form in the highest heaven (the Satyaloka, Brahma's abode), you have all come 
together from every quarter. And you have no purpose of your own (to achieve) in this 
world or the next, except doing good to others, which is your innate disposition. (23) 
Reposing faith in you, therefore, O Brahmanas, | ask you this question—which is the only 
question worth asking—in regard to my duty. Tell me, O learned sages, after due 
deliberation, what innocent course should be pursued by all under every circumstance 
and in particular, by those who are about to die*" (24) Meanwhile there arrived on the 
scene wandering about on the earth at will, the divine Suka (the son of Vyasa) who was 
indifferent to the world and had no visible marks of any particular Varna (grade of society) 
or Asrama (stage of life) on his person, who was contented with the realization of his 
own Self and was surrounded by women and children and who wore the appearance of 
an ascetic that had renounced all worldly attachments and connections. (25) Sixteen 
years of age, with tender feet, hands, thighs, arms, shoulders, cheeks and frame, he had 
a lovely countenance with large eyes, a prominent nose, symmetrical ears, beautiful 
eyebrows and a conch-like shapely neck. (26) His coliar-bone was hidden within a fleshy 
frame; his chest was broad and prominent, his navel deep and spiral like an eddy and 
his belly looked charming with its three folds. He was stark naked, with hair flung about 
his face, had long arms and shone like one of the highest gods. (27) He possessed a 
Swarthy complexion and captivated the heart of women by his charming youth, graceful 
limbs and winsome smiles. Although he had concealed his spiritual glow (behind a crazy 
appearance), the sages (present there) recognized him by his characteristic features and 
rose from their seats to receive him. (28) 





* King Pariksit asks here the following two questions:— 

(1) What should a mortal do at all times and under all circumstances ? 

(2) What is the duty of a man who is about to die ? 

He puts these very question to the sage Suka later on; and as a matter of fact, it is these two questions that have 
been answered at length by the latter in the course of the following eleven books of the Srimad Bhagavata. 


; Ot NTRS SRS _ 
DS SL eeenvicicenieerereeseeree : BOOK ONE. ate. 83 


a feeguatstea arama wet al PRITTTSSOTETE | 
wet Fem wget: feristen wert atafede gfira: 1281 
eae wer, wdtast waite: | 
Soe GHEE aeraieatantfee: Wittd: 1301 
sora aaiefed: aati «firm EqMaragesd 138 


| King Visnurata (Pariksit, so-called because his life had been preserved by Lord Visnu 
i.e., ori Krsna Himself), of whom we have spoken before, bowed his head to the stranger 
who had called on him (of his own accord), and did homage to him. The ignorant women 
and children thereupon withdrew and, worshipped by all, the sage occupied an exalted 
seat. (29) Surrounded by hosts of Brahmana sages, royal sages and celestial sages, the 
divine Suka, who was greatest among the great, shone most resplendent even as the 
moon In the midst of other planets, constellations and stars. (80) When that sage of 
unfailing wisdom had taken his seat, fully composed, the king, who was a devotee of the 
Lord, approached him and, touching his feet with his head, stood attentive before him. 
Then, bowing (again) with joined palms, he questioned the sage in sweet accents. (31) : 
qiteagara ! 
Bel BI Ad He AMM: aaa: | puartsaaor Vafeitetent: sel: 1321 | 
Jat AANUI Gal a: Beata a Wer: | fH Gada ea aeaeareaaanst: 133 | 
airearm agelfracaft aerate aaha a gat fasta gta: 1axt | 
aa & amar Sa: Hot: wUgEahsra: | dqqaasieaed AAA: 1341 | 
SIM Aseaeeadeala A: Ha FAI heat aan afaga adtaqa: 1341 | 
ata: Geet dfake ath wei yeti gesee dent frame aaa 1301 | 

TIAN Wa aendel Gf: wati wader wera at gfe sgt faut iz 

i ownad se Fey Tederia saad Daerah mMeled wad 13¢! 
Pariksit said : Oh, how blessed are we today, O holy sage, in that we, vile Ksatriyas, 
have been considered worthy of a visit by saints and have been so graciously consecrated 
by you by calling on us as our guest. (32) Men's houses are instantly purified by your 
remembrance, much more by your sight and touch, by washing your feet, offering a seat 
to you and so on. (33) Men's worst sins, O great Yogi, are wiped out at once by your 
very presence, even as the demons are by the presence of Lord Visnu. (34) | presume 
Lord Sri Krsna, the friend of the Pandavas, is pleased with me. It is for the pleasure 
of His cousins (the Pandavas) that He has acted ina friendly manner even towards me, 
their scion. (85) otherwise how could we, human beings much less those who are about 
to die, obtain the privilege of seeing you, whose movements are so obscure, and who 
have fully realized the object of human life and live in a lonely forest ? (86) Therefore, 
| enquire of you, the greatest preceptor of the Yogis, the character and the means of the 
highest realization. Nay, what should be done under all circumstances by a man who is 
On the verge of death ? (37) Again, tell me, my lord, what should be done by men in 
general—what should they hear, what should they repeat (with their tongue), what should 
they keep in their mind, what should they resort to and what should they avoid ? (38) 
For, nowhere, O divine sage, are you seen to Stay at the door of householders even for 

the brief space of time taken in milking a cow. (39) 








84 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


BeBe Re Re Be Re A RRR RR ERR REECE REBEL EE BEBE BEE BEBE AE BE RE BEEBE Be Be He Be Be Bee Be BeBe He Br Be Br He He Hr Br Ht Hr He Br He Be Br Br Hr Hr Gr Hr St Kr Br Br Re Hr Hr kr er 
Yd Jara 
wanna: 9s: A Wat zoe fra seaaed eat WTA Saat: Ivo 
sf SEPTaa AEM SAMARAS TAS Sea HHA YR 
AAMAS: 128 | 


SF DSS 


Sid NAA: hel: GAG: | 
let: So AL | 
Suta continued : Thus addressed and questioned by the king in soft accents, the 


divine Suka (the son of Badarayana), who was conversant with Dnarma, made answer 
(as follows): (40) 





Thus ends the nineteenth discourse entitled "The visit of Suka", in Book One of 
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita, composed by the sage Vyasa 
and consisting of eighteen thousand Slokas. 


FPI-IZS SESS: CIS 





HAY TAA Sez: 


Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana 


Book Two | 

Discourse | | 
The process of meditation and the cosmic form of the Lord described | 

Hh JaTaI 

alana a Sa: cdl clenfedt Ta orretfearcerna: Gat sitteriag A: GE: 1k 
HAA We AT Ala asa: | sagas 9=Fey yWeafear! 2 | 
fam fed ae aa a at aa:ifeat aden wr PAM al 2 | 
Seo agIeTa Agate Laat wadt fad ugaatr a usafai x t 
Tae und Palen wTaritat et: | stds: aifiders wderseomsay | 4 | 
War wera wentahfgei are: wt: Gard Anaoreyia: | & | | 
Tao wat ws fiqat fafeted: ren wt A WHat at: 1 8 | | 
se owmad am gmt seein seta «amet | igguranteer ¢ 1 | 
URAitsh seer sweated | Tera Ws SAI aaeiitary| | 
dag Ashrerentr uemletet Wa Fa eM Urge Alt: adi 101 | 
Unt ferfatercrararferesarerspelt TAL, latrat qa fui 9 eatardentds. 1221 | 
fe same agi: udaeakelat ed fated aed SAA ae: 1221 
Sa am Unifiaiaaaritergy: yeaa | TMA HL 183 
waa ae: ane sifaaraf: i srnera ate Meech ky 
STdchle q Wea 3InTa Taare: | Seaasarat Wel aesy A A aL 1e4 1 
Ter wafadt efx: quadteisenga: | Yat fafern areitt fartertenferarat 12q 
Tae ye fqarenat WA! At aaa saelatsAfasry 1291 
Rasietatisarara ahaa: aa: aetna Bast axakegar 1gci 








7  CHIMADBHAGAVATA , ccsesnecseossnsanmecenedoces, 
qaniadd  wideheaa dae! wat fafadwe qacn aa: fear 7 A 
ae dura fawidal aa Walald 1281 
Tesi fagé FA oe: | Sedan at aha at ached Ae Io! 
Seat Westenra ahr akHseaur: 1 say EIA aT ssa AsMtetd: 1221 


& 





Sri Suka replied : This enquiry of yours, made with a view to the good of the world, O 
king, is most welcome. It is esteemed by the knowers of the Self and is the most important 
of all thatis worth hearing, remembering or chanting. (1) There are thousands of things worth 
hearing and attending to, O ruler of kings, for men who are attached to their home and 
engaged in performing the five great sacrifices enjoined on the householders, and are blind 
to the truth of the Self. (2) Their span of life, O king, is stolen away at night by sleep or by 
copulation, and in the day-time by endeavours to make money or to provide for the family.(3) 
Maddened by affection for those that are intimately connected with oneself, viz., one’s body, 
progeny, wife and so on, unreal as they are, one fails to visuatize their end, though actually 
witnessing it. (4) Therefore, O descendant of Bharata, he who seeks to attain the fearless 
state (of Moksa) should listen to, recite and dwell on the stories of the almighty Lord Sri Hari, 
the Soul of the universe. (5) To be put in mind of Sri Narayana at the last moment (of one's 
life)that alone is the supreme reward of human birth, howsoever this may be earned through 
Self-Knowledge or Devotion or even through steadfastness to one's sacred duty. (6) Even 
ascetics, O king, that are established in the Absolute and have reached beyond the sphere 
of injunctions and inhibitions generally delight in discoursing on the virtues of Sri Hari. (7) 
This Purana, which is known by the name of Bhagavata and Is as sacred as the Vedas, | 
studied towards the end of the Dwapara age, from my father, the sage Dwaipayana 
(Vyasa).(8) Fully established as | was in the Absolute, my heart was captivated by the 
pastimes of Lord Sri Krsna of excellent renown. That is how | studied this Purana, O royal 
sage. (9) You being a votary of Lord Visnu, | shall recite the selfsame Purana to you; for the 
mind of those who repose their faith in this Purana quickly conceives disinterested love for 
ori Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation). (10) For those who have developed an aversion for 
this world and seek to attain the fearless state, as well as for realized souls that have attained 
union with God, O king, the chanting of Sri Hari's names has been concluded to be the best 
means as well as the end. (11) To aman who is negligent about his own interests, of what 
use in this world are long years of life that slip away unnoticed (are spent in ignorance ) ? 
Much more valuable is the hour, consciously spent, in endeavouring for the highest 
good.(12) Having come to know that he was to live only an hour more, the royal sage 
Khatwanga renounced everything in that short space of time, and sought refuge with Sri Hari, 
who dispels all fear. (13) The limit of your life, O descendant of Kuru, is yet seven days from 
now. Meanwhile accomplish all that is conducive to your welfare hereafter. (14) When the 
hour of death comes, man should shake off all fear and cut with the sword of non-attachment 
the tie of affection for his body as well as for those that are connected with it. (15) Full of self- 
control, he should quit the house, bathe in the holy waters of some sacred stream or lake and, 
Squaiting on a seat, made according to the scriptural ordinance, ina clean and secluded spot, 
should repeat with his mind the holy Pranava, consisting of three parts (A,U and M). Nay, 
controlling his breath, he should also subdue his mind, taking care not to forget the Pranava 
_ (the seed of the Vedas). (16-17) Having reason for his helpmate, he should withdraw his 
senses from their objects with his mind and by dint of his reason fix his mind, distracted as 
itis by tendencies to action, on the blessed form of the Lord. (18) With a concentrated mind 


Dis. 1 | - BOOK TWo 87 


Be We Ke Ke Be Ke Ke Wr Re Ke Re Re He He 
ge br te HRTEM SSSA RS ABB Re BeBe Me REN He Be RE RBH ERE HE EER EMER REHAB ARERR RR PARRA HE 


he should meditate on anyone limb of His body. When the mindis withdrawn from all external 
objects (by thus fixing it on one limb at a time), it should be so completely absorbed in the 
thought on the Lord that he should cease to think of anything else. Such a state is the 
supreme reality of Lord Visnu, by attaining which the mind is flooded with the ecstasy of divine 
love. (19) If (in the course of such meditation) one's mind is distracted by force of Rajas 
(passion) or obscured by force of Tamas (darkness or opacity), a wise man should curb it 
through concentration, which destroys the impurity occasioned by Rajas and Tamas. (20) 
When through the practice of such concentration the practising Yogi is able to behold his 
blissful object (the Lord), he forthwith attains Yoga (union with God) which is characterized 
by Bhakti (loving Devotion). (21) 


aa aendd Se ARO aT AAT aeait aT RET GEAR AATAORL 1221 
The king asked : How is concentration practised, O holy sage, and on what object has 
it been approved of (by the scriptures)? And what kind of concentration speedily removes 
the impurity of one's mind ? (22) 
My FATA 


fart faa fiiaagst fafa: ie sad SO ca: aera 1231 
fart test wags wdlaari ate aad fad wad el war aLieei 
suse «= ANS Aaa | AUST: Weal Sisal MTA SMUT: 1241 
urea = fe | ees «Soha ofisag |= taro 
were 4 faggsisr wemt deme a Gea we 126! 
= Wat aae fagniecgd fare ade aI 
Wades 20a (GC CMS TT 12091 
ws Widens dar wader a wise 
amy wet faquega: aad gq azietfr ageitet: 121 
Ssleal aed 9 sleeal: cuit «fest: «=I Se: | 
Taal «OCMC (TOTS Tet a faiteg: 1291 
ania  aayadg: qanfar «= fawiedt «6h SNC 
aegis: ouaiefewanmise «dey CH Wa ty 1201 
aa owed? eT Gea Fauquier: 1321 
eres wa ot eat: enisedusisa ysH 1 
ae Ae quot a feat afar: cast freatsierag: 1321 
wis 40 esa erin leet fates 
saad: afd «aie «ite: «0 ee UTI: 1331 
freraaren, are wet Head ya: | 
ae aay Way ad Usa: aafacnnenrat: 13%! 
faaths fearaha | alert ATRL 


Pa ws eee o 


; 
t 
. : 








88 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1 
ee Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re RE RE Re Re RE Re Re RT Ree Re Be Re Bee Me Bee Be KE He He He He Be Sr He He Be He Be Hr Hr wy 


eRe Re Ke ER Re RR RE Re RR RE ERT AE Be HBL RT EBT BE HE EE HR BE 


same ovat wad ym: uaa: sitforeat 134 
aaita AGATA fafa Aqsa Asi frava: | 
TTS ETAT Reha: 13E 1 
Fa rays Teta fagmetafsrrprant: | 
Asean FAR: roo faarart: 1391 


samen «a: Ss Afar: «=f STs 
wardaste aie was wa: Saat A adisit fenfer 136! 
a diiqeayqad amet amt  waerifaidc: | 
qd waded wit AR Ase Bed sea: 138! 
sf Serad AS URASe Sfeaat federal AeETATFaI WAAISeAT: 12 | 
Sri Suka replied : Having acquired steadiness of seat and control of one's breath, and 
having conquered attachment and subdued one's senses, one should fix one’s mind on the 
material form of the Lord by force of one's reason. (23) That is His cosmic or universal Form, 
the grossest of the gross, wherein is seen this phenomenal universe in its past, present and 
future form. (24) The Lord who tenants this cosmic body with its seven sheaths (consisting 
of water, fire, air, ether, the ego, the Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence and 
Prakrti of Primordial Matter) as the Great Being (Virat Purusa)—He alone is the object of 
concentration. (25) The knowers of Truth describe Him thus :—Patala (the nethermost 
sphere comprising the heart of the terrestrial globe ) constitutes the soles of His feet and 
Rasatala (the sphere immediately enclosing Patala) the hinder and the front part of His feet. 
Mahatala (the sphere immediately enclosing Rasatala) corresponds to the ankles of the 
Creator of the universe and Talatala (the sphere immediately enclosing Mahatala), the 
shanks of the Virat Purusa. (26) Sutala (the sphere immediately enclosing Talatala) 
represents the knees of the Cosmic Being; while Vitala (the sphere immediately enclosing 
Sutala) and Atala (the sphere immediately enclosing Vitala and enclosed in its turn by the 
crust of the earth) form His thighs. The earth's surface corresponds to His loins, O king; while 
they speak of Bhuvarloka (the sphere immediately enclosing the earth) as His navel. (27) 
Indra’s heaven (the sphere immediately enclosing Bhuvarloka), forms His breast; Maharloka 
(the sphere immediately enclosing Indra's heaven), His neck and Janaloka (the sphere 
immediately enclosing Maharloka), His face (below the brow). Tapoloka (the sphere 
immediately enclosing Janaloka) is recognized as the brow of the Primal Person and 
Satyaloka (the highest or seventh heaven, immediately enclosing Tapoloka) as the heads 
of the thousand-headed Lord. (28) It is said that the gods from Indra downwards represent 
His arms; the cardinal points, His ears and sound, His auditory sense. Nasatya and Dasra 
(the twin Aswinikumaras, the physicians of gods) are the nostrils of the Supreme; odour, His 
olfactory sense and flaming fire, His mouth. (29) The sky constitutes His eyes; the sun, His 
sense of sight and day and night form the eyelids of the Cosmic Being. The abode of Brahma 
(in the Satyaloka) represents the play of His eyebrows; water, His palate and taste, His 
tongue.(30) They declare the Vedas as the crown of His head; Yama (the god of retribution) 
constitutes His grinding teeth and the various forms of personal affection (manifest in 
individuals), His other teeth. The Maya which deludes men represents His smile and the 
unending (eternal) process of creation, His sidelong glances. (31) Bashfulness forms His 
upper lip and greed, the lower; piety constitutes His (right) breast and the path of 
unrighteousness, His back. Prajapati (the god presiding over creation) represents His penis 
and the gods Mitra and Varuna, His testicles; the oceans form the cavity of His abdomen and 


Da Ne AER AREA ESSE SETA SUT RTA Er orMe Nt RR Ee BOOK TWO ; 89 


We Wer SrHe : 
E SERESE RE SOME SERRE He Re Ree Me Re Re RR Re ERE RRA RRC EMEA REA AEM HERE RHE CBE 


the TL halal System of His bones. (32) The rivers constitute His arteries and veins and 
the trees, US) EM Of the Person of the Cosmic Being, O king of kings. The air, possessed 
of infinite strength, IS His breath; Time represents His movementand the uninterrupted action 
of the three Gunas (in the form of creation), His activity. (33) The wise recognize the clouds 
as the hair (on the head) of the Lord and twilight, as the raiment of the Infinite Being, O chief 
of the Kurus. They declare the Unmanifest (Primordial Matter) as His heart and the familiar 
moon represents His mind, which is the seat of all passions. (34) They speak of the Mahat- 
tattva (the Principle of cosmic intelligence) as the power of understanding and Rudra (the god 
presiding over destruction) as the ego of the Universal Spirit. The horse, the mule, the camel 
and the elephant represent His nails; while the deer and all other animals abide in His hips 
and loins. (35) The birds are His wonderful workmanship; the first Manu (known by the name 
of Swayambhuva) represents His intellect and man (the offspring of Manu), His abode. The 
Gandharvas (the celestial musicians), the Vidyadharas (another class of demigods), the 
Caranas (the celestial bards) and the Apsaras (the celestial nymphs), represent 
the reminiscences of His melody and the demon hosts, His virility. (836) The Brahmana 
represents the mouth; the Ksatriya, the arms; the Vaisya, the thighs and the 
dark-complexioned Suara, the feet of that mighty Being. And the performance of sacrifices 
that are conducted with the help of material substances (such as clarified butter etc.) andin 
the name of classes of deities bearing various names is His occupation. (37) Such is the 
magnitude and constitution of the Cosmic Body of the Lord as | have just told you. It is on 
this grossest form that the mind is concentrated with the help of reason; for there exists 
nothing apart from this.(38) Just as a dreamer sees himself projected in various forms in a 
dream, it is the one all-witnessing Self who experience everything through the intellects of 
all. One should devote oneself to that embodiment of Truth, the storehouse of bliss, and 
should not feel attached to any other object; for such attachment brings about the 


degradation of the soul. (39) 


Thus ends the first discourse in Book Two, describing among other things the Cosmic 
Body of the Great Being, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


sak Paget PTT 
DIESE SS 


aia fadiarseara: 


Discourse Il 
Concentration on the gross and subtle forms of the Lord and the two 
kti (Liberation), viz., Kramamukti or gradual 


types on or immediate Liberation 


Liberation and Sadyomukti 


aye SAA 
Ud Oat eqUTaISSHA ABT ale be 0 
am weriqnaregisderert = ant pense SUS | 
Snezet fe seul wa gen aarmafseatata enearet: | 


arti = peasaia, «aaa TTT IAT 1 RI 








SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 


Re Re Re Wee ROR eRe Re ee Re Re we Re Re eee ee eB eee eee Re 


aa: aiadaq aac: mesa «=8=—- AaaTaa leg: | 

fuasamae a aad at UR dt aataa: | 2 | 

wai fat fe aft: sadatet fag guadtt: fart 

aueet fe yearsaen feacnomt aft fe gape: | x | 
stuf fe ufe a ara feaha feat aarefir: ueya: akdiserer| 
Sel Ye: feafadisaft alee mete wiht Haat sagherart & | 

Wd aed wea wa fag stem Betseat ward: | 

aq faa famaf wit wareqag até | 

ee aed Wifey wed AA qa 

usd uUad adwal wets ofan | 


Sri Suka continued : It was through such concentration that Brahma (the self-born) 
propitiated that Lord and got from Him at the dawn of creation the knowledge (about 
creation), which he had forgotten (during the last Pralaya or universal destruction). Having 
thus acquired unfailing vision and a conclusive understanding, he created this universe even 
as it existed before the universal dissolution. (1) Such is the (alluring) method (of presenta- 
tion) of the Vedas that the mind seeks gratification through empty names devoid of any 
corresponding reality. Expecting happiness in the world of Maya (illusion), the soul wanders 
(through the various realms comprised in this world) as though it were dreaming, but fails to 
derive real happiness there. (2) Therefore, a wise man should have connection with the 
objects of enjoyment (which exist merely in name and have no abiding reality) only to the 
extent they are useful for maintaining the body. At the same time he should be convinced in 
his mind (about the emptiness of sensuous enjoyments) and should never commit the error 
of getting attached to them. And if such objects could be had otherwise (by force of Prarabdha 
or destiny as a matter of course), he should not strive for them, seeing that such an endeavour 
would entail (fruitless) labour. (3) When the earth is there, what would be gained by taking 
pains for a bed? When nature has provided us with arms, what use have we for pillows ? 
When we can hold things in the hollow of our palms, what need is there for dishes and cups 
of various kinds ? And when there are the cardinal points,the barks of trees and so on (to 
cover our body with), of what avail are silken robes ? (4) Are there no rags on the road (to 
wrap ourselves with) ? Do not trees, that live only to maintain others, give alms (in the shape 
of fruits, leaves and so on to the needy)? Have rivers dried up (for the man who needs water)? 
Have the mouths of mountain caves been blocked (against those who seek to use them as 
a shelter)? And (above all) does the supreme Lord Sri Hari deny protection to those who 
approach Him ? Wherefore (then) should the wise knock at the door of those who are blind 
with the pride of wealth ? (5) Having thus determined his goal witha complacent mind, aman 
should adore the infinite and eternal Lord, residing in his very heart as his beloved Self, and 
as a Self-evident Truth; for through His worship the seed of metempsychosis (in the shape 
of Ignorance ) ceases to be. (6) Who else than beasts would desist from meditating on the 
Supreme and set his mind on the pleasures of sense even when he actually sees people 
fallen into the hellish river of mundane life and suffer the agonies brought by their own past 
actions ? (7) 

chfacdegrtegaachial TeRraTA Tee aaa | 
aqui HALAS Ae Malay SITXUTaT Bra i ct 


is. 2 ] | 7 : | 
Oe event entenTnenTnnnnnnRORE ne BOOK TWO 91 


Se Be Be Me Be Re Be Ke Re Re Ke Re Re Re Re Re Ke We Be Ke He Me Ke Ree Be eRe Re KEE HE Me Ke Re ee Be Be He He BeBe He He BC 





gate forarqaaaratarz Oat AUaTaagsa 1221 
Gress = frergureaa rere 9 areefet | Tera: 

ft itd errata aaa ot oot aes eitefe ae 1231 
Mad Watt: yer wi firaaert wad: eta lexi 


Some people fix their mind, through meditation, on the Lord with four arms, bearing 
severally a lotus, a discus, aconch anda mace, and residing in the cavity of their heart within 
their own body in a form as big as in thumb in height.(8) With a cheerful countenance and 
big lotus-like eyes He has a cloth, yellow as the filaments of a Kadamba flower, wrapped 
round His person, and is adorned with a pair of gold armlets studded with precious brilliant 
jewels, a crown and a pair of ear-rings inlaid with valuable radiant jewels. (9) His feet, which 
are tender like young shoots, are installed by the masters of Yoga at the centre of the full- 
blown lotus of their heart. He bears (a little above His left breast) a golden streak (which is 
held to be a symbol of Goddess Laksmi), has the famous Kaustubha gem hanging from His 
neck: and His chest is covered by a garland of sylvan flowers of unfading splendour. (10) He 
is adorned with a girdle (round His waist ) as well as with most precious rings, anklets and 
bracelets etc., and looks charming with a smile that ever beams on His countenance 
beautified with sleek, glossy, curly and dark tresses. (11) He is betraying His abundant grace 
(on the devotees) by the play of His brows, the beauty of which is enhanced by His sportful 
bright smiles and glances. The practicant should continue to gaze on this conceptual image 
_of the Lord till his mind gets fixed in meditation. (12) He should visualize with his mind one 
by one all the limbs of Lord Visnu (the Wielder of amace) from His feet upwards to His smiling 
countenance. Even as his reason gets purer and purer his mind will become steadier and 
steadier, andin this way when one limb becomes clearly visible, he should leave it to visualize 
the next. (13) Till one's mind gets fixed through devotion on the all-witnessing supreme Lord 
of the universe as portrayed above, the practicant should witha concentrated mind meditate 
On the grossest form of the Lord (as described in Discourse | above ) after he has finished 


his daily devotions. (14) 
fet qa arent afeeiat frergfteng een 
ans a at a wR A aed sO aSereT Keg: 1241 
wa: wget TT ae a | 
weq | OT TPA = HAIL REI 


a ua arerstifrat WG SY: Hat T sa Sat a SA 
a aq amd a wee FT A fret A Ae Sek 








SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 


see cke Be Re Re Re Re Re RE RE REAR RE RRR RR LER BE RE BERT BRE BEE BE HEHE BE REA BEBE HSE BEST EE SEE AR A Be Be Be Bar 


att nee e ene Re eee TEL ERE AALAASEEELRR ERASER EEESSEEA ERE S ESS SS STAAL AEST Ae 
a owe amanmah aq aala 9 Adtegiga: | 
fag  dueqareer  wlryeeme = GIR 
sui. ayaa «= atertt |= faetgreitefqeerarera:: | 
cquitaissiica WG ddishrs wIy wegaTaatage: 1281 
anat «ofed «Ogee eget A 
aisqq—(itid Ce TTS ada IRN 
aaa. Yardwaad RGA AAAANSAVA: 
feet dedieinqusdistiittea oye | faire Te: 128 


Dear Pariksit, when the striver intends to leave this body, he should not allow his mind 
to get attached to the time and place. Sitting in a steady and easy posture, he should control 
his breath and restrain his senses with his mind. (15) Then, controlling his mind with his pure 
reason, he should merge his intellect (as well as his mind) in the Ksetrajha ( the conscious 
principle in the body), and the Ksetrajiia in the absolute Self. Then, merging the Self in the 
Supreme Spirit and attaining final peace, the wise man should abstain from all activity. (16) 
In that state (of absorption into the Supreme Spirit) Time, which is the Ruler even of gods, 
has no power, much less the gods or the creatures that are ruled over by them. There is 
neither Sattva nor Rajas nor Tamas in that state, much less the ego or Mahat (the principle 
of cosmic intelligence) or Pradhana (Primordial Matter). (17) Bent upon rejecting everything 
other than God as ‘not that’, ‘not that’ and giving up false self-identification with the body and 
things associated with it the Yogis, full of exclusive devotion, embrace with their heart every 
moment the adorable form of Lord Visnu. The scriptures are at one in declaring this form as 
the supreme essence of the all-pervading Lord. (18) The Yogi whose cravings for sense- 
gratification have been completely set at rest by force of wisdom acquired through the 
scriptures should drop his body in the following manner. First of all he should squat (on his 
seat) pressing the anus with his heels and then, overcoming languor, should draw the air 
upwards through the six places (where the six mystical circles are located). (19) The self- 
disciplined Yogi should draw the air located in the circle within the navel (known by the name 
of ManipUraka) upwards into the Cakra located in the heart (called Anahata); thence, 
following the course of the Udana air, he should take it to the circle located above the breast 
(known by the name of ViSuddhi) and, again, with the help of reason, he should gradually: 
push it to the root of the palate (i.e.,to the top of the Visuddhi Cakra). (20) Thereafter, having 
closed the seven passages (viz., the two eyes, the two ears, the two nostrils and the mouth), 
he should take the air from the root of the palate to the circle located at the middle of the 
eyebrows (viz., the Ajna Cakra). Then, ifhe has no desire to visit the higher worlds, he should 
" pause at the Ajna Cakra for about half an hour with his gaze fixed on his goal and, taking 
the air into the Sahasrara Cakra (located at the crown of his head) attain union with God. 


Finally, breaking open the crown of his head, he should abandon his body and the 
senses. (21) 


BET orate aea TATA SAT 122 | 


DisH2yit ‘BOOK TWO 93 


Be BeBe Be Ke Ke Ke Be Be Se Re He He Me Re He ee He Re Me eR RR a RR RT RR RR RE RRR Be Re Re eC RE Re Ke He ERE RRC WT Ge ER: Be Ke Be Be He Ke Kee Ke Kr Be Ke Bi He LHe We He Hr 





aut aft fast «wa: qa sed sitter | 
faygecnisa Reed Sait adh Wz AYARA | BS 


dq fash afaad fasmutam fawmiena: | 
Tpd 8 6osdfaaqui «= eogst aelage GT RG 
WM sada Waeed aa a der faa 
Patft  fagergpfredt aq gumel ag onaeMiRE! 
41 at Bet A wa a yealitt aen ma apcle 
afardatse: auaitadtaet EE CE ES CIC CHIE IG MACH 


wide «oad aI eT «OG Geese 21 

WH Ti Wat a W St gq aM wa aaa 

sao ae AM «| aepfagqdfa «= ah 121 

a oyWgaitsrdiet aim aang faa 

Wa Tat de wa ata fagaad  wordteizol 

wae ssa AAA SATCU START | 

ut wet wamadi wt a: a a ude fanstdss 1321 

w wd a zw aatt aafs 2 aim a 

a aq sau ste ys sift wna area: 1321 
aq adasa: fra: gen fag: agafagi area anata afeart adl wad 1331 
War Ha weeds fredieq atta | deeded Hen Wee ad Wacl 13x! 
Wa Adyag clad: Mie eft: | qetdaqnfetaster MAVLAAIh: 1341 
Ta Baler we et: ada Ader! Maer: aifidets deat wMTayIM 1361 

fata 2 wad sie: Udi HM Aauge, BA! 

Gia a fasafactearaed  sasihd  caewrateelictcny 1301 

Sia serrad Ae USS Seda fadtepsl Gerster AA fediaseara: 121 


If, on the other hand, O king, the Yogi intends to visit the Brahmaloka (Brahma’s abode) 
or, having acquired the eight supernatural powers,* to sportin the company of the Siddhas 
(a class of celestial beings), that move about in the air, or again to move about in any 
particular realm of the universe made up of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), he should 
depart (from the body), taking the mind and senses with him. (22) It is said that the masters 





* The eight superhuman powers are : Anima, the power of assuming a form as minute as an atom; Laghima, extreme 
lightness; Prapti, attaining anything (e.g., the moon) with the tip of one’s finger ; Prakamya, irresistible will ; Mahima, illimitable 
bulk; Isita, supreme dominion; Vasita, subjugating all by occult power and Kamavasayita, suppressing all desires. 








94 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 
Gee Be Bee Pee Re Re Be ee Re RRR RE REE RRL LL LEE RE RE RRR RE BEELER EERE REESE SESE MEER RE BEBE BEE BEE SESE BE SESE SESE Bt Bt Be He He 


of Yoga, who practise worship of God austere penance, Yoga (abstraction) and Jnana (Self- 
Knowledge), and whose body is as subtle as air, can freely move inside as well as outside 
the three worlds (the earth, heaven and the lower worlds). People cannot have such 
unimpeded movernént (in any part of the universe) through mere Karma (ritual). (23) O king, 
the Yogi who proceeds to the Brahmaloka (the abode of Brahma) through the bright 
Susumna* reaches first the abode of VaiSwanara (the god of fire) through the heavens. 
Shaking off whatever trace of impurity is still left in him, he then rises upwards to the stellar 
sphere, resembling in shape the figure of a dolphin and presided over by Lord Visnu. (24) 
Passing beyond this sphere, presided over by Visnu, which is like a navel to the wheel of this 
universe, he ascends alone in his most subtle and pure body to the realm called Maharloka 
(the region immediately enclosing Indra's paradise), which is adored even by the knowers 
of Brahma, and which is the delightful abode of gods that live for a whole Kalpa (a day of 
Brahma). (25) Thereafter (at the end of the Kalpa) when he sees the whole world below being 
consumed by the fire proceeding from the mouth of Lord Ananta (Sesa), he rises still higher 
to Brahma's abode, where the foremost among the Siddhas reside in their aerial cars and 
which lasts for two Parardhas (the full span of Brahma's life). (26) There is no grief nor agony, 
neither old age nor death in that sphere, much less fear of any kind. The only agony they 
suffer from is the mental anguish they feel out of compassion when they see people who have 
no knowledge of the process of meditation as described above undergoing repeated births 
and deaths, that entail endless suffering. (27) Then (after reaching the Satyaloka) he 
fearlessly unites his subtle body with the earth and thereafter steadily pierces the seven 
sheaths encasing the earth as below. From his terrestrial form he passes on to the watery 
and from the aqueous to the fiery sheath; again, from his fiery form he makes his way into 
the aerial sheath, and lastly from his aerial form in course of time he enters the ethereal 
sheath, which Is an index to the infinitude of Brahma. (28) Again, through his olfactory sense 
the Yogi returns to the subtle element of smell, through the sense of taste to the subtle 
element of taste, through the sense of sight to the subtle element of colour, through the sense 
of touch to the subtle element of touch, through the auditory sense to the subtle element of 
sound and through each organ of action to the functioning power of each and thus all of them 
return to their subtle form. (29) (Thus reaching beyond the gross and subtle sheaths of the 
five elements) the Yogi enters the ego. He dissolves the subtle elements into the Tamasika 
ego, the senses into the Rajasika and the mind as well as the deities presiding over the 
senses into the Sattvika ego. Then, through the same process (of dissolution) he returns 
along with the ego to the principle of cosmic intelligence (Mahat-tattva) and finally to Prakrti 
(in which merge all the three Gunas). (30) Again, during the final dissolution (when Prakrti 
too merges in God) the Yogi who becomes all-blissful now, merges with that pure blissful 
form in God, who is perfectly tranquil and bliss itself. Dear Pariksit, he who attains this divine 
goal no more returns to this world of matter (transmigration). (1) These, O king, are the two 
eternal paths recommended by the Vedas, about which you enquired of me. Of yore, when 
Brahma (the Creator) worshipped Lord Vasudeva (Visnu) and interrogated Him, itwas these 
two paths that were taught to him by the Lord. (32) For him who has fallen into the whirlpool 
of transmigration there is no blessed path other than that which makes for devotion to Lord 
Vasudeva. (33) Having critically studied the Vedas with a concentrated mind thrice over, 
Brahma concluded by force of his reason that alone to be the highest virtue, by which one * 
is able to develop exclusive devotion to Sri Krsna (the Self of the Universe). (34) Lord Sri- 
Hari alone is seen as abiding in all (animate and inanimate) beings as their very self; for the 


*A particular air tube of the body lying between those called Ida and Pingala, and believed to be one of the passage - 
for the air or the spirit. 


Dis. 3 ] BOOK TWO 95 


BeBe We Re We We Be Ke Ke Ke Ke Re Re Re ee Re Re Re Ree ee RR ee Re Re RR Re Re eR ee Ree He Re ee He ee ee eee Re Re He Re He We He Be He He We Be Ke He He Be Be Ke He Be We He We Ht We He He 





intellect and other phenomenal objects are adjuncts that lead us to infer the existence of the 
Lord, who is the all-witnessing seer. (35) Therefore, O king, men should always and under 
all circumstances with their whole being listen to, recite and revolve in their mind (the stories 
of) Lord Sri Hari alone. (36) They who drink in the nectar-like stories ofthe Lord, the Soul of 
the universe, poured into the cups of their ears by holy men, are able to purify their heart, 
which has been contaminated through contact with the pleasures of sense, and attain 
‘proximity to His lotus-feet. (37) 


Thus ends the second discourse entitled "A Description of the Lord's Divine Form", 
in Book Two of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


er 2. at ts <-9 = 
PISS rs 


BAY Taaseaa: 


Discourse Ill 
Worship of different deities for the gratification of various desires 
and the superiority of Devotion to the Lord 
AYP SAA 

Vandianied «8oysas asa AAI au afar aqery AAifaon! 2° | 
Saadaare 8a |= eT saltsace Selena: Sead I 2 | 
edt wai gq sites fasaqy| aqanm aga ear dideise dita | 3 | 
stTataenaeadiefa 4wrtnmisfed: ar! fagrcar tea: area fast Xs | 
STARA Sat Ue sol AsteLi Masten: geal Wart sleaat | & | 
Sain Weal Clenaiscawedai | sufaatena: Ade asia apa! « | 
Gat Use AHA: AleleHla: Wada! face Piet argent sat adh! 9 | 
guia sangeteh dad ao fd asi La: WUasMMsteHr ASU | C | 
TIA Ae ea Peal AAA S| HASTA «Aste AAA: Ges U1 F | 
STHla: Uderal al Alana sane: i disor whan std Yee aM igo! 
Wiara wasafe ff:daaled: | aTadael Wal aq APTadaTd: 1221 

wa aa ofdfanqifttamaesae sd aa Wryag: | 

array Umar: cml ddl swearg wea +A Haid 122! 

Sri Suka said : | have thus told you all you asked me, viz., what should men who are 
thoughtful among human beings do, when their end has arrived. (1) A seeker of pre- 
eminence in sacred knowledge should worship the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of the 
gods). Even so he who seeks to acquire keenness of the senses should worship Indra; while 
a seeker of progeny should propitiate the Prajapatis (gods presiding over creation). (2) The 


seeker of prosperity should worship the divine Maya (the Lord's own potency or the Goddess 
presiding over Prakrti or Primordial Matter) and the seeker of indefatigable energy shoula 











96 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3 
eRe Re Re Re Re Re Re RE RE RE RE RR RRO RO RRR RR RR ROR TR RR RR RR RR Re MRC RE Re RT He Ke He He Be He He HEMT Be He He He Bee He He He He Bee Wee Be He He He wr 
ee TP a el lel at a a a 


adore the god of fire. Similarly, a seeker of wealth should worship the class of gods known 
as the Vasus; while the powerfui man who aspires for more power should worship another 
class of gods called the Rudras (part manifestations of Lord Siva). (3) A seeker of food and 
foodstuffs should worship Aditi (the mother of the gods); while he who seeks (an abode in) 
heaven should adore the sons of Aditi (the twelve Adityas). A seeker of sovereignty should 
worship the Viswedevas (a particular class of gods born of Viswa); while a ruler who desires 
to secure the allegiance of his subjects should worship the Sadhyas (another class of 
gods).(4) A seeker of long life should worship the twin gods, the Aswins (the physicians of 
the gods) and he who desires stoutness should worship the goddess Earth. Similarly he who 
seeks stability of position or worldly prestige should adore the two mothers of the world, the 
goddess Earth and Dyauh (the goddess presiding over the heavens). (5) A seeker of 
personal charm should worship the Gandharvas; while he who desires to have a (lovely) 
wife should adore the celestial nymph Urvasi. Evenso he who seeks lordship over all should 
worship Brahma. (6) A seeker of renown should worship Lord Visnu (the lord of sacrifices 
or the deity presiding over sacrifices), while a seeker of treasures should adore Varuna (the 
god presiding over the waters). Even so he who seeks to acquire learning should worship 
Lord Siva; while a seeker of conjugal happiness should adore Goddess Uma, so devoted to 
Her lord. (7) He who aspires to lead a pious life should worship Lord Visnu of excellent 
renown; while he who desires to propagate his race should adore the Pitrs (the manes). He 
who seeks protection against odds should worship the Yaksas (a class of demigods); while 
a seeker of bodily vigour should adore the class of gods known as the Maruts (the wind- 
gods). (8) He who seeks to acquire a kingdom should worship the gods that rule over the 
world for a whole Manvantara (the age or period of a Manu); while he who seeks to employ 
spells for some malevolent purpose should adore Nirrti (the goddess of death or the demon 
presiding over the south-west). Even so the seeker of sense-gratification should worship 
Soma (the moon-god); while he who longs for the cessation of all desires should adore the 
Lord who transcends Prakrti or Matter. (9) Awise man, however—whether he has no desire 
at all or is actuated by all sorts of desires (all those mentioned in the above verses and others 
too) or seeks liberation (final beatitude—should worship the Supreme Person with intense 
devotion. (10) The attainment of the highest good even for those who worship Indra and the 
other gods lies in developing unswerving devotion to the Lord through the fellowship of His 
devotees. (11) As a result of the discourses on Sri Hari (that are held in the company of 
devotees) dawns that spiritual enlightenment which sets at rest the waves in the form of 
passions; nay, the heart gets purated and is filled with joy and one develops an aversion for 
the pleasures of sense and a love for devotion, which is an esteemed road to final beatitude. 
Having once tasted the joy of listening to such discourses on Sri Hari, who would cease taking 
delight in them ? (12) 


Sh SATA 
garteted st era 9 sade: | feaagean wat aarafenate Hf 1231 
Gaga fet aa aise aieqa! cen eftaetect: wat |: els gery 1 ex 
@ a UMad WN Weeds wena: | aeateach: HlSl HOt FT set 1 eu 
aa 8 WTA «ATMA: | Sema: dat wie arnt eel 
aed aA Wada a aaatiaed aan aa sanscleardaiewt 
aa: fh 4 silatd Wear: fe A Maal aA lela 3A Reta fe umusraisar tec 
estes: Med: Ges: ayia achulasidal sa am Teri: 12°! 


Dis. 3 ]’ BOOK TWO 97 


We Be We We Be Ve We We We Ke We We We He We Ke He We Ke We Ke Ke We Me Pe Ge Ke We We We Be Wee Ke Kee We ee EME eMC Ke Ke We We He He Ke Bee We We Ke Ke He He He Ke Ke We Ge Bee He He He We Ws We We Ke He He Ge He Ge We Ge We He 


facs adtemnfamag a aA Vad: mule AT! 
Mera  aigReha A TIOTTENTIEM: 1201 
WRU CUghentiegpaapg = AHL 
wet amit at wer wal Roast alee 
aad a aa mw fest fast fied a1 
uet qu dt gaat 6aaitr Amasd 6 Btalt 1221 
Viessat  aTamefitoy «Sista Sa 
stawen AdeeM: wWassal BU A aq W123! 
aeaAay aaa ada ae. Tae Rasa: 1 
a fafmaaa aa faert AX we wWeey a: 12x 
CSU ES ES EG og TAISARC BS HAS MTATTAA: | 
wee 486 atafeecreafaarfaeeet «Saft Ta SB: 1 RU 
sia AeA ASG URASe Secret fea Taaseara: 13 


Saunaka said : On hearing these words of Suka what else did king Pariksit, the foremost 
of the Bharatas, then ask the son of Vyasa, who was not only a seer but well-versed in the 
Vedas too ? (13) Suta, learned as you are, kindly reveal all that to us, who are keen to hear 
the same. For in an assembly of holy men there must be talks that ultimately lead to 
discourses on Sri Hari. (14) That great car-warrior, king Pariksit (a descendant of Pandu) 
was a great devotee of the Lord. Playing with toys loved by children, he made the worship 
of Sri Krsna as one of his sports. (15) The holy Suka (the son of Vyasa) is also exclusively 
devoted to Lord Vasudeva (Sri Krsna); and it is but natural that where holy men meet there 
are sublime talks saturated with the virtues of the Lord, whose praises are sung by exalted 
souls well-versed in the Vedas. (16) The rising and setting sun steals away (in vain) the life 
of all human beings except that of the man who spends even a single moment in talks about 
the Lord of excellent fame. (17) Do not trees live ? Do not bellows also breathe ? And do not 
the other domestic animals (other than the human beast) take their food and copulate ? (18) 
The human beast who has never heard the story of Sri Krsna (the elder brother of Gada) has 
been declared to be as good as a dog, a swine, a camel and a donkey. (19) The ears of a 
man who does not hear (the stories of) the exploits of the Lord (whose doings are marvellous) 
are mere holes (that serve no useful purpose); and his tongue is as bad as that of a frog if 
itdoes not recount the stories of Lord Visnu (who is extolled in numerous ways). (20) Ahead 
which, though decked with a silk turban or a crown, never bows to Lord Mukunda (the 
Bestower of Liberation), is only a burden. Even so the hands which, though adorned with 
wristlets of gold, never offer worship to Sri Hari are as good as those of a dead man. (21) And 
those human eyes that do not gaze on the images of Lord Visnu are as useless as the eyes 

On the tail of a peacock. Similarly, the human feet which do not visit places sacred to Sri Hari 
are as good as the roots of trees. (22) A mortal who has never bathed himself in the dust from 
the feet of the Lord's devotees is really dead, though living; even so the man who has never 
known the fragrance of the sacred Tulasi (basil) leaves offered at the feet of Lord Visnu Is 
like a breathing corpse. (23) A heart which does not melt when Sri Hari’s names are being 
uttered (either by oneself or by others) is hard like stone. And when the heart melts, tears 
rush to one's eyes and the hair stand erect. (24) Dear Suta, what you say is most agreeable 
to the mind. Now tell us what Sri Suka (the son of Vyasa), the foremost of devotees and 











SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4 


eRe RR Re Pe Re RR Re Re Ree RR RRR RE RRR RRR RR RE RRR RR RRR REM RE ME Re ERC Re Be ERE AE Be Re Ree We Be We He He He Hr Hr He Fe Hr He Hee Ke He He Hr He Ke By He Hy Kr Wr wr 


perfect in the knowledge of the Spirit, told king Pariksit in reply to his excellent question. (25) 


Thus ends the third discourse in Book Two of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PISSED 


BIA ATAiseaa: 


Discourse IV 
The king asks a question about the creation of the universe and 
the sage Suka commences his discourse 


Yd Sara 
aareentetet SAA AAA: | sue Aft Het sik: Aal Saez 
STATA A TALS AUT STATS, tea fae fret feet aaat et 1 2 1 


UIs UANaS GA Gesy AAA: | HUMANA Weel ASMA: | 3 | 
een fag dare ad tafe a aqianmed waa ame a wa: 1 x | 


Sita continued : On hearing these words of Sri Suka (the son of Vyasa), which enabled 
him to ascertain the truth concerning the Supreme Spirit, king Pariksit (the son of Uttara) 
exclusively devoted his pious mind to Sri Krsna’ feet. (1) He shook off (ina moment) the deep- 
rooted attachment which he had conceived all that time for his own body, wife, sons, 
residence, animals, wealth and kinsmen as well as for his kingdom, that had known no 
trouble. (2) Having come to know of his death (beforehand), the high-minded Pariksit 
renounced all his duties connected with the first three objects of human pursuit (viz., 
Dharma, Artha and Kama). He then established his complete identity with Lord Vasudeva 
and, full of deep reverence for hearing the glory of Sri Krsna, asked Sri Suka the same 
question which you are now asking me, O most holy ones. (3-4) 


ada dal see Adee damaiaar facia ag et: Head: Ha! & | 
ya wa fafa smarmemaaiade gia fad afesmemefat: 1 ¢ | 
am Maia faygder dasa GA: | at at ahnauriste Gea: Ut: GAM | 
AIM Hiss Hist Hud fama a i91 
Wo Wad se ete: | casera afafaenta Aiwa c | 
aM Wik Nenddrad maansta ari faufd yferden: Haq Halter sais: 1 <1 
fafatateatan sel Wa Berl et wei Freoma: afeiss wamag 1201 
The king said : All-knowing and sinless as you are, O divine sage, your words are quite 
true. Even as you proceed with your discourse on Sri Hari the gloom of my ignorance 
disperses. (5) | further wish to know how the Lord by His own Maya (deluding potency) 


creates this universe, the mysteries of which even the greatest gods (like Brahma) find it 
difficult to unravel. (6) Also tell me how that all-pervading Lord protects the universe and how 


Dis. 4.] BOOK TWO 99 
RRR RRA ARAB ARR IAA ER ALLEL ALLIED I ALIAS ISSIR 


again He destroys it. Possessed as He is of innumerable powers, which of them does that 
Supreme Person assume when He plays with His own Self, transforming Himself into so 
many playthings, and creates and then destroys (a number of universes). (7) Indeed it 
appears difficult even for the wise, O divine sage, to comprehend the doings of Lord Sri Hari 
of marvellous deeds. (8) (I should also like to know) how the Lord, who is one (without a 
second) assumes all at once the three Gunas of Prakrti in order to perform the various 
functions (of creation etc.), or manifesting Himself in different forms (as Brahma and so on) 
assumes them in succession. (9) Since you are well-versed in the Vedas and have also 
realized the Supreme Spirit, kindly respond to this enquiry of mine. (10) 
Ud soar 


searat «UR Nee eee ita 0 Tete 1281 


Suta said : Thus implored by the king to discourse upon the excellences of Sri Hari, the 
sage Suka fixed his thought on Lord Sri Krsna (the Inspirer of all senses) and commenced 


his reply as follows : (11) 
Mh FATA 


7: Wet Get ya desalted | 
Telaatihiarcdara seararavarasasetaals 1221 
at 7a: Teg hr hase sea aaa 
Gt OR TTC Gs RTT ATA aTaIN 1231 
7H aAEiseqIaa aad faqeemma ye: salir 
Pretaracaet «terete So etftr «SC tea: 12K 
Gentit aU «oadlawt «= agate aU | 
ola wen fait wert ad qusswad aAl aA: 1241 
faa SENUTNTe AG MN TST: 
faefa fe seit udearet qussad aRt Aq: 1261 
wR aaa aaiadt wafeaat wafae: ager: | 
aq a facta fart aedot ad anasad zat 7a: 1201 
feriteurrergieragcehal smvitastata: Geared: | 
asd aA um aeussa: yzeara att sufawta aa: 1221 
a wa STIMISSHaA Haar qdaeadaraa: | 
Td aetna tMiataadaatess WTA. WalearL 122 1 
fs1a: Uftastata: Seratatear Ufamtenataerata: | 
Utica wdled A Walt Adi Ufa: 1201 
qeeaieaaniaendn feared fe dranier: | 
aeha dad mad amed @ A Yarcdl War Welede_i2e! 
valet a qu aradt fara adi aia ae! 
Maan Wed fHearid: A A WAUNAAH: Weladr{_ 122! 
qcdeeat oo gm: «6a ofayfinta «IAT I 
Yar WI wear wean: Asegity war adie 71231 








SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ) [ Dis. 4 


Re Re Re Be Be Re Ree Re Re Re Re Re Re eR Re RE BER RE RE RE RE ERE RE RRR RRR BE RE RE RE RE REBT Be Re REY He Be Ke Ke Br Re Ke Re Be Ke Ke Hy He Be Ke Br Re Hr Hr Br He He Br Hr Br ar Wr Br Be Br Br We We Br Sr kr 


THe «60a Sagas TA Giana «Se apEageeTaar 1S 





- Sri Suka said : Obeisance to that Supreme Person of infinite glory, who in order to carry 
on His sportful activity of creating, preserving and destroying the universe has (in the form 
of Visnu, Brahma and Siva) assumed the three Saktis in the shape of Sattva (harmony), 
Rajas (activity) and Tamas (darkness), nay, who is the Inner Controller of all beings and 
whose true nature and ways cannot be apprehended through the intellect.(12) Salutations 
again to Him who roots out the sorrows and sufferings of the virtuous (and bestows on them 
the boon of His love), who puts a stop to the (material) growth of the wicked (and grants them 
liberation) and further confers on those who have entered the order of Paramahamsas 
(recluses) the boon (of Self-Realization) sought after by them; for all (animate and inanimate) 
beings are His manifestations (and hence He has no partiality for or prejudice against 
anyone). (13) Hail, hail to You who foster Your devotees, but are far from the reach (elude 
the grasp) of those that are destitute of Devotion, and who by virtue of Your divine nature, 
unequalled and unsurpassed, delight in Your own essence which is known by the name of 
‘Brahma (the Absolute). (14) Salutations again and again to that Lord of most auspicious 
renown, by singing whose praises, by thinking of, seeing, greeting and adoring whom and 
by hearing whose glory men are cleansed of their impurities at once. (15) Hail, hail to that 
Lord of most blessed renown, by taking refuge in whose feet the wise shake off from their 
mind the attachment to this as well as to the other world and attain to the state of Brahma 
without any exertion. (16) Ascetics and those devoted to charity, men of high repute and 
those who have controlled their mind and senses, the knowers of the Mantras and men of 
righteous conduct never attain blessedness without dedicating themselves to His feet. To 
that Lord of most blessed renown we make obeisance again and again. (17) The Kiratas, the 
Hunas, the Andhras, the Pulindas, the Pulkasas, the Abhiras, the Kankas, the Yavanas, the 
Khasas and other sinful races no less than others of sinful conduct are purged of their sins 
even by taking refuge in those who depend on Him. To that all-powerful Lord we offer our 
greetings. (18) May that Lord be gracious to me, who is the very Self to the wise and the 
supreme Lord of His devotees, who is Veda itself (to those devoted to ritual acts), nay, who 
is Dharma (righteousness) personified (to those given to righteous conduct) and austere 
penance (to men of askesis), and whose reality is looked upon with wonder by sincere 
devotees like Brahma, Sankara and others. (19) May that Lord of Sri (the goddess of 
prosperity and beauty), the Lord of sacrifices, the Lord of all created beings, the Ruler of all 
intellects, the Lord of the earth, the Protector as well as the asylum of the Andhakas, the 
Vrsnis and the Satvatas and the Lord of the holy ones be gracious to me. (20) The wise 
realize the truth of the Self with the help of their reason, purified through Samadhi in the form 
of meditation on His feet, and describe It according to their own predilection. May that Lord 
Mukunda (the Bestower of Liberation and Divine Love) be gracious to me. (21) Egged on by 
Him at the dawn of creation to revive in Brahma's heart the memory of the past cycle, 
Saraswati (the goddess of wisdom) appeared from the latter's mouth (in the form of the 
Vedas) with all her limbs (in the form of Siksa or Phonetics, Grammar and so on). May that 
Lord, the foremost of the disseminators of wisdom, be propitious to me. (22) Having created 
these bodies out of the five gross elements (viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether) that all- 
pervading Lord indwells them as the Purusa (the individual soul) and, endowed with sixteen 
instruments (the five senses of perception, the five organs of action, the five vital airs and 
the mind) enjoys their sixteen objects. May that Lord lend charm to my expression. (23) Hail 
to the omniscient Lord Vedavyasa (who Is no other than Lord Vasudeva), from whose lotus- 
like lips the devotees drink the nectar of wisdom. (24) 


DIED! BOOK TWO 101 


Se Re Re Re RR RR RR RR RR Re Re RR Re Re ROR RR Re Re RRR RRR Re Re ROR RR Re Re Re Re Re eRe eRe REE R Be Re Be Be Be Ree Be Hee EERE Re BEEBE EERE BE BEBE Re Be We Be He Be He Hr 


Weaay Wa aARae  fagesd! Aansiswend Alene aale sees: 124! 
sft srerrad Fea URAEa Mena fatal ACaisea: rs! 
Questioned by the sage Narada, O Pariksit! Brahma (the self-born), the repository of the 


Vedas, taught to that sage this very gospel, which Sri Hari Himself had imparted to him 
earlier. (25) 





Thus ends the fourth discourse in Book Two of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


“ar 2. — 2 
PISS mS 


31 USaseara: 


Discourse V 


A description of the cosmos 
AR q 3dq 


caddie faerie «= aegraretaesia 12 
aga owes oad: gee satiate ai aa add aa ard: 121 
Wa @da Wa ae YANMay: |euqemae fad fanaafad dais 
afer aeremnt «ae ee: 1 Ue: 9osifa oui = ydtararaa ix! 
Se, VTaaa Aa A WUIMaa SAL! Steaks SUTRA: 141 
We ac wt ofsemt a ad fattiameaqiniet aaaq fefsena: 1c! 
@ Waa at anu: gqanled: ida Gets aca West waa iol 
Ut Usd: ad ada anomifanife addené aelsqanfaa: ici 
Narada said : My obeisance to you O god of gods, creator of all beings, forefather of all. 
Kindly instruct me in that wisdom which makes one realize the truth of the Spirit. (1) My lord, 
kindly tell me in essence the truth about this universe, as to what its characteristics are, on 
what it is supported, by whom it has been created, where it ultimately rests, by what power 
it is ruled and what it essentially is. (2) You surely know all this; for you are the lord of that 
which has come to be, that which is still to come and that which is coming into existence. 
Like a fruit of the emblic myrobalan on the palm of one's hand, the universe is within the range 
of your knowledge. (3) What is the source of your special knowledge and by whom are you 
Supported ? To what power do you owe your allegiance and what is your essential nature? 
Single-handed you create all beings out of the five elements by dint of your own Maya 
(wonderful creative energy)! (4) Even as a spider spins a web out of its own mouth without 
any exertion and sports in that web, so do you create all beings in your own Self by your own 
energy and remain unchanged yourself. (5) Of all that is known through a certain name, form 
and qualities, in this world, O lord, | know of nothing, animate or inanimate, high, low or 
_mediocre, which has its source in anything other than you. (6) By the fact that even you (the 
.supreme Ruler of all) practised austere penance with great concentration of mind, you 


bewilder us and lead us to suspect that there is someone higher than you. (7) Omniscient 
as you are , O Ruler of all, | ask you all this. Pray, therefore, instruct me in such a way that 











102 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 


BeBe Re eR Re Re RR Re A Be Re RR REE BEE BE RE PEE BERT RE Be THe We We Mr Be Be Br Re Ke Ke Hr Br By Wr Hr Kr A FF Be We We Wr Kr We Kr Wr Sr He Sr Wr Wr By Ke Be We Hr Hr Hr Rr We Br Ke Rr Br Hr Hr Hr Hy 





| may follow your teachings correctly. (8) 


STENATA 
aig sreftrenae acd a fafarenhari aed «=o atfea: «= aa aTagtdeatt te 
ad da daa an at sedis ot: araga at aA Ulead ant fe Ago! 
aa wafer fad af daarseni ameaisieder art auatzedent: 1221 
aa aa wad area diafeiamam gia at gafa wTger 122 
faosma aa Wattaradsqari fafa fawera aarefafa afela: 123 
ta Sd a HSA WMal sila wa Al aracarad Hela araisaishet Awad: 1 ev! 
aa eT Aa ARTOIS ST: I ARTA eT ATAU AT: 124 | 
anrauray ss aT (CTU a LATA ATT TH: 1 REI 
qe sign 9 pewentaere: | get gent ygelseitarcenfiretiaa: 1got 
aa wea sa fore yore: fetta wélar area fast: 1221 
chldichulehdea Tamia: |aaha aa aw alsa Gee Wo: 1281 
a WW Whiieoshatiratlas: | aoa adie AA AA: ol 


Brahma replied : Laudable is this enquiry of yours, dear child, who are full of compassion 
to all; for you have thereby urged me to reveal the Lord's glory. (9) It is not without truth either 
what you have spoken about me, my son. For, until one has come to know Him who is even 
greater than me, all this greatness appears as belonging to me. (10) | (Seem to) manifest 
(bring forth) the universe, which stands manifested by the self-effulgent Lord, much in the 
same way as the sun and fire, the moon and the other planets as well as the other stars and 
the lunar mansions (seem to) illumine it (the universe) even though it stands illumined by the 
Lord. (11) | bow to the same Lord Vasudeva and meditate on Him. Deluded by His Maya, 
which is so difficult to conquer, people (like you) speak of me as the father of the universe.(12) 
Nay, bewildered by that Maya, fools vauntingly speak of the body as their self ('I') and of all 
that belongs to it as ‘mine’, although this Maya is too shy even to stand the Lord's look. (13) 
In reality, O divine sage, there is no substance other than Lord Vasudeva—neither the 
elements nor Karma (destiny) nor Time nor Swabhava (nature) nor the individual soul. (14) 
Narayana (Lord Visnu) is the goal of the Vedas; the gods have sprung from the limbs of 
Narayana; the sacrifices are meant to please Narayana and the worlds attained th rough such 
Sacrifices are sO many limbs of Narayana’s Cosmic Body. (15) Narayana is the ultimate 
object of all Yoga (concentration of mind); all austere penance is intended to propitiate 
Narayana. All wisdom is directed towards Narayana and all paths lead to Narayana. (16) He 
Is atonce the Seer and the Ruler; though immutable, He is all-embracing. Itis He who created 
me; and, encouraged by His glance, | evolve this creation. (17) The Lord is infinite and 
beyond the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti); it is His Maya that has assumed these three 
Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—for the purpose of creation, preservation and destruc- 
tion.(18) Through the agency of the elements, the senses and the gods presiding over the 
senses, these Gunas (modes of Prakrti) bind the individual soul who is Subject to Maya, 
though ever free in essence, with the consciousness that he is the physical body, the senses 
and the mind, all in one. (19) The selfsame Lord, who transcends sense-perception, 
envelops Himself beyond recognition with these three sheaths of matter. He is the Ruler of 
all beings as well as of myself, O Narada ! (20) 


Dis. 5:] | ~ © BOOK TWO 103 


aie od aud A Weal Wa Maisie dewa wT faqygeuted 1221 
cele Wrest: ufone: wurad: | ado waa aed: qearetsdedd 122! 
Heded fapaltnsst: raed ede | TaN ««- SATA sHaTAh: 123 1 
aisesn sit set fagda anufaiaaiteesas amasfa afar! 
Sikh: fHaraikaaiaakohtta TAT 12x 1 
amrareta Yetaparonayay: | TA AAT WUT: Bledl fg Aa sSazaat: 124! 
Intent upon becoming many (at the dawn of creation), the Lord of Maya assumed at will 
(pressed into His service for the purpose of creation) by His own Maya (deluding potency), 
Time, Karma (Destiny of the Jivas) and Swabhava (their innate disposition) that had already 
existed in a latent form in His being. (21) Time disturbed the equilibrium of the three Gunas, 
Swabhava transformed them and from Karma was evolved Mahat (the principle of cosmic 
intelligence), all these functioning through the power of the Lord Himself. (22) From Mahat, 
as it underwent transformation, dominated as it was by Rajas and Sattva, emanated an 
evolute which was dominated by the element of Tamas (darkness, opacity) and was made 
up of three factors—Dravya (substance), Jnana (intelligence) and Kriya (activity). (23) This 
was known by the name of Ahankara and became threefold as it underwent transformation. 
Its three varieties are Vaikarika (Sattvika), Taijasa (Rajasika) and Tamasa, which are 
severally predominated, O Narada, by the force of Jnana, Kriya and Dravya. (24) From the 
Tamasa Ahankara, the origin of the five gross elements, as it underwent transformation, was 


evolved ether. Sabda (sound) is the subtle form as well as the distinctive characteristic of this 
element; and it is sound which furnishes a clue to the seer and the seen.*(25) 


avaisa fapatoneya aehquistte: | araaresecai sl SOT Sit: Gel A125 | 

aaa 9 fapatord, cieatkawtad: | Squad ast a wad eRalsleqad 1201 

ate 4 famatunediast warden! ecad wales aed oda 122! 

fareeg 4 famatonesrat Teeny Wraae 8 8=—- Tae greqaTMT aa: 11291 

achicha WA eal anita earl feardinwadstagtsesian: 1301 

asad. q fapatonfatsarfor aarstecli aMatkn: feraratitefes: STOTT stat | 
NA VMUlEtsearattgetaarad: 132 | 


From ether, as it underwent transformation, sprang up the element of air, which is 
characterized by the quality to touch. Having inherited the characteristics of its cause (ether), 
itis further characterized by the quality of sound. Vitality, energy, zeal and strength are only 
other names of air. (26) From the element of air, even as it underwent transformation under 
the impelling force of Time as well as of the Destiny and innate disposition of the various 
individual souls, was evolved fire, which is characterized by the quality of colour and has also 
inherited the characteristics of its chain of causes, viz., sound and touch. (27) From the 
element of fire, even as it underwent transformation, sprang up water, which is characterized 
by the quality of taste. It is further characterized by the qualities of colour, touch and sound, 
which it has inherited from its chain of causes (fire, air and ether). (28) From the element of 
water, evenas it underwent transformation, came into being the earth, whichis characterized 
by the quality of smell as well as by the qualities of taste, colour, touch and sound, which it 
has inherited from its chain of causes ( water, fire. air and ether). (29) From theSattvikaEgo 








* Suppose someone standing behind a wall loudly exclaims “Elephant! elephant!" Here it is this ejaculation that indicates 
the presence of the man who sees the elephant, as well as of the object he Sees. ; é 








104 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 


BORER Ree ROR ROR REORDER RR ROTOR ROR RRO ROR MOREE RR ROT RO ROR Ree MMe Re eR ME He RRR NE WE NE HE We We We We We We We Se A we We Wee We Me We eA We We He Be 


sprang up the cosmic Mind (as well as the deity presiding over the same, viz., the moon-goq) 
and the ten deities severally presiding over the five senses of perception and the five organs 
of action, viz., the Digdevatas, the wind-god, the sun-god, Varuna, the twin-gods Aswins (the 
physicians of the gods), the god of fire, Indra (the lord of paradise), Lord Visnu (appearing 
as a younger brother of Indra and therefore called Upendra), Mitra (one of the twelve sons 
of Aditi) and Prajapati*(30) From the Rajasika Ego, as it underwent transformation, were 
evolved the ten Indriyas—the five senses of perception, viz., the auditory sense, the sense - 
of touch, the sense of sight, the sense of taste and the olfactory sense, and the five organs 
of action, viz., the organ of speech, the hands and feet, the organ of generation and the organ 
of excretion. Again, the intellect, which is the faculty of cognition, and Prana the faculty of 
action, are also the evolutes of the Rajasika Ego. (31) 


qeisdea |= Me SAAN: | aerator A SesteaTfard A 1321 

ql dea Uta wWashhalfed: | aearqaea wast wage: 1331 

aureeard devehehaay | Sedan  slatssitansitaad 13x | 

a wa yeumeneus fafttar fria: i aeetdefores: aseraittar 1341 

qagadaeta medata adieu: | meanfefra: aA ated seraiafs: 1361 

USGI Ha Ael AANA lea: | Haledeal Wad: uae Yelsatlad 1301 

Woe: Hhiedd: Wasa YaotRIsMAaad: | al Wels Beat Aeelent AEles: 1321 

Waa saelns Miele: Asa! weal: AaetHe AeletH: Aad: 1391 

dehen wide SAGE fades fast: | Mpa Yao Ys AGMA C ded 1¥o! 

Welde GC UHM Weal Wade oie Weded sft whats: Gar 1se | 

Yoich: hiedd: Wa%al YaoicniSa Aad: | este: Hieaal Fal sla al Slehameaal 1s?! 

Sie AEA ASTM GRAS Aedes TSAI: 14 | 

O Narada (the foremost among the knowers of Brahma), so long as these categories— 
the gross elements, the Indriyas, the mind and the three Gunas or modes of Prakrti— 
remained dissociated they could not erect a house in the form of a body. (32) Then, urged 
by God's power, they combined with one another and, assuming between themselves the 
role of cause and its effects, produced both the cosmic and the individual body. (33) The 
_macrocosmin the form of an egg lay on the causal waters ina lifeless condition fora thousand 
years. With the help of Time as well as of the destiny and innate disposition of the individual 
souls, however, at the end of this period the Lord (who is the life-giver of all) infused life into 
this egg. (34) Bursting open that (Cosmic) egg, issued therefrom the same Supreme Person 
(the Cosmic Being) with thousands of thighs, feet, arms and eyes and thousands of faces 
and heads too. (35) It is in His limbs that the wise locate the various worlds comprised in this 
universe—the seven lower spheres below His waist and the seven higher spheres above His 
hip and loins. (36) The Brahmana (the priestly class) represents the mouth of this Cosmic 
Being and the Ksatriya (the warrior-ciass), His arms. The Vaisya (the trading class) 


emanated from the Lord's thighs and the Sudra (the labouring and artisan classes) from His 
feet. (37) The seven subterranean spheres and the sphere of the earth are located in His 





* Of the ten gods enumerated above, the Digdevatas preside over the auditory sense, the wind-god over the sense of 
touch. the sun-god over the sense ot sight, Varuna over the sense of taste and Aswins over the olfactory sense. Again, the god 
of fire presides over the organ of speech. Indra over the hands, Upenara over the feet, Mitra over the organ of excretion and 
Prajapati (the god presiding over creation) over the organ of generation. 


Dis. 6 ] BOOK TWO 105 
We We We We We We We We We Ke We We We He Hee We WH Re Re eRe OR eee eH We We We We We We Me He We Me Hee Me Ve ee ee ee 


lower limbs—from the feet up to the waist, the Bhuvarloka (the space between the earth and 
heaven) in His navel, the Swarloka (Indra's paradise) in the heart, and the Maharloka in the 
breast of that Supreme Being . (38) Even so Janaloka is located in His neck, Tapoloka in His 
breasts, and the Satyaloka, the (comparatively) eternal abode of Brahma, in His heads. (39) 
Again, the Atalaloka is located in His waist, the Vitalaloka in His thighs, the holy Sutalaloka 
(the abode of Prahlada, Bali and other devotees as well as of the Lord Himself as the divine 
Dwarf) in His knees, the Talatala in His shanks. (40) Even so the Mahatala is located in His 
ankles, the Rasatala in the fore part of His feet, and the Patala in His soles . In this way the 
Supreme Person represents the aggregate of all the fourteen worlds. (41) (According to 
another arrangement) the sphere of the earth is located in His feet, the Bhuvarloka in His 
navel, and the Swarloka in His head. This is how the three worlds are located according to 
this arrangement.(42) 


Thus ends the fifth discourse in Book Two of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


wk Piet Boek Fs 
ODOT REELS OD 


BID ABSeATA: 


Discourse VI 
Glories of the Cosmic Being 


SENATA 
ara agda aa saat aa wea: | ean frel ade aie! 
aaigal a ams aad warn asada a amt aAtesmied: 1 21 
ea astat aatda: gee arferoit | Hurt fear a dteiat sitararenrersteca: | 
AMA GAHAN AI A ASAT 13 | 
aT walaaisa aaa aa fei vawgeaswnda dal ase Ae: | x | 
ears «= Rierelevfaeqar Aiea Glee Saat: AAA & | 
fama sapfa: aa ana ae aliddamanu Raw sie! «| 
sat date uate use semad: i ge: fiat sce seeded: 1 9 | 
age «=—ofetsftterer «ae i fear Peeedeticrer qe: wa: cI 
TNA arate Ufsma: | Aten AcAcT q WMoronhereela: 1 e | 
Terma wa Raa aisat fafad Gat wad Aaa: 4a 120! 
mea a Pa a Han waa aifadaa A GaSe Wee GWA Ike! 
ae Va Vasa a sa BAaISAT: | qe APT: GM Aras: 122! 
Tea =| aa TATTOO: | usta: foax: fast faensnsmon gar: 1231 
ara a fafaen sitar seeautne: | aeelchdaenredted: Rrahaaa: 1 2X1 
Wa Ger wae yd vel wae adimieniad fad  faahafefasfa eu 
[564] B. M. 6=— Hie 











106 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6 


weitere trererer ret renee nr ett rr SORE Rtn arate a sonot tote a ga got OR ROR ROR RATATAT RRR RR RANT RIOR I Hee He 
mired sauq so aes saueetiuwa faust sadeeddie: GAM ee! 
aisqqensvaee  aeea FeeNTI AAT adt Ae YSN ta: 101 
aey daa ye: fefraet fag: iad anv fryetserfa qerq ec 





Ue aegaassiat A ssa: | srdkRacteareaN «= edelisgeaad: 128 | 
adi faamd faye aaa sNiaciaet a faa a eure: iol 
aaeue fag FA Ydisaqunee: | ae see fad mM: Ga gary 122 | 


Brahma continued : The mouth of the Cosmic Being is the birth-place of the organ of 
speech as well as of the god of fire (the deity presiding over it;) the seven Dhatus or essential 
ingredients of His Body (viz., skin, flesh, blood, fat, marrow, sinew and bone) are the source 
of the seven Vedic metres (viz., Gayatri, Jagati, Usnik, Tristubh, Anustubh, Pankti and 
Brhati); and even so His tongue is the source of all kinds of food—the food of the gods, the 
food of the manes and the remains of both (which is like ambrosia for human beings)—of the 
six varieties of taste, as well as of the sense of taste, and the birth-place of Varuna (the deity 
presiding over the same). (1) His nostrils are the excellent source of all the five kinds of vital 
airs (viz., Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana) as wellas of the elementof air; similarly 
His olfactory sense is the birth-place of the twin-gods, Aswins (the celestial physicians) and 
the source of all kinds of foodgrains, as well as of all ordinary and special odours. (2) His 
sense of sight is the source of all colours as well as of the lights that reveal them; while His 
eyes are the source of heaven and the birth-place of the sun. Even so His ears are the source 
of the four cardinal points as well as of all sacred places; His sense of hearing, of ether and 
its Special characteristic, sound, while His limbs are the source of the essence of all things, 
and the receptacle of all loveliness. (3) His sense of touch is the source of touch as well as 
of the element of air and even so of all kinds of sacrificial performances. Similarly the hair 
on His body are the source of all kinds of trees and plants or (according to another view) of 
such of them as contribute to the performance of sacrifices. (4) His hair are the source of 
clouds and His beard and moustaches, of lightning; while the nails of His fingers and toes 
are the source of rocks and iron. Similarly His arms are the birth-place of the guardians of 
spheres, who are mostly engaged in the work of protecting the universe. (5) His stride is the 
support of the three worlds—the earth, the region of the air and heaven; while Sri Hari's feet 
are the source of security and protection as also the place where all one's desired objects 
can be had. (6) The penis of the Cosmic Being is the source of water, the seminal fluid and 
creation, and the birth-place of the god of rain as well as of Prajapati (the god presiding over 
creation); while His faculty of generation is the source of delight resulting from copulation 
for the sake of offspring. (7) Even so His organ of excretion, O Narada, is the birth-place of 
Yama (the god of retribution) as well as of the god Mitra, and the origin of the function of 
evacuating the bowels; while His anus has been spoken of as the source of all destruction 
of life, the origin of hell and the birth-place of Mrtyu (the god of death) as well as of Nirrti (the 
goddess of poverty). (8) His back is the source of defeat and unrighteousness, as well as of 
Tamas (the principle of darkness or opacity). His arteries and veins are the source of big and 
small rivers, while the system of His bones is the source of mountains. (9) The abdomen of 
the Cosmic Being is known to be the source of the Unmanifest (Primordial Matter), the chyle 
and the oceans and the origin of all beings as well as of their dissolution; while His heart is 
reputed to be the source of the mind. (10) Even so the Citta (Reason) of the Supreme is the 
excellent source of Dharma (righteousness and the god presiding over it), myself (Brahma), 
yourself (Narada), Sanaka andhis three brothers (Sanatana, Sanandana and Sanatkumara) 
and Lord Siva, as also of Vijnana (understanding) and the faculty of reason. (11) Myself and 


Diss6 - BOOK TWO 107 


We We We Me We Ke EWE Wee We WOME We Ke Vee HOM We He Wee Mee We Hee He Hee We Hee AWE RE ROMER MEME RENE RENE HE ME He RE HE HE Wee Me We We Me ee Be OM HARARE REERBES 





yourself, Lord Sankara, those elder brothers of yours ( Sanaka and others), the gods, 
demons and men, the Nagas, birds, deer and reptiles, the Gandharvas and celestial 
nymphs, the Yaksas, Raksasas and BhUtas (ghosts), serpents and beasts, the manes, the 
Siddhas, Vidyadharas and Caranas (the celestial bards), trees and other species of living 
beings residing either in water, on land or in the air, the planets and lunar mansions, comets 
and other stars, lightnings and thundering clouds—nay, all this universe, past, present and 
future, is no other than the Supreme Person. It is by Him that all this stands pervaded and 
it covers only a span of the Cosmic Being. (12—15) Even as the sun shines outside while 
illumining its own orb, so does the Supreme Person cast His effulgence inside as well as 
outside the univétse, while illumining His own Cosmic Body. (16) He transcends all that is 
subject to death as well as the fruit of action, and is the lord of thatimmortal and fearless state 
(of Moksa). That is why, O divine sage, no one can fathom the glory of the Supreme 
Person.(17) All the worlds represent only a fraction of the Supreme Person and it is in these 
worlds, forming part of the Lord, that all created beings are known to reside. And it is in the 
three highest heavens (viz., Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka) standing above Maharloka, 
which itself exists above the three worlds, that immortality, security and fearlessness have 
been established. (18) The three ASramas or stages of life, viz., those of the Brahmacaris 
(lifelong celibates) Vanaprasthas (forest-dwellers or anchorites) and the Samnyasis 
(recluses), none of whom begets children, constitute His three feet, which have their abode 
outside the three worlds (viz., the earth, the region of the air and heaven); while the fourth 
foot, viz., the stage of the householder, who does not observe a vow of long celibacy, dwells 
inside the three worlds. (19) The scriptures speak of two paths—the Path of Action, which 
has been characterized as Avidya or ignorance (because of its being conducive to rebirth) 
and the Path of Upasana (meditation on God), which has been designated as Vidya 
(because it leads to Knowledge or the Realization of Truth). The Jiva (embodied soul) follows 
either of these two paths, the first of which leads to enjoyment and the other to final beatitude; 
while the Supreme Purusa is the foundation of both. (20) Even as the sun, though illumining 
and warming all with its rays, is yet distinct from all, the Lord, from whom was evolved this 
universe in the form of an egg as well as His Cosmic Body, consisting of the five gross 
elements (earth, water, fire, airand ether), the ten Indriyas (the five senses of perception and 
the five organs of action) and the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), (though indwelling allthese 
and manifest in their form) is entirely beyond the universe as well as His Cosmic Body . (21) 


aera i aTafeareeara «= eI: iaifae «0 INS Geeta 1221 
ay Gq Ula: Pads: HPMise WU eases HlseseqNbad: 1231 
aaa: el Weledel Wei wal ase ami adela A Ada 12! 
Tata Aas afaons ada Altadena: ced: Agsedetada W124! 
Tat ada: set wafer Ader gqesadatd ASI: Aya Aa 12e! 
sit 89 WTA: GeeTaaae| daa SO ATER 121 
ddd Wt Sh WM Udal Aas SHAekh Yer Wantledi: 1c! 
. Wig wa: aie git weatsats frat fagen cat Aqen: mafstasy12¢! 
ad art «oo aafa «fee )S faerfeai aétaaeqo: 9 aaiclaqu: tad: iZ0! 
= gfe afsamisé at ata dea:ifad gesean ufo frerrae i2e! 


' gfa o«asfifeq aa adenqgefaiaeenad: fefstet weneiny 132! 
qa unt Ass yaaeed aA a wf aaat yar ala: | 











108 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6 


BORER Re RRR RR RR RRO RE RRR Ree Be RR Be Be Se Re He Fee Re We We Be Ke We Ree We We He eee ee eee We We We We Ay ar We He Re Me Wee Kee We Ke Ke We We We Hey, 


a 2 gia ured at gelenvedam al et 1331 
ase aarameima: seradamitatad: = aft: | 
sera art fagut aatfadet Aeaetes aa SIAN: 12%! 
adiseae oder wdlqst valescq SBR WAFe| 
at giamafasya wt udme aa aM: ramet qa: 1341 
Te a ga sedi wh fagi amea: feqamt qu: 
Tag AWedagaieac faffia oerand  fereng 136! 

When | sprang up from the lotus in the navel of this Cosmic Being, | found no materials 
for sacrifice beyond the limbs of the Supreme Person. (22) Of these requisites, O noblest 
sage, | collected from the limbs of the Cosmic Being Himself materials for sacrifice such as 
the animals to be sacrificed, trees for sacrificial posts, blades of Kusa grass, this sacrificial 
ground (where Brahma evidently happened to be at the time of the discourse) and a most 
advantageous time (spring etc.), for the performance of a sacrifice, vessels and other 
necessary things, cereals (like rice, barley and so on), clarified butter and other only 
substances, saps of Soma and other plants, gold and other metals, earths of various kinds, 
water, the sacred texts of the Raveda, the Yajurveda and the Samaveda and the duties of 
the four chief priests officiating at a sacrifice (viz., Hota, Adhvaryu, Udgata and Brahma), the 
names of sacrifices (such as Jyotistoma etc.), and Mantras (Such as Swaha etc.), as also 
the sacrificial fees and the sacred vows to be observed during the performance of a sacrifice, 
the mention of the gods, the texts laying down the process of conducting sacrifices, the formal 
undertaking of a vow (to perform a Sacrifice) and the process of performing it, the movements 
at the close of a sacrifice and contemplation on the deities, expiatory ceremonies for errors 
and omissions and offering the whole performance to the Lord. (23—26) Having thus 
collected all the materials from the limbs of the Cosmic Being, | worshipped with those very 
materials the same Supreme Person, Lord Visnu. (27) Then these your (elder) brothers, the 
nine lords of creation (Marici and others), with perfect concentration of mind, adored the 
Supreme Person, who is manifest (in the form of the Cosmic Being) and unmanifest (as the 
inner controller of all beings). (28) Thereafter, when the time came, the Manus and the other. 
Rsis (seers), the manes, the gods, the demons and men, all worshipped the Lord through 
sacrifices. (29) This universe, O Narada, rests on the support of the same Lord Narayana, 
who, though essentially devoid of all attributes, assumes innumerable attributes at the dawn. 
of creation by His Maya. (30) | create the universe as commissioned by Him; Lord Hara. 
(Siva), under His control, dissolves it; while He Himself as the Purusa (Lord Visnu) preserves : 
it. In fact, itis He who has assumed the three powers of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas (severally 
for the purpose of creation, protection and dissolution). (81)Thus, dear son, have | told you 
what you enquired of me. There is nothing in this creation, whether existing as a cause OF. 
an effect, which is other than the Lord. (82) My words, dear Narada, are never observed to. 
be false; my mind too never conceives a false idea and my senses are never led astray either. 
This is because | have ever contemplated on Sri Hari with a longing heart. (33) | am Veda: 
personified, my life is full of austere penance and | am the lord of Prajapatis (the progenitors. . 
of races) and adored by them all; nay, | practised Yoga in all thoroughness with a. 
concentrated mind. Yet | failed to realize Him to whom | owe my existence. (34) | bow to His . 
most blessed feet, which are the home of all auspiciousness and end the cycle of birth and 
death in the case of those who take refuge in Him. Even as the sky knows not its limits He. 
too is unable to realize the extent of His own Maya (deluding potency); how, then, can others 
know it ? (35) Neither myself nor you (my sons) nor even Vamadeva (Lord Siva) knows His 





Dis. 6 ] -- BOOK TWO : 109 


Be Be We Ke We Be Wee He Wee We Ve We Hee We We We We He We We We He We Wee Mee Hee eee Wes Ve He He He He Hee eRe Ke MORE MRR Ke eRe He Re Re Re RM Re Hee We ie We ee Bee He Be Hee He He Ge 
i 





true nature; how, then, could the other gods knowit ? Our mind is so confounded that we fail 
to comprehend the reality even of this universe, whichis a creation of His Maya, but 
merely speculate about it according to our own understanding. (36) 


aad mara weaaed:ia a faced acd dH Wiad AA: 1301 
a Wl Sel: Gee: Hed Hed Ga: | sessesMSssaM Aaaola a ula a 13cl 
fags has AM seH BaMakeayqiaad giaaerd for free 139! 
ma faeha Gaa: seiaiePear: | ae 40 - deal ate fecta eitaa fey Ivo} 
Sasa: GSS: OR HT: «=I: Ss AT 
sa fant man shai fame woe era afta wa: 1x2! 
ae Val at sh se aaa a waaay | 
alae: TTA JOH: 1S? I 
Tela fare eaI CANON a AMAA: | 
a al A OMTA AT: faguri ceases: | 
ara a a Walaareanyaqapwausalerymasaeaian: 1s | 
ake ad oh Wleteadhdeae Foad aad 
sitgtlasyarctacagaral ara ut WAAR 1S | 
Tara «= aaa CIN See: I 
sda HUleeTaaaet CU (SHC TTL XG 
Sa SEMA AST TAS Shera factraehal TBISEATA: 1 | 
Hail to that Lord whose descent in the world of matter and exploits (in the course of such 
descent) myself and others constantly sing, but whom none of us knows in reality. (37) That 
unborn Primal Person Himself creates, protects and dissolves Himself (in the form of this 
universe) within Himself and by Himself, cycle after cycle. (88) He is pure (Subjective) 
absolute consciousness uniformly abiding as the inner Self of all. He is ever true and perfect, 
has no beginning or end, andis attributeless, eternal and one without a second. (39) Narada, 
those who are given to contemplation realize Him only when they have perfectly subdued 
their body, senses and mind. He, however, disappears from our view when He is assailed 
by the sophistical reasoning of the wicked. (40) The first manifestation of the Supreme is the 
Purusa (the Cosmic Being). Besides Him, Time, Swabhava (innate disposition), Prakrtiin the 
form of cause and effect, and mind, the five gross elements, the Ego, the modes of Prakrti 
(viz., Sattva etc.), the senses, the Cosmic Body, the Cosmic Being and the bodies of all 
animate and inanimate beings are all manifestations of the all-pervading Lord. (41) Nay, 
myself, Bhava (Lord Siva), Lord Visnu, these lords of created beings, Daksa and others, nay, 
yourself and other devotees like you, the protectors of heaven (Indra and others), the 
guardians of the feathered kingdom (Garuda and so on), the rulers of the mortal world and 
the protectors of the subterranean regions (Sesa and others); the lords of the Gandharvas 
(the celestial musicians), Vidyadharas and Caranas (the celestial bards): the leaders of the 
Yaksas, the Raksasas, the serpents and the Nagas; the foremost among the Rsis (seers) 
and the manes; the lords of the Daityas, the Siddhas and the Danavas; other than these, 
Such as the rulers of the Pretas, PiSacas, Bhitas, Kasmandas, aquatic creatures, beasts and 


birds; nay, whatever in this world is endowed with supernatural powers, glory, vigour, 
resolution, physical strength and forbearance, or whatever is possessed of splendour, 











110 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


We Re Re Re eRe ee Re Re RR ROR RE ROR RR ROR RRR RRR A ROR ROR AR RR RRR RE RE RR RE MRE ROME Ke Me Ke Re He He Kee Bee Hee He A He Hee We We He We He Me Ke Ke He We We We wr 
he a I tet a ST A a 


decorum, good fortune and intellectual acumen, that which has a wonderful colour and 
whateveris with or without formis the same as the ultimate Truth. (42—44) Again, O Narada, 
the scriptures have described the chief among the sportful descents of the Lord, and | shall 
presently narrate those most delightful stories, which dry up the impurities of the ears. Please 
drink this nectar to your heart's content. (45) 


Thus ends the sixth discourse in Book Two of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita 


Dacat Cave FA 
DOTS IOS 


SIT UAAISeaTa: 


Discourse VII 
The stories of the Lord's sportful descents 


bey 


Sears 
wate: fattest faa mit aq anoaqadiaas: | 
srddeia 9 summaaecat «od =dpafsfea «amet ce! 2 | 
Brahma continued : When the infinite Lord assumed the form of the divine Boar, 
representing all kinds of sacrifices, and determined to lift the earth (from the bottom of the 
ocean), Hiranyaksa (the very first progeny of Diti) came upon Him (for an encounter) inside 


that great ocean and the Lord tore him to death with His tusks even as Indra (the wielder of 
the thunderbolt) clipped the wings of the mountains. (1) 


Tit Gawd Ga Baa stefagaqaa afar i 
Clnaga + vediete delle Miasyad Aaa afeiteren: | 2 | 


Next He was born as the son of Ruci ( who belonged to the class known as the Prajapatis 
or lords of created beings) and his wife Akuti ( a daughter of the very first Manu 
Swayambhuva) under the name of Suyajna (who held the position of Indra in the first, i.e., 
Swayambhuva Manvantara), and begot through His Consort, Daksina, a group of gods who 
bore the title of Suyama. When (as Indra) He relieved the great affliction of all the three 
worlds, He was renamed by Swayambhuva (His maternal grandfather) as Hari (the Reliever 
of distress). (2) 


Si dU meye fest caea alfa: aa aati wart | 
Sd Aaisseems Wregusater faya afar mf wai 3 | 
Again He was born, O Narada, as the son of Kardama (another Prajapati) and his wife 
Devahuti (under the name of Kapila) with nine sisters, and imparted to His mother the 
Knowledge of the spirit, by means of which she wiped off in the course of that very life the 


dirt of attachment to the world of matter, which had polluted her heart,and attained to the 
state of Kapila (i.e., final beatitude). (3) 2 


SAMs se Isl ad Aateia aa war A ad: | 
Aer gS Ta ferAce anTegare tat aeeeatell: | ¥ | ‘ 


Pleased with the sage Atri (one of the seven sages who held the office of the Saptarsis 


Dis. 7 ] BOOK TWO 111 


Be Be Br Be Be Be Gr Ke He Ke Ke Be Ke Ke He He Be Ke Be Ge Re Ke Be Ge Ve He Hr Ke Hr Ke He Ke Ke We Ke Be Ke Be Be Ke Ke Be Fe Be Le Be Re REC KE BEEBE BBE Be BEBEBE BEBE Be BEBE BEBE BEBE BEBE BEBE BE BEBE BEEN! 





during the first Manvantara and was so-called because he had transcended the three Gunas 
or modes of Prakrti), wno sought from Him a son, He said, "| have given Myself as a son to 
you !" That is why the Lord became known by the name of Datta* (when He was born as 
a son of Atri). Purified in body by the dust of His lotus-feet, Yadu, Sahasrabahu (who was 
born in the clan of Ksatriyas bearing the title of 'Haihaya' ) and other kings realized the twofold 
consummation of Yoga (in the shape of enjoyment and liberation). (4) 


wd aa fafaaornfrgeran A siet Ga WAI: A Ad: aaSye | 


VAL Wie Waal aAeaataiar & | 
At the dawn of creation | (Brahma) practised austerity for the purpose of creating the 
various worlds. As a result of that penance of mine the eternal Lord appeared in the form 
of the four brothers (Sanatkumara, Sanaka, Sanandana and Sanatana), all of whom bear the 
word ‘Sana’ as a part of their names, and fully expounded in the present Kalpa the truth of 
the Spirit, which had been lost during the Dissolution at the end of the preceding Kalpa, and 
which the sages forthwith perceived in their heart (as a result of that exposition). (5) 


aa aadeddtas Wat ATAU at sft Waa-wsa: | 

qBissat wad Mamaemd tanatgudt aed A stp: & | 

Md ced pial Aq Weesar We cea A A caw! 

asa genase sia fasta ama: Het 4 Ge AA: Had 1 9 | 

Of Murti, a daughter of Daksa and the wife of Dharma (the god of virtue), He was born 

as the twin sages Narayana and Nara, who were unequalled in the glory of their austere 
penance. The celestial nymphs who accompanied the god of love as his army to conquer 
them beheld there other nymphs, as charming as themselves, evolved by dint of their Yogic 
power, and could not violate the sanctity of their vow. (6) Pious souls (like Lord Siva) may 
burn down the god of love with their angry look; but they cannot burn anger, which they 
find too much to endure and which burns their own self. Such anger is afraid to enter the 
pure heart of the divine sages Nara and Narayana; how, then, could lust ever penetrate 
their mind ? (7) 

fag: eurdenumiata ua west aqua aah | 

ARN Bele Yanks Word waa feen: wata Frat Aqueereda | ¢ | 


Pierced by the shaft-like words of his step-mother (Suruci) in the presence of his royal 
father (king Uttanapada), Dhruva, who was yet a child, betook himself to the woods to 
practise austere penance. Pleased with the praises that he uttered, the Lord bestowed upon 
him an eternal abode (in the shape of the polar star) which celestial sages extol (to this day) 
While coursing round it both up and down. (8) 


wae «86 fastaranawfageareeert = RA UT 
areaIRiat waft qaad a Sa een agh ager ano a1 ¢ | 


___ King Vena (a descendant of Dhruva) having gone astray, all his power and fortune was 
burnt by the thunderbolt of the Brahmanas' curse and he was about to descend into hell. 
When, therefore, the Brahmanas prayed to the Lord, He appeared in the form of Prthu 
(through the churning of Vena's dead body) and rescued Vena, thus earning the epithet of 
"Putra! (a son).t It was He again who used the earth as a cow and milked all its rich produce 


* 'Datta' is a passive past particle from the root ‘Da’ (to give) and therefore means “ Given”. 
t ‘Putra ‘ (Put+tra) literally means he who saves his father from the hell named ‘Put, into which a man dying without a 
son is hurled— 


3) + UA Atare Fed Alaa frat Ya: | Tea YA Sa Whe: LaaAa Laaryar Il 
(Manu) 











112 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


Be Re Be Re Re Be Ree Re Re Re Re Be RR RRR RE REE RE RE RR RE REE RRR BRE Re BE Re RET BE HERE RE RE He Be Me Be Bee Be Br Be Re He Be He Br Hr He He Br Hr Hr Hr He Sr Hr Hr Br Sy Fr Hr dy 





(in the shape of foodgrains etc.) for the benefit of the world. (9) 

qMIGNN sta weal a wean aaa wearreaaiy 

SORHeGa: Ucn GR: Wee: UawMAG: 1kol 

He was (further) born of king Nabhi and his wife, Sudevi (Merudevi), as Rsabha, who 

having completely rid Himself of all attachment and thoroughly composed His mind and 
senses, established Himself in His spiritual essence and, regarding everything with the same 
eye, practised uninterrupted meditation, appearing as an idiot; which state has been spoken 
of by great seers as the state of a Paramahamsa ( one who is ever absorbed in abstract 
meditation). (10) 


GA AAA War a BRAIN Aaa A Anqeqadiaanyn: | 
Sala AAAAshascada Atel Ayer: WAASA AST: 1221 


The same Lord, who presides over and is worshipped in all sacrifices, personally 
appeared at my (Brahméa's) sacrifice as Hayagriva (one who has the head of a horse), with 
a golden complexion, who is Veda personified and represents all the sacrifices and all the 
deities in His person and from whose nostrils, even as He breathed, issued forth the holy 
Vedas. (11) 


Teal GIdaAa Aqdec: atuiaar ffaesitattenrecha: | 
fadfaaeua alee mart ste at fase @ aan 122! 


During the universal dissolution (at the end of the sixth or Caksusa Manvantara, that 
preceding the present one) the would-be Manu (king Satyavrata) beheld the Lord in the form 
of the divine Fish, who, being the stay of the earth (that appeared in the form of a boat), 
supported all classes of living beings. Picking up the Vedas, that had dropped from my 
(Brahma’'s) mouth into the most dreadful ocean (that had washed away and submerged the 
entire creation), He continued to sport therein (till.the next creation). (12) 7 


steer eMaAqAa Ay AAA ATA amfeca: | 
Wet mescagideam mM  Fatenstaftadnarrnve: 1231 


When the leaders of the immortals and the Danava chiefs commenced churning the 
ocean of milk to get nectar out of it, the primal Deity assumed the form of the divine Tortoise 
and bore on His back Mount Mandara (which served as the churnin god). Now as the 
mountain revolved on His back, the friction relieved the itching thereon and brought Him 
nap. (13) BE 


Aastewa a dead pal wieyHlecpaneaaan | 
esa, Teawadrdaniet form fac aa: BAcAT ex 


In order to dispel the great fear of the gods (the denizens of heaven) the Lord assumed 
the form of a Man-Lion (Nrsimha) with a face which looked most frightful on account of His 
restless eyebrows and moving jaws. When the demon chief (HiranyakaSipu, elder brother 
of Hiranyaksa) assailed Him with a mace from a distance, the Lord quickly (seized and) threw _ 
him down on His thighs; and even as he tried to wriggle out, the Lord ripped up his belly with 
His claws. (14) 


AUAeIed Ud Yeltl MeN y_eafacaseed sid: | 

steaneqetitaeclnna diets: AAAS AMAIA 12% | 
Tal Sheet aaa Hee: UMISYSHeRAS: | i 
ao aAmdet fafater AMISM We War queen 1261 ps 


Seized by the foot inside a lake by an alligator of vast strength, the famous elephant (who 


, at. 


Dis. 7 ] BOOK TWO 113 


Sr Br Br Br Br Be Gr Br Be Br Ke Hr Br He We Be Ke He Ke Be Be We Gr Ge He Be Br Br We Br Ke Be Be Se Be Ke Br Hr Ke Ke He Ke Ke Ke Be We Ke He Ke He He Ke Ke e Ke Ke We He Ke Be Be Be Ke Ke Ke He We Be Hr Be Br Be Be BeBe Be Be Be Be Me Ke He 
————————————- Sass 


happened to be the leader of his herd) felt much distressed and, holding up a lotus in his trunk, 
called out thus: “O Primal Person, O Protector of all the worlds, O Lord of sacred renown, 
Whose names are auspicious to hear !" (15) Hearing his invocation, the infinite Lord Sri Hari 
appeared on the scene, armed with His celebrated discus (Sudargana) and mounted on the 
shoulders of Garuda (the king of the birds). He severed the head of the alligator with the 
discus and, taking the elephant, who sought His protection, by his trunk graciously rescued 
him (from the enemy's mortal grip). (16) 


RIM TORAASaAfet: Fart clear faa Sa Beeler: | 
ant aa we Ruased Areongd uf ae SYA aes: 1201 
Tat aerate: frat gqdadt faaenfret 
a a sear a faetdeaeenag fara wasas ic 


Though the youngest of all the (twelve) sons of Aditi, Lord Visnu (the Deity presiding over 
sacrifices) was the foremost among them in point of virtues, as is evidenced by the fact that 
He covered all the three worlds by His strides the moment king Bali gave Him the promise 
to grant Him land (measuring three paces). Although in the form of a dwarf He thus wrested 
the earth (from Bali) under the pretext of asking for land measuring three paces, He 
demonstrated to the world at large (by His example) that a man who sticks to the path of 
righteousness cannot be overthrown even by the all-powerful except through solicitation.(1 7) 
Dear Narada, to acquire sovereignty over the gods (the position of Indra)—this was not the 
object sought for by Bali, who placed on the crown of his head (as a token of reverence) the 
water in which the foot of the Lord (who had taken strides to measure the three worlds) had 
been washed, nay, who was not the least inclined to do anything other than that which he 
had solemnly undertaken (even though warned and cursed by his own preceptor, Sukracarya) 
but offered to Sri Hari his own body (to be measured as the third step) by placing his head 
at the Lord's feet. (18) 


qa a ane yt wan fagawed wes sat ar! 
WH Wd wmadaieaddd agqeaenon  facwma ies 
Un a feadfaed aq wat Aare Aqaaent fac | 
Spy Us a Sead Gal aa frag sedi seraasifer: 1201 


Immensely pleased with your highly developed devotion, O Narada, the Lord (appearing 
as the divine Hamsa) taught you the Yoga of Devotion as well as the divine wisdom, which 
is like a lamp to reveal the truth of the Spirit and which only men who have taken refuge in 
Lord Vasudevacan easily grasp.(19) In the various Manvantaras the Lord (appearing as the 
Manu) preserves the race of the Manus and wields His authority over all the ten directions— 
an authority which is unobstructed like the discus of Lord Visnu (Sudarsana)—spreading by 
His exploits His charming glory up to the highest heaven, Satyaloka, which lies even beyond 
Maharloka, Janaloka and Tapoloka, and inflicting punishment (in the capacity of Manu) on 
the wicked kings (from time to time). (20) 
eS TIAA War, Bada Hiliaial JUN Goostt Est Sal Ek | 

aq BA UMTAAdaae Bes ActasMeadad Goh 12e1 
' And, descending into this worlds as Dhanvantari (a king of Kasi), whois glory itself, the Lord, 


on the very utterance of His name, immediately cures the diseases of men who suffer from 
numerous ailments. Nay, He won the rank ofimmortals and gota sharein the sacnficial offerings.” 
bani hatin ed feet? Aletha Nestea ede ea lice Nol rate bne S e SE 


* The story of king Dhanvantari has been told at length in Harivamsa (Harivarnsa-Parva, 29) and there is a passing 
reference to Him in Srimad Bhagavata (IX.xvii. 4—29). 











SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


Re Re Re Be Re Be Re Re Re RR RE Re RE RR RRR RE ERT RE REE RE RE Re Re Re Re eee We er Be Me Be Be Kee Hr Be Hee Fe Be Ke Ke Ke Ke Kr Ke Ge Me Ke He Ke We We Hr He Be Ve Ke Hr Ke We We Ke Ke Kr Wr Br Ve yy, 





Again, it was He who taught (to the world) Ayurveda (the science of healthy and long 


life). (21) 
aq aaa fafiayd vere seers atenriciiong | 
Sera aenvemyaaaka:- aaa SSMRALAAA 1221 


When the Ksatriya race turns out to be the enemy (rather than the protector) of the 
Brahmanas and abandons the path of virtue, as if courting the tortures of hell, nay, when it 
becomes a veritable thorn in the side of the world and is exalted by Providence only for its 
destruction, the Supreme Spirit appears as Parasurama of tremendous prowess and 
exterminates it thrice seven times with His sharp-edged axe. (22) 

TATA: Hea Heal sedias sade Water | 
fsa at aaa sifada ahs faser agement sftaresa 123 | 
Ga sidlecitracvagaat ari auetgt ead feel: | 
a Genfaenragavesa TM AAAAI Ha: 12% 1 
Ae: WU eusesaleadiashadhpoyxs SETA | 
aeisai: ae farefa anadtapfsineigqa serdtsfiraat 1241 

Ever disposed to shower His grace on us (Brahma and the other gods), will the Lord of 
Maya take His descentin the line of Ikswaku (as SriRama) along with His part manifestations 
(Bharata, Laksmana and Satrughna) and in obedience to the command of His father (king 
Dasaratha) go in exile to the forest, accompanied by His Spouse (Sita) and younger brother 
(Laksmana). There the ten-headed monster (Ravana) will make Him his enemy and come 
to grief. (23). When Sri Rama (reaches the seashore), intent like Hara* (Lord Siva) upon 
burning His enemy's city, the whole host of alligators, serpents and crocodiles in the ocean 
will feel terribly oppressed by the very look of the Lord, whose eyes will turn crimson with 
wrath stirred by separation from His beloved Consort (Sita); and Ocean with his limbs all 
trembling due to fear will immediately allow Him a passage. (24) (During Ravana's encounter 
with Indra in the course of his conquest of the four quarters) the tusks of the elephant 
(Airavata) bearing Indra on its back were smashed as they struck against Ravana's breast; 
painting the quarters white with (the clouds of) their dust. This made Ravana, the conqueror 
of all the quarters, laugh (in exultation). When, however, he carries off the Lord's Spouse 
(Sita) and stalks (with pride) between the two contending armies (on the battle-field of 
Lanka), the Lord will immediately put an end to his laughter (pride) as well as his life with 
the mere twang of His bow. (25) 


qa: Ucaewfaneda: Bares meat fda: | 
id: SR sae: wafer areafeaaraeria i261 
Meat Slate deafnraraatna aA uel senelsuqu: | 
aq figdrderd felawenat, qed katara ae 1291 
aq a ast seq faadeadiem cetcasttaacquecieapar | 
dwaisitiasdidtaciotieqeeaae fae sferarirc 
dd ma feoaa ata fF: cdefrn afar afer | 
SAM AAAdisaddas AA fuera aaersaermadt: 1291 





* There is an allusion here to Lord Siva's famous expedition against the city of Tripura. 


Dis. 7 ] . ‘ BOOK TWO 115 


ae Be He We Wese Fe We Te Ge Ge We Be HeMe We Me He Ke He He We We He He Be We He Her Br Br We Me Be We Bee He We Ke He He We Me Ke Ke Ke Hee Me He Vee He We Be Wee eC Be Wee Bee GEE Be BeBe He Bee BeBe Be He He Ht Wr 


Telt AIQIATVMAGS AT Wrst YA A q adeqer aria | 
ASIASA Aart Yar Wat eater asa: wrasse, 130 | 
Te A Olea Vee Toor Trane Tar frog fafearegaat S| 
searad RI arate ath faqusqutea weap 132! 
Te sitet awfgara eashreadft aga quer fier: | 
edfhscratra wa fetht agait wdeaieet aeten 1321 
mist at it ferenkatat weaepe: aeaaaqse | 
sarees «6 aye «| oadeheafa «= far eT 1331 





a at 4a afafaante sitar: aaraistacetepechhagerarel: | 
Teas seuiitemiget awn feat adler 1341 

In order to relieve the oppression of the earth, which will be overrun by the armies of kings 
who are secondary incarnations of demons (the enemies of gods), the Lord will be partially 
born as Sri Balarama and Sri Krsna, representing severally a grey and a dark hair* of the 
Deity. In these forms He will perform feats bearing testimony to His greatness, even though 
His ways are beyond the comprehension of the common people. (26) To suck out the life of 
the demoness Ulukika (Putana) even as a new-born babe (of less than ten days), to turna 
cart upside down with His foot, while yet three months old, and to knock down two very high 
Arjuna trees while crawling on His hands and knees between them—all these feats are such 
as Cannot be conceived to have been performed by anyone else than the Lord Himself. (27) 
Living in Vraja, He will bring back to life the cattle of Vraja as well as their keepers—who meet 
their death by drinking the poisonous water of the Yamuna—by casting His gracious look at 
them. And further in order to purify the waters of the Yamuna He will sport in that river and 
expel the serpent Kaliya, whose tongue is ever restless due to the vehemence of the fierce 
poison. (28) The same night, when the (dry) forest of rushes (Surrounding them on all 
sides) begins to be consumed by wild fire and the entire Vraja is dead asleep (on the bank 
of the Yamuna), that Lord of incomprehensible power with Balarama will ask them to close 
their eyes, and save them from certain death. This exploit of the Lord will be indeed 
Supernatural.(29) Every cord that His mother (YaSoda) catches hold of to bind her Child 
with will prove inadequate. Nay, when the cowherd lady (Yasoda) beholds the (fourteen) 
spheres in His mouth, even as He yawns, she will at first be filled with dismay and then 
she will be roused to a sense of His supreme divinity. (30) Again, He will rid His father 
Nanda of fear (of the python) and deliver Him from Varuna's noose and will further rescue 
the cowherd boys that will be shut up in caves by the demon Vyoma (Maya's son). Nay, 
He will take to His own (eternal and blissful) Abode, Vaikuntha, the people of Gokula, even 
though they remain working all day long and, due to over-exertion, sleep as a log at 
night.(31) When, on the yearly sacrificial offering (to Indra) being stopped by the cowherds 
(Nanda and others), the god of rain will pour down torrential showers all over the territory 
Of Vraja for the destruction of that land, the Lord in His anxiety to protect (them as well as) 








* By speaking of Sri Balarama and Sri Krsna as representing the Lord's hair Brahma means to say that a single hair 
(the minutest fraction) of the Lord is enough to relieve to earth's burden. The statement is further intended to indicate the 
fair and dark complexion of Sri Balarama and Sri Krsna respectively. In reality, however, Sri Krsna is the integral Divinity, 
the Lord Himself— ‘qumeq war tay’. 








116 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


Wr We Wr Re Ve Ve Ke Ve Vee We Ke eRe Ke Be Be Re Be Be Be Bee Be ee eT BET Re Ke Mee Ree We ee We He Me Ke Ke We Re Ke Me Hr Kr We He Ge Ke Ke Ge Ge Ge Sr We Ke Mr Br Sr Ke Hr Se Hr Hr Ke We Hr Hr Ke Wr Ke Ke Hr He dy 
LS 


their cattle will, at the (tender) age of seven, graciously and sportfully hold up on His untiring 
hand Mount Govardhana even as a tall mushroom for seven days (consecutively). (32) 
While sporting in the groves (of Vrndavana) on a night bright with the rays of the full moon, 
He will, as a prelude to His Rasa dance, pour out (from His flute) a sweet and prolonged 
melody, which will kindle the flame of love in the heart of the young cowherdesses (and 
draw them to the lovely spot). (In the course of the Rasa dance that follows) an attendant 
of Kubera (Sankhactda by name) will carry them off and the Lord (while rescuing them) 
will sever his head* (33) Nay, (demons like) Pralamba, Dnenuka (who lived in the form of 
a donkey), Vaka, Kesi and Arista, champion wrestlers (such as Canura), the elephant 
(Kuvalayapida), Kamsa, the Yavana hero (Kalayavana), the demon Naraka (born of Earth), 
Paundraka (who had assumed the false appearance of Sri Krsna and posed as the real Sri 
Krsna) and so on; even so other champions like Salva, Dwivida (the monkey chief), Balwala, 
Dantavaktra, the seven bulls (of king Nagnajit), the demon Sambara, king Viduratha 
(Dantavaktra's brother) and Rukmi (brother of Rukmini); the kings of the Kambojas, the 
Matsyas, the Kurus, the Kekayas, the Srfjayas, and other bragging warriors who will appear 
on the field of battle, armed with a bow, will be slain by Sri Hari Himself under the assumed 
names of Balarama, Arjuna, Bhima and so on, and attain to His divine Abode. (34-35) 


By flux of time the intellectual calibre of men gets dwarfed and their life too becomes 
short. When, therefore, the Lord realizes that the import of the entire Veda—which 
embodies His teachings—can no longer be grasped by them, He manifests Himself in 
every cycle through the womb of Satyavati (as Vedavyasa) and splits up the tree of Veda 
into many branches. (36) 


cafgst Femacifa fisarit ghitaa fafenfesaqht: | 
wea Hat Aftfeaarentarerst ae faera ag werd sttoerehy 13001 
aaioaga Adal aR: HM: A: arafveat fH quent year: | 
lel MN asista H Pe a aA re Alcea HATA BIA 13 C1 


When the demons (the enemies of the gods), though devoted to the path of the Vedas, 
will destroy the people with their (aerial) citadels of invisible velocity, built by Maya (their 
architect), the Lord will assume a garb that will delude their mind and prove most alluring to 
them, and teach them many a heresy. (37) At the close of the Kali age, when there will be 
no discourses on Sri Hari even in the residences of pious souls, when the twice-born (the 
Brahmanas, the Ksatriyas and the Vaisyas) will turn heretics and the Stdras will become 
the rulers of men, nay, when the uttering of "Swaha", "Swadha" and "Vasat"t will be heard 
no more (when there will be no talk of sacrifices to gods of offering oblations to the manes), 
the Lord will appear as Kalki (the Punisher of Kali). (38) 


at qiseqaal aa ad wean: WA a adiaananuedian: | 
3rd aad eta aang eell Arata yaa Sal: Tealkeh ast: 1381 
fas dior wanisedte a: uftiarat afafdaad wife | 
* Although the incident connected with Sankhacida did not occur the very night the famous Rasa dance took place, 


the two events have been promiscuously joined together apparently because Brahma is making only a passing reference 
to the pastimes of the Lord and is not so attentive to details. 





+The words 'Swaha’ and 'Vasat’ are uttered when an offering is made to the gods; while every oblation that is offered to 
the Pitrs is accompanied with the utterance of the word ‘Swadha’. 


Dis. 7 |] BOOK TWO 117 


Be We Ke Be Ge We Ge Ke Fe We We Ge We Ge we Ge Ke We Me Ke We Ge Ke He He Ke He We We Mr He We We He Me He He Ke We He We Bee Be Me We We He Be He He We He Ge He He Hr He We We We We Ve He We Br We Me He He He He We Be Pe He Be He Fe Se He He 


Te a: eee Is aed Prarataetigen Maat 1¥o | 
ard fanart qa Aaa Gere qHelsat a | 
Ma WU, aaa sitfeca: Btetseyara AAaei ATA UA 1S! 
aa UT Wa War added: Palamisstrauel afe Freieiten | 
aq genmanra a tana vet amefafa ett: wpmeswed 1x2! 
aqeag uma fe ana gi wag uname eqead: | 
uel Wal: WU WAT aalenngs weak ys sq qa 1x3! 
SAAT HOH alaea MEET AITAT TEAATESTEM: | 
WRaehadstadeal «= eae «= feeaicay «= fit: vx 
Starrs Rarfadac troreeanad gaqaaeayheaUT: 
asa fasitaurequgd seria eantiagradeaaat: 1S | 
a a fagafanta a tana eiqgeurre sft orasitar: 
Tigi ste fq aaron 8 ie! 


It is the same Lord of infinite powers who manifests the glories of His Maya (marvellous 
creative faculty) in the form of austere penance, myself (Brahma) and the nine seers who are 
the lords of created beings, at the time of creation, in the form of Dharma (the god of virtue), — 
Lord Visnu (the Deity presiding over sacrifices), the fourteen Manus (the progenitors and 
protectors of mankind), the immortals and the rulers of the earth, at the time of preservation 
and in the form of Adharma (the spirit of unrighteousness), Hara (the god of destruction), the 
class of serpents (residing in the nethermost regions) known by the name of Manyuvasas 
and demons etc., at the time of dissolution of the universe. (39) What man, gifted with insight, 
in this world could catalogue the powers of Lord Visnu, even though he might have counted 
all the particles of dust on the earth ? (As the Lord proceeded to measure the three worlds 
with His strides), He raised His legs with such irresistible force that the whole universe from 
the outermost sheath of Prakrti (primordial matter) to the highest heaven (Satyaloka) began 
to shake violently, when He supported it by His own might. (40) ( O Narada !) neither myself 
nor those elder brothers of yours (Sanaka and others) know the whole truth about the Lord, 
who is a storehouse of innumerable potencies, Maya (who brings forth and withdraws into 
herself the entire creation) being one of them. How, then, could others know It ? Even the 
Primal Deity, Lord Sesa (the serpent-god); who is possessed of a thousand mouths, cannot 
reach His end even to this day, though he has been singing His praises (from eternity). (41) 
They alone are able to cross the Lord's Maya (deluding potency), so difficult to get over, and 
know it in reality, to whom that infinite Lord extends His grace, which is possible only when 
they take refuge in His feet with their whole being and in a guileless manner. And it is these 
alone who cease to look upon their body, which is the food of dogs and jackals, as their self 
Or as their own. (42) Dear Narada, it is | who know the wonderful creative energy of that 
Supreme Being, and so do you and your elder brothers (Sanaka and others), Lord Bhava 
(Siva), Prahlada (the foremost of the Daityas), the celebrated Swayambhuva Manu and his 
wife (Satara), as well as their sons and daughters, kings Pracinabarhi, Rbhu, Anga and 
Dhruva; even so kings Ikswaku (the eldest son of Vaivaswata Manu), Purtrava (the son of 
lla), Mucukunda, Videha (Janaka), Gadhi (father of the celebrated sage Viswamitra), Raghu, 
Ambarisa, Sagara, Gaya, Yayati (the son of Nahusa) and others; and similarly kings 
Mandhata, Alarka, Satadhanu, Anu and Rantideva; Devavrata (Bhisma), the demon king 
Bali as well as kings Amurtaraya and Dilipa; the sages Saubhari, Uttanka, Devala, 
Pippalada, Saraswata and ParaSara as well as kings Sibi and Bhirisena and devotees like 














118 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


Be BeBe Ke Br Be Vee Be Ve Ke BeBe Ke Ke Be BeBe eRe Ke BA BeBe Bee Be Be Be Be Be BeBe Be Rr We Me Be We Br Be Ge We We Hr Ve Be Hi Me Be x Br Br Ke Me Ge By Be He Ke Be Sr Be Be Hr Be Ke Lr He Br Hr Ke Ke Ke Ke Ge We Pe Kr wy 
_—— 


Uddhava, Vibhisana, Hanuman, Upendradaita (Suka), Arjuna (Prtha's son), Arstisena, 
Vidura and Srutadeva know His Maya. (43—45) Women and Sudras (members of the 
labouring and artisan classes) as well as the Hunas and Sabaras and those leading a sinful 
life, nay, even lower animals such as birds and beasts who have been taught to imbibe the 
virtues of the Lord's devotees, much more those who follow the teachings of the Vedas, are 
able to realize the true nature of the Lord's Maya and cross the same. (46) 


Tad Wada sida We AA Wada: waa | 
eal A Ba Yseeitchar fare arn wae a fast ive! 
dq a ud Wad: we Gal sella aa fagetadqa faster 
awe feat adal anendeft Sa: wufsa Poraatrs: ix 
a daar fayette adisa sreraiafatera aa: sats: | 
ee RMdiatasqasitamnt ama at gqeat a faritecsa: ive 


The substance of the Supreme Spirit is ever most serene and free from fear and of the 
nature of absolute consciousness. It is untainted by Maya, and destitute of all diversities and 
is beyond the real as well as the unreal. It is beyond the reach of words (both sacred and 
profane) and transcends the fruit of actions which is attained as a result of diverse course 
of discipline. Nay, even Maya, who is ashamed to stand before It, flees away from Its 
presence. (47) That is the essential character of the Lord, the Supreme Person, which the 
wise realize as Brahma (the Absolute), which is free from sorrow and of the nature of eternal 
bliss. Having fixed their mind on Him, ascetics neglect even the means of discarding the 
notion of difference (viz., Self-Knowledge), just as Indra, being himself the god of rain, has 
no use fora spade which is employed in digging wells. (48) Itis the Lord, again, who bestows 
on man the fruit of his actions; for it §s He who inspires all noble acts that are performed in 
accordance with the natural disposition of the doer. Even when the body gets dissolved as 
a result of its constituents in the form of the elements being disintegrated, the unborn Spirit 
dwelling in it does not, any more than the ether interpenetrating it. (49) 


asa asfafedena wae fagaied: | aaa seidesend aad Adio! 

4 Wad AA at wnadiem i aresa faydiat aaa fagetee 148! 

am al wala zo vfmrfaeial aaicahacte sit ase aula 1421 

Wa 28 AUaISAS Ss SALAM ed: | YUad: sega fel ATaaISSeM A Wallet 1431 

Sia AAeMad AEM URAER Sted fede AeAReaale AAAS: 191 

Thus have | talked to you in brief, dear child, about the Lord who creates the universe by 
His very thought. Whatever there exists as cause or effect is no other than Sri Hari, although 
the latter stands even apart from it. (50) This is the ‘Bhagavata' which the Lord was pleased 
fo teach me. It describes in brief the glories of the Lord : do you now expand it. (51) Proceed 
with this work of amplification with a will that men may develop devotion to Lord Sri Hari, the 
Universal Spirit and the Sustainer of all. (52) The mind of the man, who proceeds to describe 


the Lord's Maya, or approves of another describing it or reverently hears it described 
everyday, is never deluded by Maya. (53) 


Thus ends the seventh discourse in Book Two, comprising among other things 
the dialogue between Brahma and the sage Narada, of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PISS RR ye 


Dis. 8 ] BOOK TWO 119 


hr Br Bt Br Br Be Be Be He Wr eRe Be we Ke Ke Be Ke Ke Ke Be Be He Ke Ke Be Pe Ke ee Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Be Bee Hee Ke Ke We Me We He Ke Ke Ke Hr Be We Ke Be He He Kr Se He Be He Br Kr Br Ke Be Ke Ge Ke Be Be Ke Be We He Gr HTM 
a I II III 


STIATIASeaa: 


Discourse VIII 
King Pariksit asks various questions of the sage Suka 


THAT 
Fa Aled Te Tes alas ae ae swe ancl aacsia: 1 2 | 
Wie afegtant ad ace aimuadda ae Claqdget: | 2 | 
aut Fart 86 aetna | pent faze Fag wae Hea! 3 | 
Vad: se a Woras wes area arfadetor sama faa aeix 
stags: aU MT | eee alfa BAS HET: Glos AM A! & | 
aaa Yee: MTS aA ysfti qwmaduhse: urw Gat aati «| 


The king said : Narada is wont to reveal the form of the Lord (to those who are ripe for 
His sight), O holy sage. Therefore, when Brahma (the Creator) urged him to describe (at 
length) the virtues of the Lord who transcends the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), to what 
particular individuals did he discourse about those virtues and in what manner ? (1) | am 
curious to know this in reality (from you), who are foremost among the knowers of the Vedas; 
for the stories of Sri Hari, who possesses marvellous powers, are a source of the highest 
blessing to the world. (2) Tell me, highly blessed sage, how am | to fix my mind which Is free 
from all attachment, on Sri Krsna, the Soul of the universe, before casting off this body ? (3) 
The Lord enters before long the heart of the man who daily listens with reverence to His 
stories and also narrates His doings. (4) Reaching the lotus of His devotees, heart through 
the cavity of their ears, Sri Krsna rids it of all impurities even as autumn turns the water (of 
rivers etc.) clear. (5) He whose heart is thus purified is rid of all afflictions (of mundane life) 
and would never abandon the soles of His feet, just as a traveller (who has returned home) 
after a long and tedious journey would not leave his own roof. (6) 


aeadad se eeNasa angi: | aqesar eal al aed Ad aa wo | 

Sele AEA, Ul MIHARIASAONL| aaa aA Yee sadlaaad: yar | 
daratatd sip: Aeataataataa | 2 | 

a: Uae ya ya aaqwediagel aA aga afaodaqea: |< | 

@ ala aa geet fanfare: | YaRaIsSHAra Alaa: At Payee: 1201 

yesaaacie: aaiet: Yaerfead: | oreaaeraage:  waarekit  Wrieet 


The soul, O divine sage, has no connection with the elements (matter); yetit takes a body 
which is made up of these very elements. You know in reality whether this happens as a 
matter of course or due to some causes (Karma etc.). (7) The Lord, from whose abdomen 
(navel) sprang up the lotus representing the fourteen worlds, has been spoken of as distinctly 
endowed with the same limbs and the same number of limbs as an ordinary human being, 
the measurements alone being His own. Hence He is just like a common man. (In what way, 
then, does He differ from man 7?) (8) Itis by His grace that Brahma, who represents all beings, 
creates them: and itis by His grace alone, that he was able to behold His divine form, though 
born of the lotus sprung from His navel. (9)Where does that Supreme Person, whois the Lord 
of Maya and the Indweller of all hearts, and from whom proceed the creation, preservation 
and destruction of the universe, rest after throwing off (the veil of) His Maya? (10) We have 
heard from yourself that the various worlds together with their guardian deities were formerly 











420 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8 


Re Re Re Ree Ree Re Re Ke Re Re RR Re REE RE EET RE REE RE REE ERE RE RRR RE RE RR RRR RY Re Be Re TY Me Re Br Re Me Re Be Ke Be He He Ke We BT Be He He Ke Be eB We Ke Me He Re Ke Be He Ke-sy-w, 





conceived in the limbs of the Supreme Person, and then again they were conceived as His 

limbs. (11 
a eg cer erp’ Wave BGA WA Ad Ad: 122! 
mead gq wets geaftiaqaa: wind  aresitfgstada 13 
ae oatamaat an aaaqed dora afer aa ofomasiicrar iex 
SOTA epee AeA AA TAL, | afcaraqsetari ARTA RATA 12% | 
YQUMAUSI «| AIIAHed: «= edt SC Aah «Ss UTIsTHfafasya: 12K! 
qm aad a at ay at aqtistadtdekd aarsydat at eu 
Jot aremon ed: afastasy area: | Moat Uersion a et: Greasy staal 1801 
Ta URES SAT edeave| yeouefatsatreneaiaHs A 1221 
anaass tsa afar | aatadeeatonfatreraqeorat: 1201 
aga: ddyaei fama: sfadna: | ssmode ara fate a at fafa: 1221 
aga wt: Wasa A Aa: | Se SAMA A Aa BAIA: 1221 
aMssada War fanaa | fages at aan Arama Urlstae fay: 123 | 
adtdd Wie Yast ASqa: | awadiseeeled Wad Aes irexi 
3A wa fe Var UMS aessay: 1 ut AeMfasfa yaar gas: Haul 
qa asda: Wad sadadgeedt! fadsaadigeaaa plod fesme ire 


What is the length of a Mahakalpa and smaller Kalpas (Vikalpas) ? How is (the passage 
of) time which is referred to by the words 'past','future’ and ‘present’ to be known ? And what 
is the allotted span of life of creatures that have identified themselves with their physical 
body? (12) Again, how can the subtle and long movements of time be perceived ? And how 
many destinies are there to be reached through Karma (action) and what is their character, 
O noblest sage ? (13) Of the Jivas (embodied souls) who seek the fruit of the three Gunas 
(in the shape of birth in the higher or lower species of life) what type of Jivas resort to what 
kind of action in what manner and for what kind of fruit ? (14) How do the earth and Patala 
(the nethermost sphere), the four quarters and the sky, the planets and the stars, the 
mountains and rivers, seas and islands and the creatures inhabiting these come into 
existence ? (15) What are the dimensions of the egg-shaped universe, within and without ? 
Pray, tell me also the stories of exalted souls and the distinctive character of the different 
Varnas (grades of society) and Asramas (stages of life). (16) Kindly also let me know the 
characteristics of the various Yugas, the duration of each and the course of duties prescribed 
for each, on the one hand, and the most wonderful stories of Sri Hari's descent (in the world 
of matter) on the other. (17) What are the common duties enjoined on men (in general) and 
what are their special duties ? Again, what are the duties peculiar to men following the 
different trades ? Further let me know the duties of royal sages as well as of men living in 
adverse circumstances. (18) Kindly also tell me the number of the various categories 
(ultimate principles), their distinctive character as also their characteristic causality in respect 
of certain other categories, the method of worshipping the Supreme Person as well as of the 
Yoga taught by the sage Patanjali (what is known as the Astangayoga or Yoga with its eight 
limbs). (19) Again, what are the powers acquired by masters of Yoga and what is their 
destiny? And how does the Linga Sarira (subtle body) of the Yogis dissolve ? Again, what 
‘ is the distinctive character and the theme of the Vedas and the subsidiary Vedas (such as 


‘ 


Dis. 8 | BOOK TWO 121 


Be Wr Hr wr Be Kr Ke Hr He Ke Kr Sr Hr Sr Gr Wr Hr Hr Ke Hr Kr Hr Kr He Ke He He Kr Be He Hr Hr Kr Hr Hr Ke Me Ke Kr Hr He Br Br Hr Hr Hr Ke We Ke Ke Ke Ke We Be He Be He Ke He We Ke Ve Be Ge He We Ge He Me We We Be Ke He He Be Ke He Pe Be We He 


Ayurveda or'the science of medicine) as well as of the Dharma-Sastra (the books on law), 
the Itinasas (epics) and Puranas ? (20) How do the creation, preservation and dissolution 
of all beings take place ? And what is the process of performing Vedic rites and works 
recommended by the Smrti texts (such as the digging of big and small wells and tanks, 
construction of temples to gods and gardens etc., and bestowing food* ) as well as acts 
which are prompted by some selfish desire ? Again, what is the unobjectionable method of 
pursuing the three objects of human aspiration (viz., Artha or worldly possessions, Dharma 
or religious merit and Kama or sensuous enjoyment)? (21) How are the Jivas whose 
individuality has been merged in Prakrti (Primordial Matter) during a Mahapralaya (the 
dissolution of the universe that takes place at the end of a Brahma's life) invested with a body 
again ? And how does a heretical doctrine make its appearance? What is meant by the 
bondage and emancipation of a soul and, again,what is meant by the soul realizing its true 
character ? (22) How does the Lord, who is absolutely independent and all-pervading, sport 
with His own Maya and how after throwing off (the veil of) His Maya does He stand 
unconcerned as a witness? (23) O great and divine sage, pray, tell me all this in reality one 
after another, since | have approached you with the above questions and have sought refuge 
in you. (24) You are an authority on these subjects just like the self-born Brahma (the highest 
god). Others, however, (blindiy) follow only what has been done by the ancestors of those 
who have gone before them. (25) Rest assured, O divine sage, that this life of mine is not 
going to depart but for (the curse of) the enraged Brahmana, even though | am abstaining 
from all food, drinking as | am the nectar (dripping from your mouth) in the form of the stories 
of Lord Acyuta. (26) 
Yd Sa 

a samtadt wat aera aad: i sea yar sit fawn dale ize! 

we Wad AA GUot seaman Wadikh AeleHcd sand 12! 

ae ad Uifeess: $= oMgaMagesta | straqgetor AMAA ATTaAHA 122 | 

ofa aeaerrad Here uae Gieaai fedtacH-t Wafafearaweais tara: | ¢ | 


Sita continued : Thus invited by king Pariksit, who had been rescued in his mother's 
womb by Lord Visnu (Sri Krsna) Himself, to narrate the stories of the noble Lord in the midst 
of that assembly (of sages), the sage Suka was highly pleased. (27) He expounded the same 
Bhagavata-Purana which had been taught by the Lord Himself to Brahma (the Creator) at 
the beginning of the Brahmakalpa (the very first Kalpa of the present round of creation), and 
which is held in the same esteem as the Vedas. (28) He proceeded to answer Seriatim all 
the questions that had been asked by Pariksit, the foremost of the scions of Pandu. (29) 


Thus ends the eighth discourse entitled “A Statement of Questions" 
in Book Two of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana , 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


POS ESR 





* aniipudernie cada A | SAVER: Gatrcaserad A 
(Manusmrti IV. 226) 











122 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9 


RB Be Re Re Be RE RR Br Re BeBe Be BER RR BET Re RE BE Re Be Re RE REA Br RB He Re HY BY AE Be Br Br HY Br BY Br Be Hr Me Hr Ke Kr He He Fr Fe Br Br Gr Br He He Br Ke He We Kr Br Kr Kr Hr kr 
eet EER LLL 


319 AaHSeara: 


Discourse IX 
Brahma beholds the divine Abode of the Lord and is taught by Him 
the text of the Bhagavata, consisting of four couplets only 
Mh Java 
saad «UCR: 1A eee: «= asp Rarerar |g 
aged safe = Araat «age aa gen | AaTefaia Att | 2 
ae aa ufefa 2 ate Hien: | Wa «| Taeeeecdiera «= dela! 3 
aeataagerst «= eS TAH Ae Saale MAI eHaTaa: | ¥ I 
Sri Suka said : Even as a man can have no connection whatsoever with the objects 
(seen by him in a dream), so can the soul, that transcends all material sheaths and is 
consciousness itself, have no connection in reality with the phenomena (of this world), O 
king, except through the Lord's Maya (deluding potency). (1) It is on account of this 
multiformed Maya that the Spirit too appears as endowed with diverse forms; and when he 
begins to take delight in the material objects of sense, he develops the feeling of 'I’and ‘mine’ 
(with reference to the body and all that pertains to it). (2) Rid of all delusion, however, when 
he begins to revel in the glory of his own self, which is beyond the realm of Time and beyond 
Maya (the Lord's deluding potency), he discards both these notions (of ‘I’ and 'mine') and 
transcends the three Gunas. (3) (I now proceed to expound) the truth which the Lord was 
pleased to teach Brahma, in order to enlighten him on the essential character of the Spirit, 
while revealing to him His own divine form in approbation of his true penance. (4) 


a stfecat sd at we: wfewanrena fagederd | 
aT Weare ama ama wosaalfatda vad & | 
a fadeq gaemtecsroepne faifet ae fay: 
wag 4 aaisadtcaiast fiat ya aq et fae: 1 «| 
era dapiegaiar «feet «= fata «= aa reuaeaa: | 
airman «9=6ofaqea odhgd )«=6aoeoes )§=6sateel «=a 1 9 I 
feet Aealecuareaeatar fatter fafearsatea soil 
dead 8 8Mha@eclnday  aueddiandad  # anrfed: ict 
sitting in his own abode (the lotus from which he had emanated), that primal deity, the 
supreme preceptor of all the three worlds, began to meditate with intent to proceed with the 
work of creation. But he failed to obtain the vision which is regarded as valuable for this 
purpose, and with the help of which the creation of the phenomenal world could be taken in 
hand. (5) While he was yet absorbed in thought, Brahma (the deity presiding over the entire 
creation) once heard near him in the causal waters a word of two syllables, viz., the sixteenth 
and the twenty-first letter- sounds among the twenty-five hard consonants (a and ¥=74,) i.e., 
practise penance) uttered twice. Itis this penance, O Pariksit, whichis known to be the wealth 
of men of renunciation. (6) On hearing this word, Brahma looked aboutin all directions, eager 
to behold the speaker. But, failing to perceive any other being, he resumed his seat on the 
lotus once more and, taking it to be a sound advice, set his heart on penance as if enjoined 
(by the Lord). (7) That foremost ascetic of all those given to austere penance, endowed as 


he was with unfailing vision, controlled his breath and mind, subdued his senses of 
perception as well as his organs of action and with a composed mind practised for a period 


Dis. 9 ] BOOK TWO 123 


BeBe BeBe HG SS RES eS Be Be Re Be Be Br Be HB BR RR RR REAR RE RRR RRR RRR REE REE REA REBEL RRR LEER REE REE ARE ERE BE 





of one thousand celestial years (or 3,60,000 human years) penance which illumined all the 
worlds (i.e., revealed to him a plan of the entire universe). (8) 


we Wel wan waite: gestae ut a geal 
CTO Te Sa etree ETeT wapakaigertgay | ¢ 
Tedd Gl weed: aa a fist a a area: | 
tT A Te feqaet estat aa 9 auautfelar: 1201 
RATATAT: «= AAA SASYEAT: faxrgcrean: ea: aaa: | 
af oo agafet «6 sfaeafodamenrm: arta: | 
Taliwaeayunesaate: Uheprpuseationtion: 1221 
wird:  ouftt fast  ocafeamratefiterar | 
facia: SAS NTATEL LS: Afagewrate treat AM: 122 
sta witugeraue: aift ar agen fasyfafiy: | 
MS fat a paneagisitann faced mead i231 


Pleased (with his penance), the Lord fully revealed to him His own supreme Abode, 
higher than which there is no other realm, nay, which is absolutely free from afflictions, 
bewilderment and fear, and which is extolled on all sides by highly enlightened souls who 
have been blessed with His sight. (9) Neither Rajas (passion) nor Tamas (the darkness of 
ignorance), nor even Sattva (the quality of goodness) mixed with either prevails there. The 
all-destroying Time too is powerless there and even so Maya (illusion); how, then, can the 
progeny of Maya (attachment, greed etc.) find their way into that realm ? Nay, the attendants 
of Sri Hari who reside there are adored by the gods and the demons alike. (10) Possessed 
of a transparent swarthy complexion and lotus-like eyes, clad in yellow, most charming to 
look at and extremely delicate of body, they are all endowed with four arms, highly 
resplendent themselves and further beautified by gold ornaments set with superb shining 
gems. Some of them (who have not attained identity of form with the Lord) possess the hue 
of corals, cat's-eyes or lotus stalks and are adorned with brilliant ear-rings, diadems and 
garlands. (11) Glittering all round with rows of brilliant and glorious aerial cars of exalted 
souls, which are further illumined with the splendour of most charming ladies, that divine 
realm shines like the sky with its line of clouds accompanied by flashes of lightning. (12) 
Endowed with a most lovely form, Sri (the goddess of fortune) adores in that realm the feet 
of the Lord (who is widely sung ) in many ways with her other manifestations (figuring as her 
female companions such as Bhudevi, Liladevi and so on). Nay, sitting in a swing, she sings 
the exploits of her beloved lord, while her own praises are sung by the bees (the attendants 


of Spring) at the time. (13) 
ast wifaearadt uf fia: oft aaafe safer 





feta guefed addst diarat aafe ofa Brerieu 
seqdunaraaninert «= eC (aC (GA WSRITRT TITAS: 1 
a wt: ita ag: @ WS at waite 12a! 
aentarereafegaragt Cad: SATA: | 








SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9 


BeBe Re Re eRe Re Re Re Be Re RR Re Re Re Re Re eRe RE RE RE RR RE RR RE RR RE RE BRE RE BERR RE REE RE Re Be Be Be HE Be Re Be Be He Be By By By Be By Be Br Rr Br Be Be wr Hr Wr Br Re He Re Hr Be Ree 


waa ergs fase ad Cee Cerf 1201 
qd ster aquied aq senfaat 3 fsmnreaner 
au uatencafast fir fra: fret sana: wt Bar iee 


Brahma beheld there the Protector of all His devotees, the Lord of Sri, the enjoyer of 
sacrifices, the omnipresent Ruler of the whole universe, being waited upon by the foremost 
of His personal attendants, Sunanda, Nanda, Prabala, Arhana and others. (14) Ever 
disposed to shower His grace on His servants, He bears nectar in His look and wears a 
gracious smile on His countenance. He has reddish eyes, is adorned with a crown and ear- 
rings, is ever clad in yellow and can be easily distinguished by His four arms as also by a 
golden streak borne on His (right) breast as a symbol of (His beloved Consort) Goddess 
Laksmi. (15) That universal Lord occupies an excellent and most valuable throne, is 
surrounded by His twenty-five Saktis or potencies (viz., the Spirit, Prakrti, the Mahat-tattva, 
the ego, the mind, the ten Indriyas, the five subtle elements and the five gross elements, all 
in a personal form); and endowed with His six eternal and divine attributes (viz., lordship, 
righteousness, renown, prosperity, wisdom and dispassion—all in their fullest measure), 
which are incidental in others, He (constantly) revels in His own blissful essence. (16) 

rahma’'s heart was flooded with rapture at the sight of the Lord: the hair stood erect on his 
person and tears rushed to his eyes due to excess of love. The Creator of the universe bowed 
to His lotus-feet, which are attained by pursuing the path of the Paramahamsas (those who 
have renounced the world). (17) The Lord, who had evoked Brahma’'s love, was delighted 
at heart to see His beloved Brahma standing before Him in a suppliant mood, full of love and 
joy, and fit to receive His commands for the creation of living beings. He took Brahma by 
the hand and then addressed him in accents illumined witha gentle smile. (18) 


MATA TATA 
aae died: ae aan fagernifat yaa ager aaa: qeatfrariest 
RM aa wu a are Alvatea saeoa: ufisma: deat aeatarafe: 1201 
Tiassa HA wlaelEM ay wh ae at au: 1281 
Teaes UM at ala cafanifediagl A eed Alanalane aTaISAT 122I 
ga deed seat anat wa:i faut ager fad dt a eat aa: 1231 


The Lord said : With the knowledge of all the Vedas stored up in your heart you have 
thoroughly pleased Me by your prolonged penance carried on with the intention of creating 
the universe. (You know) hypocritical Yogis can hardly please Me. (19) Ask of Me, the 
Bestower of all blessings, your cherished boon and you will be blessed (with that). The pains 
that men take for the good of their soul, O Brahma, reach their fruition in My sight. (20) You 
practised such supreme penance only on hearing My command in the lonely waters (without 
seeing Me). That is why you have been blessed with the sight of My divine Abode according 
to My wishes. (21) | commanded you (to do penance) on that occasion only because you did 
not know howto proceed with the work of creation. Penance (you know) is My very heart (very 
dear to Me), O sinless one; while | am the very soul (essence) of penance. (22) It is by dint 
of penance alone that | create this universe and through penance | maintain it; and it is 
through penance, again, that | absorb it (within Myself). Nay, My strength consists in penance 
which is hard to practise. (23) - 


Dis. 9 ] BOOK TWO | 125 


Be BeBe Be Be Be Be Be Be Be BCR Be BY Be RRL Re Hr Be BR Be Be Re BY Re Br Be Be He Re Be Hee Kee He Re Ke Ke Be Be Ne Ke We Me Ke We Ge He Ke He He Me He He We Br Me He We He Ke He He Sr He We We We Sr Ke He Se We He Be 





TENA 

We WayMAasaea Weide Widest Yara feenifha ix! 
aaa Tea A AI AT aTeat ae SU Stat a efor: 1241 
ams | AReafeds, «| fa fags Wert faerararet 126 | 
misaMAlaasea SUA | aa afgsat afe wadiet afa area 1201 
wats cma  ddtsd: i AeaM: wet aed aequerdi2cl 

aad, Teal AeiRaa a Ha: senfaert fas at aaq 1 

afageaet URedi 3 fert wa A agqaguetssmifa: 12¢1 


Brahma said : O Lord, You dwell in the heart of all beings as the witness and know by 
Your unobstructed wisdom what | intend doing. (24) Nevertheless, my Master, grant one 
request of this humble petitioner that | may be blessed with an insight into both the absolute 
and relative aspects of Your formless Being. (25) Even as a spider spins a web round itself, 
sports in it and then takes it back into its mouth, so do You, O Madhava (Lord of Maya) of 
unfailing resolve, through Your own Maya (creative will) multiply Yourself in the form of this 
universe, maintain it and then dissolve it all by Yourself, possessed as You are of manifold 
powers, and thus carry on Your sport, assuming various forms as and when necessary. Pray, 
therefore, bestow on me the insight by which | may be able to know how You do all this. (26-27) 
Let me unwearingly carry out Your instructions, O Lord; nay, while carrying on the work of 
creation, let me not, by Your grace, be attached to it (through the feeling of doership etc.). (28) 
Since you have acknowledged me as Your friend as any other friend would (by clasping my 
hand and through other such gestures), O Lord, let me not be puffed up with pride, thinking 
that | am immune from birth etc., so long as | remain engaged in Your service in the form 
of creating living beings and, unperplexed in mind, classify the Jivas (according to their 
natural characteristics and past actions). (29) 





Wt weg A aq fanaantadti eee dag A Yer Med al 1301 
Gane amwmal  asayvinde: i dda dealageae A Aaqaer1321 
AAA ARIE Ad Aes WAI UMes adda alsafela alseae 1321 
RASH Ud wdlad A wdlaa arth afgenerat Aat asissarat aa AA: 1331 
am Heth Oa tgeeetgy | sfasrasfasi aa ay A AyeH13y1 
undead fare 3 ceaferaraaisse: | sraaerfttearal ad, Sid, Ada Ader 1341 
wrad dais amu aarfea! var ametancdy a fanata aierad 136! 


The Lord said : Do you receive the most esoteric knowledge, as well as the realization, 
which is going to be imparted by Me, about Myself, as also the truth of Devotion and all that 
is accessory to it. (30) By My grace you shall have true knowledge about Me, as to how great 
| am, what is My essential character, in how many forms do | manifest Myself, what virtues 
do | possess and what are My doings. (31) Prior to this creation | alone existed and that too 
in my absolute state. Other than Me there was nothing gross or subtle, nor the cause of both, 
viz., Prakrti (Primordial Matter). | exist even after creation as well as in the form of this 
phenomenal world and! amalso that which remains (after all this has disappeared). (32) That 








126 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9 


We Be BeBe Me We Ree Re eRe Ree RR RR Re RR Re RR Re RR eRe ee He Re Ae eB Were ee Be Be Br Br Hr 


which makes it possible for something inexplicable to appear in My Being (as apart from Me) 
without any corresponding reality, just like the illusion of asecond moon, and which obscures 
My Being (even though | am present everywhere), like the presence of the planet Rahu 
(which has a shadowy form) in the midst of the other luminaries, should be regarded as My 
Maya (deluding potency). (33) Even as the gross elements (earth, water etc.) may be said 
to have entered (the bodies of) all living beings, both great and small, (made up as they are 
of those very elements) after their creation, and they can as well be said not to have entered 
them (in that they already inhered in them as their material cause), similarly | can be said to 
have entered the bodies of these living beings as theirindwelling Spirit (when they are viewed 
materially), and | can equally be said not to have entered them (when they are viewed 
Spiritually, there being no other reality than the Spirit, i.e., Myself). (84) He who is eager to 
know the truth of the Spirit should enquire into and ascertain that Reality alone which is 
proved to exist everywhere and at all times—whether you argue by the negative process, 
excluding everything else as ‘not that’, ‘not that’, or by the positive method of affirming 
everything as that. (85) Establish yourself fully in this doctrine of Mine through perfect 
concentration of mind. By doing so you shall never be confounded (fall a prey to egotism etc.) 
while creating the diverse forms of life in the course of the various Kalpas. (36) 


Meh Sara 
ayiedatstt «= SAAT Ge BAM Usaaee da SOM «AST: 1301 
Seda «= CeaSC(“‘<é‘éP TTS: 1 TTY s fast Geefe 8G Uda 13¢1 
Taaidedaoehel «©6=C OC LI Sk STATA Paaiasa «wares 13e1 
qd ane: aaa Ramemmaqad: | yam: aed wea aa a ixol 
ma fafatesa fama veh: | aerradt wer = faat uddread xe 
qe fama fat oem sfaaeeqieae: aus warm aaqgesfa ise! 
qa se¢ AMA GUT Sa Sikh UTA Me Md: Ga den 1%31 
ane: We Wa aeaaee Wied wa GWA orarnadsna xxi 
age aa YS ated Gearfea! senssdieorenea TAA: 14k 
es gid AHErad AEM UAE Alea feds ASAISeATa: 12 | 
Sri Suka continued: Having thus instructed Brahma (the supreme Ruler of all created 
beings), the unborn Lord Sri Hari withdrew that form of His while the former stood gazing (with 
wonder). (37) Brahma, who represented all beings, bowed with joined palms to Sri Hari, who 
had now concealed His perceptible form, and created this universe as before ( in the 
foregoing round of creation). (38) Eager to secure the good of all created beings, Brahma, 
the lord of creation and the protector of righteousness, once practised the various forms of 
self-control (Yamas)* and religious observances (Niyamas) witha view to achieving that end, 
which he regarded as his own purpose. (39) (During that period) O king, the great sage 
Narada, who was the most beloved of all his sons and an eminent devotee of the Lord, and 
was eager to know (from Brahma) the Maya (the wonderful power) of Bhagavan Visnu, the 
Lord of Maya, waited upon him as an obedient servant and fully gratified his father by his good 
” The Yoga-Sitras (Aphorisms on Yoga) of Maharsi Patanjali enumerate the Yamas and Niyamas as below :— 


Aaatraaaaaaiiae aa: | CII. 30) 


"“Non-violence, truthfulness. non-thieving, continence and non-accumulation of worldly possessions are the five 


Yamas.” 


Dis. 10 ] BOOK TWO 127 


He Be Be Be Be Re Be Ke He Me Ke He Me Ke Ke He He We We we Ke He Ke Kr Se We Ke We Kr Ke Me Ke We We We Ke We Ke Ke He Ke Be Ke Me Ke Ke Me He Ke Ke He Be Ke We Ke Me We Be Be We We Ke ee He BeBe Ke Ke He Fe He We Ge He He Ge Wi He Kr He He 
St 


conduct, modesty and self-control. (40-41) Finding his father (Brahma), the forbear of the 
entire creation, pleased (with him), the celestial sage humbly asked him the same questions 
that you have asked me. (42) Delighted (all the more by his questions) Brahma (the Creator 
of beings) repeated to his son (Narada), this very Bhagavata-Purana containing ten 
distinctive features, which was taught to him by the Lord Himself. (43) Narada (in his turn), 
O king, imparted the same to the sage Vyasa (my father) of boundless glory, while the latter 
was meditating on the supreme Brahma on the bank of the river Saraswati (vide I.v. 
above).(44) | shall (presently) tell you (in the form of the same Bhagavata-Purana) in reply 
to your questions on the subject, how this universe emanated from the Cosmic Being, and 
answer all your other questions too (through the same Purana). (45) 


Thus ends the ninth discourse in Book Two of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SIE 
POISE eee 


SIN SQASeaTa: 
Discourse X 
The ten characteristic features of the Bhagavata 


Ham Java 
aa amt «=ofaaiss ed usu: i daatengqeet )«=— tat «afer: | 2 
ame «faut AaMiite ari ava Al: Ada Aleta | 2 | 
qqaarsaat «=a Ot Seed: | BeOTY WUraerena faa: urea: Ba: 1 3 | 
fuftcdauefasra: «= aYsut ss dade: | earaftr Gage saa: apdareat: | x | 
staan speed RAs | Aas Aha: Mikhl AREA feat: | & | 
Piatsaarearea: ae wzreelt: | akafeearaaed wean cafe: 1 < | 
starasy «60s fataasy «Ss sea | A Sa: UL Aal UMA Alec | 9 | 
Asenanisd FSs: Aisataarfaetac: | geivatese: gest wifesatiten: 1c t 
Uanoama 8 ael «= Ae | fatal aA s«AT.- oA ST TTI: | @ I 
Sri Suka continued: Sarga, Visarga, Sthana, Posana, the Utis, the Manvantaras, 
ISanukathas, Nirodha, Mukti and ASraya; these are the ten topics discussed in this 
Bhagavata-Purana. (1) Men of true knowledge aver that the first nine topics have been 
discussed in this Purana only in order to present a clear conception of the tenth or the last 
(viz., ASraya, i.e., the all supporting Brahma). This they have deduced in some cases from 


the actual words of the text itself and in other cases from their purport. (2) The creation (in 
the reverse order) of the gross and subtle elements, the senses of perception and the organs 





VWMragarsay <aleara aaa Paar: ! (IT. 32) 


"Purity of mind and body, contentment, austerity, study of the Vedas or repetition of the Divine Name and 


meditation on God are the five Niyamas.” 





2 








128 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10 
Se Re eRe Wr Re Re Re Re ee eee ee Re Re Ree RR RR RR RE RR RR RR RR RR Re AR ae eR RB A rH BB BB BY YY HY BB HB BY BY BB or 


of action, and the mind, the ego and the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence) 
due to disturbance in the equilibrium (and the resultant transformation) of the three Gunas 
or modes of Prakrti, brought about by the will of God, has been spoken of as ‘Sarga’; and the 
creation of animate and inanimate beings by Brahma (himself born of the Cosmic Being) is 
called Visarga. (3) The triumph of the Lord (as revealed by the fact that living beings created 
by Him keep within their bounds) is known by the name of ‘Sthiti’ and the Lord's grace on 
His devotees is termed as ‘Posana'. Again, the virtuous conduct of the saintly Manus 
(presiding over the different Manvantaras) has been referred to by the term ‘Manvantaras'; 
_while the latent desires of the various creatures, which lead to their bondage 
through interested action,are known as 'Utis'. (4) Even so the life-accounts of the various 
manifestations of Sri Hari as well as of His saintly devotees, supplemented by various other 
stories, have been termed as 'ISakathas'. (5) 'Nirodha' means the withdrawal of the individual 
soul with all its qualifications or adjuncts into the Lord subsequent to His retirement (falling 
into Yoganidra). And when the Jiva relinquishes its assumed character (doership etc.) and 
realizes its true nature (Brahmahood), they call it ‘Mukti’ or emancipation of the soul. (6) 
Finally, that from which are known to proceed the creation, preservation and dissolution (of 
the universe) is what they call the 'Asraya', which is spoken of (in the scriptures) as the 
supreme Brahma or the supreme Spirit (Paramatma). (7) The same perceiving subject (the 
individual soul) which identifies itself with the sense of perception also exists in the form of 
the deities presiding over the senses of perception (the sun-god and others); while the 
physical body, which distinguishes the senses from the deities presiding over them, serves 
as the condition (Upadhi) of the individual soul. (8) When it is clear that in the absence of 
anyone of these we cannot perceive the other two, it follows that He (God) who knows all 
these three is the 'Asraya' or support of all and this latter has no other support than 
Himself. (9) 

qeaisus fama ager a fafacda: 1 sneisaqntacsauiseaitefa: Yet: 1201 

aadidid WgS WesURaCI at ARTA AM sem: Weel: 1221 

ci ad a aieA MMA Vila wa Al deqded: Ara A Aha aedare ier 

Uhl AMA Baca, Alera: | ate faroaa eat Areal argere, Fram 1231 

afacanareareratenyatata TY: | aie urea dit frenftad aay ex 

When the aforesaid Cosmic Being emerged from the egg-shaped universe and stood 

apart, He began to look out for a foothold for Himself; and with this object in view that Being 
of pure intentions created the holy waters. (10) Having evolved from the Supreme Person 
(also called ‘Nara’) these waters were known as ‘Nara’ (that which proceeds from 'Nara’); and 
since He lived on these waters of His own creation for a thousand (celestial) years He 
became known as Narayana (He who resides in the 'Nara’'). (11) The gross elements (the 
material of which this universe is made), Karma (the destiny of the Jivas), Time, the mutability 
of Matter and the Jivas exist only by His grace and cease to exist the moment He grows 
indifferent towards them. (12) Awaking from His Yoganidra (deep trance), Lord Narayana, 
who was all alone (till this moment), now sought to multiply Himself and by dint of His Maya 
(wonderful energy) split up His effulgent seed-body into three parts—the Adhidaiva, the 
Adhyatma and the Adhibhtta. Hear now (O Pariksit !) how the unitary energy of the Lord 
came to be divided into three parts. (13-14) 


Sa «| STeHIAMI:SCSTR «fae: | SiS: Tel Aes Vel Ad: Ai Asa: Feu! 
SIA A UN: Wd Aastra | SOTA AReaMarm: 126 | 
mr fed ad qed stad swt: 1 foram wads mena fafa 120 


Dis. 10 ] BOOK TWO 129 


Br Br Be Br Be Br Br Ry Kr Br Re Wr Hr Br Hr Hr Br 
Br Br Br Be Be Be Be Br Be Be Be Be Be Rr Be Be Re Be Re Re Re Re RE RE R Re R Re Re Re R Re RE RE Be Be RRERE ReR RER RE HE BERR Re RE RE RE Rt Re Re Re Re Be He Re He Re PRB 





Geeene Rea fret aiasnadi ad arr wa wa freer aisfrraa i2c 
fraaittadt aat afeatn and wat:ise & ae aaa frie: asilad 1221 
aia Pateat aaa asweahti a arpietael mot afa fryer: 1201 
aassat Pretend a feeea: 1 ARIA aie ae VAI AATVTAS: 122 
eA TR Raat: | cut at feed fest: sitet TOTS: 1221 
oat Qeatioaeeatarsitaant | fuse fifiar qe Waedieat: | 
A Ardateditaaral GNU Ad: 1231 

wet Se ar aefeaitder i aa «6 aeftrest «sree 12x 
uit fried: uret eeesfranftrery| wesai ag: wa get Hie: feeaa Fh: 1241 
Pritea fet a serena: | acer amedta, amram fret agsranstey 126 | 
shagaaigqas fifi a wqeniaa: wae faa sari seems: ee! 
sfagen: at: gat afigrqama: | aaaMed Fea: Gea ICI 
SUEUR, «= HAASATSA: | A: TASS «dake: alpen 1291 
Pierre weet Pete i al Wea: USeU: GM Wa A130! 
aed areefea ela waa: | SAAS: WA HON aaa: 1321 
TnaaMifsat 9 wyaiersta WN: 1 aa: Adlaanie aAghaatataoil 1321 
Uiettad Sd We aA Sled Aart! Vanfefysrawnetiefengay 1331 
ad: ut geadnaenh fafderum smifeneated Mel aga: a 13%! 


When the Cosmic Being bestirred Himself, there arose from the space within His body 
the acuteness of the senses, strength of will and strength of body as well. And from these 
sprang up Prana, the chief of all the vital airs. (15) Just as the attendants of a king follow him, 
even so the senses in all living beings are active when this Prana Is active but cease to be 
active the moment this Prana becomes inactive. (16) With the free movement of the Prana 
the Cosmic Being was overcome with hunger and thirst; and the moment He felt inclined to 
eat and drink a mouth appeared in Him in the first instance. (17) From the mouth came out 
the palate, in which the sense of taste was produced; and thence were evolved the different 
kinds of tastes, which are experienced by the sense of taste (as well as the deity presiding 
over the same). (18) When the Cosmic Being felt inclined to speak, there emanated from His 
mouth the god of fire (the deity presiding over the organ of speech), the organ of speech itself 
and the act of speaking, which depends both on the organ of speech and the deity presiding 
over the same. Till then the Cosmic Being remained under water controlling His breath for 
a pretty long time. (19) When, however, His breath sought an outlet and pressed forward, 
a pair of nostrils appeared in Him. And as He felt inclined to perceive smell, there appeared 
in His nose the olfactory sense as well as the wind-god (the deity presiding over the sense 
of smell), the bearer of smell. (20) When there was darkness all about Him and He feltinclined 
to see Himself and other things, there appeared in Him a pair of eyes, the sun-god (the deity 
presiding over the sense of sight) and the sense of sight; and thence followed the perception 
of colour (the object of sight). (21) On the Vedas proceeding to awaken Him (through hymns 
of praise addressed to Him) and on the Cosmic Being feeling inclined to hear them, there 
appeared in Him a pair of ears, the Digdevatas (the deities presiding over the four quarters 











130 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10 


Re BeBe BeBe eRe Re RR Re Re Re Re Re RR Re EERE RR BEE EERE EY REBEL Re AT Re BEBE RE BEB RE REMY BT Be He Be Me Br Be He Br Me Hr Hr Hr Be He Br Sr Br Hr Br Br By Hr Br Hr Br Hr Fr 





as well as the auditory sense) as well as the auditory sense itself; and thence followed the 
perception of sound (the object of the auditory sense). (22) When, again, the Cosmic Being 
felt inclined to experience the softness or hardness, lightness or heaviness and warmth or 
coolness of objects, there appeared in Him the skin (the seat of the tactile sense) and on the 
skin there arose the hair (the sense perceiving touch as well as the itching sensation), the 
trees (the deities presiding over the hair) as well as the wind-god (the deity presiding over 
the tactile sense). Nay, He was also covered all over His skin, within as well as without, by 
the tactile sense, when followed the perception of touch (the object of the tactile sense). (23) 
As soon as the Cosmic Being felt inclined to perform various acts a pair of hands grew out 
of Him. In these hands there appeared the faculty of grasping things and even so Indra (the 
deity presiding over this faculty) as well as the act of grasping, which depends both on the 
faculty of grasping and the deity presiding over it. (24) Even as the Cosmic Being felt inclined 
to walk according to His will a pair of feet grew out of Him and along with them appeared Lord 
Visnu (the deity presiding over the feet) Himself as well as the faculty of locomotion, with the 
help of which people procure the materials for sacrifice. (25) When the Cosmic Being craved 
for offspring, sexual enjoyment and immortality (heavenly bliss procurable through a pious 
married life) a penis grew out of Him and even so there appeared in Him the faculty of 
copulation, the god Prajapati (the deity presiding over this faculty) and the pleasure arising 
from sexual commerce, which depends both on the faculty of coition and the deity presiding 
over the same. (26) On the Cosmic Being feeling the urge to void excrement there appeared 
in Him the anus and thereafter the faculty of defecation and then the god Mitra (the deity 
presiding over the organ of evacuation) as well as the act of defecation, which depends both 
on the faculty of evacuation and the deity presiding over it. (27) When the Cosmic Being felt 
inclined to pass from one body to another and leave the former with that end in view, there 
appeared in Him the navel and in the navel sprang up the vital air called 'Apana' and then 
the god of death (the deity presiding over the ‘Apana’' air); and then came about the 
dissociation of Prana form Apana, i. e., death, which depends on both the 'Apana' air and the 
deity presiding over the same. (28) On the Cosmic Being feeling inclined to take food and 
drink there appeared in Him the cavity of the abdomen, the intestines and the network of 
veins and arteries as well as seas (the deities presiding over the intestines) and rivers (the 
deities presiding over the blood vessels) and even so satisfaction and nutrition, the former 
of which depends on the intestines and the seas, and the latter on the veins and arteries and 
rivers. (29) When the Cosmic Being felt inclined to;contemplate on His own Maya (wonderful 
energy) there appeared in Him the heart and thereafter the mind, then the moon (the deity . 
presiding over the mind) and last of all volition and desire, the two functions of the mind. (30) 
From the elements of earth, water and fire were evolved the seven constituents of the body 
of the Cosmic Being, viz., the thick outer skin, the thin inner skin, flesh, blood, fat, marrow 
and bone; even so from ether, water and air sprang up His vital air. (31) The senses of 
perception are all directed towards their objects, and the objects of sense are born of the 
Ego (the source of the elements). Mindis the seat of all morbid feelings; while Intellect reveals 
to us the reality of all objects. (82) | have thus described to you the gross form of the Lord; 
it is enveloped outside by eight sheaths, viz., earth, water, fire, air, ether, the Ego, the Mahat- 
tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence) and Prakrti (Primordial Matter). (83) Beyond this — 
is (the Lord's) most subtle form, which is unmanifest, unqualified, having no beginning, 
middle or end, eternal and outside the realm of mind and speech. (34) 


sat «Wat eT Saud 1 SH sf =a Weta arares fants: 1341 
W aeididanda War seleayy | aaeaihalr ed Aalto: ae: 1361 


Dis. 10] BOOK TWO 


Br Br BeBe Beker Br Be Be Be Be He Ke Ke eRe Hee Re We Bee Gr Be Ke he Ke Ge Kr Ke Ke Re Ke Ke Ke Hr Ke Ke Ke Ge Ge HK Be Ke He Be Kr Ke He Be Ge Be Be Be Ke Hr Kee Be Hr Ge Mr Be He Ke He Ge He He GEM Ke WH Be Re Ht Ke WK: Hr 


TIM cay ann yea eanorrsal «fare 1201 
Fear AMT aa faqestor aq | tasfteraisas Sayfa 1321 
PAVESI, UCI Als | VIP Wa Gar Pigs Agar 138 1 
fefaenadicen ast Goede: | paletaien fisn: ero tafeaat: 1¥o 
aa we git fre: Gane: i dara wus ferd ada | 
ACHAMISUIA WU SATA 1X2 | 

a We Writ wear ahaa i genfa woe fas feleacqeeh: 121 
dd: colette open: dma aed wrtnfyatho: 1x3! 


Both the subtle and gross forms of the Lord, which | have described to you, are the 
creation of the Lord's Maya. Hence the wise refuse to accept either (for worship). (85) The 
supreme Lord is really actionless; it is by His own Maya that He becomes active. Assuming 
the form of Brahma, He reveals Himself both in the form of word and what it denotes, and 
evolves many aname and form and activity. (86) Prajapatis (lords of created beings), Manus, 
gods, Rsis (seers), the various classes of the manes, Siddhas, Caranas (celestial bards) and 
Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Vidyadharas (another class of demigods), Asuras (de- 
mons) and Guhyakas (Yaksas), Kinnaras (another class of celestial musicians), Apsaras 
(celestial nymphs), Nagas, serpents, Kimpurusas (another class of demigods) and snakes, 
Matrkas, Raksasas, Pisacas, Pretas, Bhutas and Vinayakas, Kusmandas, Unmadas and 
Vetalas, Yatudhanas and Grahas, birds and reptiles, beasts of prey and other animals, trees, 
mountains and all other names and forms in the universe, O king, are His. (87—339) All other 
creatures, both animate and inanimate, whether viviparous, Oviparous, sweat-born or 
sprouting from soil, and living either in water, on land or in the air, are the good, bad or mixed 
fruit of Corresponding actions (done in the past). (40) The predominance of Sattva 
(goodness), Rajas (passion) and Tamas (opacity or ignorance) is severally responsible for - 
birth as a god, as a human being and as a denizen of hell or as a member of the sub-human 
species. Each of these three destinies is again sub-divided into three varieties according as 
each of the three Gunas is eclipsed by either of the other two Gunas (modes of Prakrti ) or 
not. (41) Having assumed the form of Visnu (who is all virtue) for the support and sustenance 
of the world, the same Lord preserves and sustains this universe by appearing from time to 
time in the guise of animals, men and gods. (42) Again, when the time comes, the Lord 
appears as Rudra (the god of destruction) from the fire of universal destruction and dissolves 
this universe, once created by Himself, even as a blast blows away a mass of clouds. (43) 


sumed afd warm wade: aeMed fe GW Benet Gea: 1xx! 
ara efor el OReNafetad i adeastasart araanifad fe acixul 
34 qd He: wea: afanea sated: | fafa: aremont aa ant: Mendeendl: 1xGl 
GRAM UW wleM BeaIsAlarey | AM GANA Weal Hea Oy ixi9! 


The Lord, who is possessed of inconceivable power, has been described as above (as 
the creator, preserver and destroyer of the universe). The wise, however, should not regard 
Him only as such; for He is even beyond this description. (44) The Supreme has no doership 
‘in relation to the creation and other activities connected with this universe. Sruti texts ascribe 
it to Him only with a view to denying it; for the same has been superimposed on Him by 
Maya.(45) | have told you about the great Kalpa (cycle) connected with the appearance of 
Brahma as also about the other smaller Kalpas. The process of creation is the same in all 
the Kalpas, the only difference being that during a Mahakalpa (the Kalpa immediately 














132 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 10 


RRR Re RR RE REE PERRET RE RR RR A MRE RE REAR  R RRE RERER RE RR Re Re Re REM Re Ree RE Be Ke HEM He Ge HERE He HECHT He Me eRe Se Kr We Sr Br He He He Hr Hr Br tr 





following a Mahapralaya or Final Dissolution) the whole process of creation begins anew 
(including even the transformation of Matter, from the evolution of Mahat down to the 
crystallization of the five elements); while in the other Kalpas (the Kalpas following a night 
of Brahma) it is only the bodies of the animate and inanimate beings that are created anew. 
(46) | shall describe in full the measures of time (both gross and subtle), the duration of a 
Kalpa and its divisions later on (in Book III). Now hear the story of the Padma Kalpa. (47) 


Sh SaraT 
Wie A Vad Ga AA ANTad: | aa dais yauteral ee Farasry_ CI 
Sl RAR darclsenessd: |agl A WTA yeeraqara give 


Sie qaediee ara fax feiss a adaMTMAa. WA: 140 | 


Saunaka said : Sita, you told us how Vidura, who was the foremost of the Lord's 
devotees left his kith and kin, so very difficult to part with, and travelled on foot to all the 
sacred places on the earth's surface. (48) Where did he come to have a talk with the sage 
Maitreya (the son of Kusaru) on spiritual topics, and what was the truth that the venerable 
sage taught to Vidura in response to the latter's queries ? (49) Tell us all that story of Vidura, 
O gentle Suta, as also the circumstances in which he left his kinsmen and what led to his 
return. (50) 


qd Sara 
Tet Uitte Ost aearetem: | agistterel Oj Ua: Waa: 1421 


St AASMad ASI CAAA Aa WAS Gearar fectacHy-e 
Geos eaqassd ATA <eAIS eA: | Ro | 


= 


Sia fectta: Hel: GATE: | 
ait: So aca I 


SUuta said : King Pariksit too asked this very question. | now proceed to reuiGatide to you 
the discourse that the great sage (Suka) gave in response to the king's queries. (51) 


Thus ends the tenth discourse entitled “The Disposition of the limbs of the Cosmic Being" 
in Book Two of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita, a collection of eighteen thousand 
verses composed by the sage Vedavyasa. 


0-4 
PI OI SES I 


~ End of BookTwo > 





CD OI EBON 


Gala: het: 


ST Wrasse: 


Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana 
Book Three 


Discourse | 


Meeting of Uddhava and Vidura 
MP SATA 
watta «yst aat ana foi aor at wfasa Maal wegen | 2 | 
Ul sat wane warhaew:idkasye fear sfadeneretend! 2 | 


Sri Suka said : It was this very question that Vidura asked the worshipful sage Maitreya 
in the past, when the former had retired to the forest quitting his prosperous home. (1) Itwas 
at Vidura's residence that Lord Sri Krsna, the Ruler of the universe, who happened to visit 
Hastinapura as an ambassador of your forefathers (the Pandavas), called as if it were His 
own house, refusing the hospitality of the Paurava king (Duryodhana). (2) 


eal agqevaa aaaoa Ga: leet al Ge Wale Udavia A: Wat 2 | 
qa weal  faqrnmene: ide attafa sa: ureerelaefed: | x | 
The king said : Where did Vidura's meeting with the worshipful Maitreya take place 
and when did he have a talk with him ? Kindly tell me all this, my lord. (3) Surely the question 
which the pure-hearted Vidura asked of the noblest sage Maitreya could not have been of 
small consequence, particularly when it was honoured with a reply by a saint of no mean 
order. (4) 
Yd Sara 
a Uafecaist yer wat wife see at aeleteticme AerTbeet | | 


Sita continued : Questioned as above by king Pariksit and much delighted at heart over 
this, the all-wise Suka, the foremost of sages, said in reply : "Listen !" (5) 











134 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1 


We We We Me Re We We Ve We Be Ree eRe RE ORE RE ORE ORE REE ROR ER ROE We ROW RR RRR Re ROR ROR Re EM Te NORE Re VER eM Ke Hee ee eRe MEE We Me We We We ee We ee 
ry Caen re ee 
a  ————— 


yh Sara 

qq wl waaay Wado faapelp: | 

wqiasa di farm yas wlatMat adel! 

aeal | |aNat )6=6pecaeen: «9 canfiaet Yqamd ve 

1 aR Fa: NT: Seer: Hapa! w | 

a amu fara aeat: ahaa aan! 

I aedisaaqaa aad att wat Aasmaan: ic 

aoa wedsfed: awe sigeaie sme He: | 

I adm i gaaqmeada wile A aaquaca: |e | 

ated wat sast waa gs: fas yds 

ame dae ate awafaot adhth achat igot 

Sri Suka proceeded : You know how king Dhrtarastra, who was not only blind but had 

alsolosthis rightjudgment and supported his wicked sons through unrighteousness (in their 
unrighteous ways), had his younger brother's fatherless sons (Yudhisthira and others) 
lodged in a house of lac and the same set on fire. (6) Nay, when in open court his second 
son (Duhsasana) dragged by the hair Dhrtarastra's own daughter-in-law and the spouse of 
king Yudhisthira (queen Draupadi), whose tears washed off the saffron painted on her bosom 
(she being covered by a single cloth), the king failed to stop that abominable act of his son. 
(7) The guileless king Yudhisthira, who was devoted to truth and regarded none as his 
enemy, was worsted in a gambling bout by unfair means (and sent in exile to the forest for 
a period of thirteen years); but when (on expiry of the term of exile) he returned from the 
forest, and asked back his share according to the terms of the agreement, Duryodhana 
refused to part with it, blinded as he was by infatuation. (8) When Sri Krsna, the Preceptor 
of the universe, was sent by Yudhisthira to the Kaurava court, He spoke there words which 
were full of nectar to His devotees (Bhisma and others); but the king (Duryodhana) attached ~ 
no importance to them, since all his stock of merits had been exhausted. (9) Again, when, 
invited by his elder brother (Dhrtarastra), Vidura entered the latter's private chamber and was 
asked to give his advice, that crest-jewel of wise counsellors gave a piece of advice, which 
politicians still speak of (with reverence) as 'Viduraniti' (the Counsel of Vidura). (10) 


sideat: «ieee aaeSCséetfetetY «= fee 2 carr: 
Seg at gale: wat wa ane farfeiers 
Waid cat Wardect Waa a i$ fefaeaca: | 
aired waa ageacar fafatsiararaqeaea: 1221 
a We ae: wyeasert Wea sfast ances 
Wana 86 fea «= siesta «= eet a@rar 1231 
safaatera Gare TFSHITCERATAT 
steep: Acegeuiearaites: aR AhUilastatatert 1 ex | 
e wWioludga fie adem: at agiedta yp: 
we sda: ua srt Fataaea otesaa: 124! 


a yeaagqrarenvaviuiq: gl adq arfearsit 
wa agit «= era ett Cs Itemtesaas = Arar: 126 1 


Dis. 1] BOOK THREE 135 


a feta: amraqveet  ustearieue:  valht 

srarmad, 4 uafaentdatent «= aferfeeat «= aft Ss Geert: 12091 

ay quarqadixpagisdag AR | 

srr: AASHAT Tak dtafadagaad: 1261 

™ udeq = eatfafaxnafa: AAT GASA:AAAASATT: | 

retard: ata Aaat sata ay Sharaonta 1221 

Vidura said, “Return the share of Yudhisthira, who regards none as his enemy and who 

has been tolerating the wrongs done by you, even though they are hard to bear. He is 
followed by Bhima, whom you are terribly afraid of, and who with his younger brothers (Arjuna 
and others) is hissing in fury as a serpent. (11) The cause of the Pandavas (the sons of Prtha) 
has been espoused by Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) Himself, who is adored 
as a deity by Yadava chiefs, who is staying at present in His own capital (Dwaraka) having 
conquered big sovereigns, and who has all the Brahmanas and gods on His side. (12) It is 
evil incarnate that has entered your house in the person of Duryodhana, whom you are 
fostering as a son and who is an enemy of the Supreme Person (Sri Krsna). That is why you 
too have turned your face against Sri Krsna and lost your splendour. Therefore, in the interest 
of your race, abandon this unlucky fellow at once." (13) Vidura had a disposition which was 
coveted even by saints. But, when he uttered these words on that spot, the anger of 
Duryodhana and his companions—Karna, Duhsasana (Duryodhana’'s younger brother) and 
Sakuni (son of Subala and Duryodhana's maternal uncle )—knew no bounds. Their lips. 
began to quiver and Duryodhana insultingly interposed :— (14) "Who has called this crooked 
son of a maid-servant here ? Hostilely disposed towards the master (myself) on whose 
crumbs he has grown fat, he works for the enemy's cause. Although his life may be spared, 
he should be banished from my capital at once." (15) Cut to the quick by these most poignant 
words, which pierced his ears like shafts, in the presence of his brother (king Dhrtarastra), 
but recognizing the greatness of the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) Vidura did not feel the 
least perturbed in mind and quietly left the palace himself, depositing his bow at the gate. (16) 
Vidura, whose birth in the race of Kurus had been secured as a result of great merit (who was 
an acquisition to the race of Kuru), departed from Hastinapura and, with a view to acquiring 
religious merit, undertook a pilgrimage to all holy places on the earth's surface, sacred to the 
Lord whose feet are ever hallowed, and where the Lord resides in a thousand and one forms 
(images). (17) Unaccompanied by anyone else, he visited on foot cities, sacred groves, 
mountains, bowers, rivers and lakes containing limpid water and holy places graced with the 
Lord's images. (18) He perambulated the earth in the garb of a recluse, so that he could not 
be recognized by his own people, lived on pure food such as fruits etc., dropped from trees, 
bathed in all sacred waters without exception, slept on the ground, never made his toilet, and 


observed vows that pleased Sri Hari.(19) 








SU mM URdAa ad aed Wada AEH! 
CIC REECE! fattiaanmanidqaristda UT: 1201 
aa wta des iat am  ausafedse 
Geaeiar INI Ca Te ss TIAL 22 
qaat_—«siésdeteIS STs eeefeaet TTT: | 
adi gaa wal Wea aarecae a  asnfaaa ie 
sara «6 ate)Ssdfasieaea: «3S ata Ss aaa ~«~—Ss fare: | 
BS Fog PCO ETRE EAL FRAP UATeR A 123 1 








136 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1 


aaa Msye Wane PRAgois | 
ale aaerqarqadl dala wnat deal 126 
GQ amedaet wat gead: wR a sd! 
aeg7 Me ST AR BAAS RTAGHA 14! 

While he was yet travelling in the land of Bharatavarsa and reached Prabhasa (near 
Dwaraka), king Yudhisthira (son of Prtha) had established himself, with the help of Sri Krsna, 
as the universal and undisputed sovereign of the entire globe. (20) There (at Prabhasa) he 
heard how his kinsmen (the Kauravas) had perished due to mutual jealousy even as a thicket 
of bamboos is consumed by fire produced by the friction of one bamboo against another. 
Grieving over the holocaust, therefore, he quietly repaired to the bank of the Saraswati 
where it flows in a westerly direction. (21) On the bank of that river he (visited and ) stayed 
at (eleven) different spots—severally sacred to the memory of the sages Trita, Usana (the 
father of Sukracarya) and Asita, Swayambhuva Manu, king Prthu, the god of fire, the wind- 
god, king Sudasa, the cows, Guha (god Kartikeya,the eldest son of Lord Siva) and king 
Sraddhadeva (Vaivaswata Manu)—and many other sanctuaries in this area, consecrated to 
Lord Visnu, founded by holy sages and gods and containing temples that bore on their 
domes the mark of SudarSana, the chief of His weapons, the very sight of which reminded 
one of Lord Sri Krsna. (22-23) Journeying thence through the prosperous land of Saurastra 
and the kingdoms of Sauvira, Matsya and Kuru-Jangala, he reached in due course the bank 
of the Yamuna, where he came across Uddhava, another great devotee of the Lord. (24) 
Vidura fondly ciasped in close embrace this celebrated servant of Lord Sri Krsna (son of 
Vasudeva)—who had attained perfect serenity of mind and was an erstwhile pupil of the sage 
Brhaspati (the preceptor of the gods)—and enquired of him the welfare of his relations (the 
Yadavas), the proteges of the Lord:—(25) 


sad «Sell: «ale «= fae UE aes RNS REI 
mae wa: elt wa: a sma gene ait 1 
a a we faqacht am aq adv ive 
aged 3H wet GaAs ait 
4 eleanut wnadsted ame fama weiaat irc 
fata Uadaqeiveenenonmea: a 2 
aaa caatalt SATAN uhea SUL 128 | 
wag: et ad: wea sneiswut wet are ana: | 
aad ad wnaadl aden @a WE alshawar agAals® 1301 
a a age set 4: GIA PIeOSeEE: | 
MUSA Aataaaal Ifa aetat afahdrany 132 | 
wide 9a: Gerla st weno  wWracua: | 
a: PUMleiscararayagd WAfafirarad: 1321 
ated  caausge fame sa ean: | 
a a wnt cam ta att am aafaamadaisa3i 
sfukaerd wa Wa al a: Ulead! mrMaeishiec: | 
aed OCC ee Ga Mere 1 3% 





Dis. 1 ] BOOK THREE 137 


wie Me REO ROME ROME WOME OREM RE REWER Re RENEE ERE EEE OREN eR RE ROR Re Me Ree RRR Re Re Re eRe eRe eR Re He Re Re Be ee Be We Me Re We Be Ke We Ke We Ve We He We Be Be We Bee 


ated a face anda 41 
Salas Seas: waked aha Arz 1341 


"The two Primal Persons (Sri Balarama and Sri Krsna) appeared (in human semblance) on 
this globe in response to the prayer of Brahma, who was born of the very lotus that had sprung 
from the Lord's own navel. Having relieved the earth ofits burden and brought delight to the whole 
world, are they doing well in the house of Sutrasena (the father of Vasudeva)? (26) Dear 
Uddhava, is our brother-in-law (sisters husband)*, Vasudeva (son of Surasena), quite happy— 
Vasudeva, who is the greatest friend and well-wisher of the Kurus, and who, like a father, 
liberally bestows on his sisters (Kunti and others) the gifts of their choice, bringing satisfaction 
(by offering rich presents) even to their husbands ? (27) Again, dear friend, is that heroic 
Pradyumna, the generalissimo of the Yadava forces, quite well—Pradyumna, who was no 
other than the god of love in his previous incarnation and whom his mother Rukmini secured 
from the Lord by propitiating the Brahmanas? (28) Is Ugrasena, the ruler of the Satvatas, 
Vrsnis, Bhojas and Dasarhas, prospering—Ugrasena, whom the lotus-eyed Lord (Sri Krsna) 
installed (on the throne of Mathura), even though he had stood aloof, having lost all hope of 
regaining the throne ? (29) Is SriHari's (SriKrsna's) son, Samba, whois the equal of his Father 
and the foremost of car-warriors, faring well, O gentle Uddhava—Samba, who is no other than 
the god Guha, whom Goddess Ambika (Parvati) bore in Her womb in the past and to whom 
Jambavati (the daughter of Jambavan and one of the eight principal consorts of Lord Sri Krsna) 
gave birth (once again) as a fruit of her religious observances? (30) Is that Yuyudhana (Satyaki) 
quite happy, who received the secrets of bowmanship from Phalguna (Arjuna) and who easily 
secured through the mere service of Lord Adhoksaja (Sri Krsna) the position of His devotees, 
which is difficult of attainment even for ascetics ? (31) Is the wise and sinless Akrura (son of 
Swaphalka) quite healthy—Akrura who is devoted to the Lord and who, beside himself with 
love, rolled about in the dust of the road marked with the footprints of Lord Sri Krsna ? (32) Is 
all well with Devaki (daughter of Devaka, the chief of the Bhoja clan of Ksatriyas), who is as 
good a mother of Lord Visnu as Aditi (the mother of the gods), and who bore the Lord in her 
womb even as the three Vedas bear the extensive ritual (the elaborate details and procedure 
of the various sacrifices) as their import ? (83) Is the divine Aniruddha (the grandson of Lord 
Sri Krsna) perfectly all right—Aniruddha, who grants the desires of His worshippers like you 
and whom the scriptures have declared as the source of the Vedas and the deity presiding over 
the mind (Manas), which constitutes the fourth part of the inner sense (which is a composite 
of four elements, viz., Citta, Ahankara, Buddhi and Manas)? (34) And are other people such 
as Hrdika, (a Yadava chief), the sons of Satyabhama, Carudesna (Pradyumna’s real brother) 
and Gada (a brother of Sri Krsna) faring well, O gentle Uddhava—people who are exclusively 
and fully devoted to Sri Krsna (the lord of their heart)? (35) 





aif wesat fasarqanat ado ad: ukafa aan 
qeaisdad aaa  wMrasen  fasadaqet 13¢! 
fe a maaguiaadt  idisteactiad came 
qed «= wy ART eee «= fae 1301 
Chfeleranelt TATAAAT TMUSlaerararanhened 
ateferd AatHeyal Tatiana fated 13¢1 





*Vasudeva had a number of wives, one of them—Pauravi by name—being a cousin of Dhrtarastra. Hence Vidura speaks 
of Vasudeva as his sister's husband. 


[564] B. M..7— 








138 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1 


Be Be Be Re Be Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re eR RR RR REL RE ER BER BERR RE RR RE BERT BRB Be Be BRE Te BER BEBE He Be He Be He Be A Br Br Br Be Sr Gr Se He Br Here He Ke He He Hr HH Hr rae yy, 


saga yer: urate caatherefaron | 
Ia | seraCiisN(C( (aR Tifa arate 138 | 
svat. ssgeifa«S ss feradssieref 0 usifdaeior fait 
AAA SATA fara Tafecta: HHPUATA: Xo | 
aaa «ana TC (GC RTENC(‘édfAGR a tt 
Paid a deeayal Be SU WAAAdT Ise 
ase wiiveeta git yt ead = faeng: | 
araeet: uadi warm iuwaq  adlaeraisa ive 
i yao feat wa 8 Ygeteadi = (aay: | 
AMT SATA stats SPA STATEL wT PRT 133 | 
3TeI WAU Hava deus Tare | 
Taam «6S tea CTT HTT IS 


qe Waa etch Aaa RIAA S| 
ata Wat wR at wa aida dieienid: ive 


sia steered AEM URAER Sedat dda frataadare wemseaa: 121 


"Does king Yudhisthira (who is virtue personified) protect the law according to the 
principles of righteousness with the help of his two arms—Vijaya (Arjuna) and Acyuta (Lord 
sri Krsna)—Yudhisthira, at the sight of whose imperial fortune and attendant glory in the 
court built by Maya (the architect of the demons) Duryodhana burned with jealousy ? (36) 
Has Bhima, who is most relentless like a serpent, given up his long-standing grudge against 
those who wronged him, viz., the Kauravas—Bhima, whose tread the earth could not bear 
as he moved about on the battle-field revolving his mace in a variety of ways (while actually 
engaged in a fight)? (37) Is Arjuna (the wielder of the Gandiva bow), the most renowned of 
leading car-warriors, now at peace with his enemies, (having subdued or destroyed them 
all)— Arjuna, who won the pleasure of Lord Siva, disguised as a Kirata (hunter) beyond all 
recognition, by hiding Him with a volley of his arrows ?(38) Do the twin brothers (Nakula and 
Sahadeva), the foster-sons of Prtha—who enjoy the protection of their half-brothers (the 
sons of Prtha) even as the eye-balls are protected by the eyelashes—rejoice after recovering 
their ancestral share from the enemy's hands through the arbitrament of war as though a pair 
of Garudas had snatched nectar from the mouth of Indra (the wielder of a thunderbolt)? (39) 
Oh, Prtha (my sister-in-law) is surviving merely forthe sake of her children, though bereaved 
of Pandu (that foremost of royal sages), who, a matchless hero and foremost car-warrior that 
he was, had conquered all the four quarters with no other companion than his bow. (40) | feel 
concerned, O gentle Uddhava, for that brother of mine (Dhrtarastra), who is paving his way 
for hell, inasmuch as he wronged his own deceased half-brother (Pandu) in the person of his 
sons (the Pandavas), and who banished me, his well-wisher, from his capital (Hastinapura), 
having yielded completely to the will of his sons.(41) | am, however, not the least surprised 
or sorry (for his behaviour towards me); for it is Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), the Supreme Ruler (of 
this universe), who bewilders the intellect of men by following the ways of mortals. | am, there- 
fore, moving about in this world, unperceived by others, observing His glory by His grace. (42) 
The Lord overlooked (for the time being) the wrongdoings of the Kauravas, though capable of 
punishing them then and there; for He sought to relieve the distress of those who had taken 
shelter in Him by exterminating with them other monarchs too, who in their threefold pride 
(of birth, wealth and learning) had strayed from the path of virtue and shook the earth with 





md 


Dis. 2 ] ‘BOOK THREE ~~. . 139 


grax Br Br Bt Br Be Ke We Kr Me Sr Kr Br Be Br Hy Ke Hr Kr Ke Ke Hr Ke Br He Ke Ke Kr Hr Ke Br Hr He Ke Ke He He Be He Ke re Ke He Ke Ke Me Hr We He He Ke He Ke Ke We He Be Br BEBE Be Bee BEBE. BEBE RE Be Bt Be Be Be BeBe BEBE Me Be He 
——— eee rere erence EEE ———oo—_>___—  ——= 


their armies again and again. (43) The birth and doings of the Lord, who is really birthless 
and actionless, are only for the extirpation of the wrongdoers as well as for attracting people 
towards Himself; otherwise (to say nothing of the Lord) what man that has transcended the 
three Gunas(modes of Prakrti) would tie himself down to a (corporeal) body or pursue an 
elaborate course of activity ? (44)Therefore, O friend, tell me the news about that Lord of 
sacred renown who, though devoid of birth, has descended in the race of Yadu for the good 
of all the guardians of the different spheres who sought refuge in Him, as well of such other 
devotees as are (ever) at His beck and call. (45) 


Thus ends the first discourse in Book Three,consisting of a dialogue between Vidura and 
Uddhava, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


Ar 
oS Sees 


31g fedrarseara: 


Discourse Il 
Uddhava recounts the childish sports of the Lord 
My Sara 

Sit wrad: Gs: aon arat fraser aaah A Blas SivsaIAINAAE: | 2 1 

a: Usa AT sea afd: i daw Ga aa aeclear | 2 | 

a Ha Aad ql wes A Aa: 1 gst amt sfagared: wWelaqae! 3 | 

a Gea puree waridian vkearta faa: ae fea: | x | 

Walkera deiwagn Wa: i quiet clade  Mereteagd: | 4 | 

Waa ttacetchlaclch Gaia: tfaqea AN fact yeelea sea! & | 
Sri Suka continued : Thus asked the news relating to his beloved Sri Krsna, that great 
devotee of the Lord, Uddhava, was put in mind of his lord and was too overwhelmed with 
emotion to utter a word in reply. (1) While engagediin worshipping the Lord in his childish play 
even as a body of five, Uddhava felt no inclination even to have his breakfast in spite of his 
mother's call. (2) Having grown grey in His service by flux of time, how could he answer 
Vidura's query regarding his lord, his thought being fixed on His feet ? (3) Completely 
immersed in the nectar flowing from the (lotus-like) feet of Sri Krsna, and transported with 
joy through intense devotion, he remained mute for nearly an hour. (4) The hair stood erect 
all over his body and tears burst forth from his closed eyes. Seeing him overpowered with 
a flood of affection, Vidura came to know that he had realized the object of his life. (5) 


Uddhava slowly returned from the divine realm to this mortal world (body-consciousness) 
and, wiping his eyes, replied to Vidura in a tone expressive of wonder (at the thought of the 


Lord's exploits) :— (6) 

Yc pengafabrera  aftdigsritot gi fs go Ged aai Teil WeyET I | 
_ gat aa olatsa acat fimmafiia daar a fagdt dim gatgaqi ci 
Pea . ARIAS «Aled: aaa «= aCi(<ité‘éMTTTI IT | GI 











140 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 


CORREO Ra ORE RR BORO RR RRR ROR RRR RR RR RE RE AR RR Me Re RR REM BT SRM RR BT BY Me Me He Me Be Be We Be Re He ee wy 
——————— TTT IN 


taal A WS A aeaaisra: i arad ett ageeerqge et igo 
sezaaqarearaaddeali FUN! STEARATE feral GHG 122 | 
arate ARTA aataat Wetrr | 
fragt SECTS: SE UTUTIS122 1 

Uddhava said : The sun in the shape of Sri Krsna having set, our homes of blighted 
splendour have been devoured by the python of Time. What shall | say, then, about our 
welfare? (7) Alas ! unfortunate is this world and more so the Yadus, who lived with Sri Hari 
(Sri Krsna) and yet could not recognize Him, even as the fish did not identify the moon (when 
she was under water). (8) The Satvatas (Yadavas) could read the mind of another through 
external gestures, were highly intelligent and lived and sported with Him at one andthe same 
place; yet they accounted Him, the Abode of all beings, the foremost of the Yadavas alone.(9) 
The intellect, however, of aman who has bestowed his heart on Sri Hari, his own Self, cannot 
be misguided by the (disrespectful or slanderous) words of those (the Yadus and others) who 
are deluded by the Lord’s own Maya (deluding potency) or those (Sisupala and others) who 
harbour animosity against Him. (10) Having shown His divine form to men who had practised 
no penance, He has now screened it from their view, even though their eyes were not sated, 
and thus robbed them of their very sight as it were (since they have nothing worth seeing left 
with them). (11) The form which He had assumed in order to reveal the power of His Yogamaya 
(Divine Energy, which was capable of manifesting such transcendent beauty), and which was 
So eminently suited to His pastimes in imitation of men, was an object of wonder not only to the 
world but even to Himself, a perfection as it was of abounding grace. It was a form whose limbs 
added to the charm even of ornaments. (12) 


agdgaedd wig fier ara fiete: | 
aiedt alee wa faenaratagat aad 
FATA TARA ATA: 

asta = gisququivatsatey: = fre HARIMT: 1 8¥1 
Paraeatgyde: WeUvaaMgqenadar | 
Uta Aesaet west aet was aes: 124i 
TI edad asta sofas asdeate | 
wt da amishkwnea wa que aaldlelerddid: 1261 
Gift Ud: itt Wade aes elafae fast: 1 
adr Hulgealisdr Tatad AlSafaeparary, | 9 | 
at a sameness faaddieta wan fae 
a faaprayfacda Wat hdedt fargHr ieci 
a afta: daueata ae ana ete aadieel 
qa uaa Wied a sea Henan 
wa: 8 ffedt avait 8 ooeiega: 89 denmgrer 120 | 
wa aaa aT: PNAS AAT: | 
ate PS ACAP SAC oe fatienledfsaaredia: 1221 





Dis. 2 ] BOOK THREE | 1417 


ge RABBLE RR ERR RE RE RRR LER RR GRRE RRR RE RE ROR ERE GER HERE ROR MOREE REE RERERE REE REMEBER ERE REREAD AMARA He HE 
treharaay uty ferera aaa fremafa 1221 
set at ee «= feted 
ON wit anafeaat dist a a was sul aa 123! 
TOS WATaaT ear MeaMriapfastaart | 
2 Mgt anlgnidagarenquree ze 


Beholding that form, which was the highest delight of all eyes, at the Rajasuya sacrifice 
of king Yudhisthira (the son of Dharma, the god of virtue), the inhabitants of all the three 
worlds thought that the entire workmanship of Brahmain creating this mortal world had been 
exhausted in fashioning that form. (13) Feeling honoured by His love-laden smiles and jokes 
and sportive glances (which reciprocated their love), the women of Vraja followed Him (in 
His excursions to the woods) with their eyes and mind and stood (like statues), leaving their 
household work half-finished. (14) With a mind full of compassion for His gentle forms 
(Vasudeva and others), that were being persecuted by His wild forms (such as Karmsa), the 
Lord, who is the Ruler both of Prakrti and the manifest creation, though unborn, appeared 
(in this world of matter) along with His glorious part manifestation (Balarama) even as fire 
(which, though present everywhere in a latent form, is manifested through wood). (15) That 
He who is unborn should assume the appearance of being born in the house of Vasudeva 
and dwell in Vraja as if for fear of the enemy (Kamsa), and that He whois possessed of infinite 
prowess should Himself flee the city (of Mathura), scared as it were by Kalayavana, puzzles 
me (as something irreconcilable with His divinity). (16) My mind is filled with agony as | recall 
what He said to His parents (Vasudeva and Devaki), bowing at their feet, “Dear father and 
mother, being in great dread of Kamsa, we (Balarama and myself) failed to render any 
service to you (repay our debt to you); therefore, be pleased to forgive us !" (17) Having 
inhaled (the fragrance of) the dust of His lotus-feet, what man can ever forget it, remembering 
that He is the same Lord who removed the earth's burden by the mere play of His arched 
eyebrows, which represents the god of death ? (18) You must have seen (with your own 
eyes) the consummation (oneness with the Lord) attained by Sisupala (the king of Cedi), who 
hated Sri Krsna—a consummation which even Yogis (ascetics) long to attain through the 
efficient practice of Yoga !| Who could bear separation from such a benign lord ? (19) 
Similarly, such other heroes of this mortal world as were killed in action (during the 
Mahabharata war) by the missiles discharged by Arjuna (son of Prtha), while drinking with 
(the cup of) their eyes (the nectar of) Sri Krsna's lotus-like countenance, which ravished all 
eyes, attained to His (supreme) Abode. (20) Himself the suzerain lord of all the three worlds, 
He is equalled by none, much less surpassed by anybody, and has all His desires satiated 
by virtue of His own supremely blissful character. Nay, His very footstool is adored by the 
eternal guardians of the various spheres with the crest of their diadems while offering their 
Presents (tributes) to Him. (21) Standing before Ugrasena, who sat on his royal throne, He 
Submitted, "My lord, listen (to my prayer) !" That He should thus behave like a servant 
confounds us, His slaves, to the utmost degree, dear Vidura. (22) Oh, even that impious 
woman, Pitana (the sister of the demon Baka)—who suckled Him (as a Babe) at her breast, 
which was daubed with a most deadly poison, with intent to kill Him—got from Him (in return) 
the destiny appropriate to a foster-mother ! Is there anyone so merciful, whom we should 
resort to for protection, other than Him ? (23) | consider even those demons as devotees of 
the Lord, who had fixed their mind on the Lord of the three worlds through anger (born of 
animosity), and who beheld on the battle-field Garuda (son of the sage Kasyapa) swooping 














142 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 


BeBe Br Ke Be Ke Br Ke Re Be Be Be Be Br Br Be AL Be Be Ae EAT Bee Bee Be Bee Hr Be Gr Ke Br We Ke Br Kr Br Kr Kr Hr Kr Hr Hr Hr Ar Br Ke Br Wr Hr Br Br We We Wr Br Sr Ke Br He Br Ke Be We We Br Br He Sr Ke Ke Sr Hr Hy Hr Hr Sry 
SS SSeS eS eS URC eeanesncsaOoOO— ss ai et 


on them, with Lord Visnu (the Wielder of the discus Sudarsana) mounted on his back. (24) 
aaa tani wa weseenifaatsinase:  aasarfirafea: 1241 
dd adcasiiva: far catfgfasad | ualae wares Welle: qaclsaad 1261 
Uidt 8 adddais  aetey: | aqaoat Hacletapledaea4a 12X91 
San 4atasst Yawiat asian wiaa Cae oaelarlaal: 121 
a Ua Men oe fed featleuqiara | To WoreRAARATL120 | 
Sarr Vee AA: HMA: | Soa Sqadie ale: HlSAcHiAa 1301 
faqary, fasaea faye yasmin serenaaqaama sepfaferises 
saad Wret few: | fade arene fant aaa fay: 1321 
adds set: amlunsaaMsifage: i neetermaat AR 86sec 1331 


Mewes «= AMC GATTI Te Hod WA Slot AusmnuEa: 13x! 
Sa SEMA ASM TRAE Medan Tiss fagtsadare fEdtaiseara: 12 | 

In order to bring relief to this earth the Lord was born of Vasudeva and Devakti in the 
prison-house of Kamsa (the chief of the Bhojas) in response to the prayer of Brahma (the 
unborn). (25) Having been removed therefrom to Nanda’'s Vraja by His father (Vasudeva), 
who was terribly afraid of Kamsa, He lived there with Balarama (His elder brother) for eleven 
years, concealing His glory (from the outside world). (26) In the grove on the bank of the 
Yamuna, the trees of which were swarmed with warbling birds, the Lord sported in the midst 
of cowherd boys, grazing calves. (27) He showed childish gestures that were pleasing to the 
sight of the inhabitants of Vraja, sometimes seeming to weep, sometimes appearing to laugh 
and sometimes gazing innocently like a lion-cub. (28) (As He grew a little older) the same 
Lord took to grazing white bulls and cows, that were embodiments of splendour, and 
entertained with the music of His flute the cowherd boys that accompanied Him. (29) 
Meanwhile He despatched in mere sport all those demons sent by Kamsa—who were skilled 
in Maya (conjuring tricks) and could assume any form they liked—even as a child would 
smash up its playthings. (30) Having tamed (and expelled) Kaliya (a leader of serpents), He 
revived the cows (as well as the cowherds) that had fallen dead by drinking the poisoned 
water (of the Yamuna), and rendered it possible for them to drink its water,which had now 
regainedits purity. (31) In orderto make the best use of the abundant riches in the possession 
of Nanda (as also to curb the pride of Indra) the Lord persuaded him to perform with the help 
of the best of Brahmanas a sacrifice in which cows are worshipped. (82) Blessed Vidura ! 
when Indra, who was enraged at the interruption of his worship, poured down torrential rains 
(on the land of Vraja), the Lord protected the inmates of Vraja, that were much agitated, by 
holding up the Govardhana hill like a toy-umbrella over them and thus showed His grace to 
them. (33) Making the most of the evenings bright with:the rays of the autumnal moon, He 
sang in melodious strains and revelled in the midst of a bevy of young women, gracing them 
by His presence. (34) 


Thus ends the second discourse in Book Three, consisting of a dialogue between 
Vidura and Uddhava, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


FIRS SS St DIY 


Dis. 3 ] BOOK THREE 143 


ofr Br Br Br Br Be Be Be Be Ke Kr Re Ke Ber He Gr He Gr Ge Kr Ke Hr Ge Ke Ke Hr Pe Ke He Me He Kr Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Kee Ke He Hr Ke Ke He He Ke He We Ke Ke He Be He Re He Be Be We Be Ke Br BER We Be He He Ke Pe Ke Ve Be He Be He Re Be Be Ke 


BIA Trea seaa: 


Discourse III 


A brief survey of the Lord's other exploits 
SEI SAA 
ad: 8 wa Wt waitrisetiar wa aecadad: | 
Raatssidgiisqaetat ed eee state 2 
ard: Upekh were aaa Welat wt wd Used! 2 | 
aed «86odtmarna «a «fa: aatfa ayer 
Teagan 4 fiat wart we ae aft aecquut:1 31 
Hapa saga aftrar waar Aafia | 
ASA 8 «=—|«- ema: «= RAYA: ARTA LX I 
fa supra sa fon fafa gas ae 
asad 8a sare: mist FAe aM & | 
a wt GC aM wed Gg Pid afer 
STA adetdararal aa eral dad: Ggatfaaar | & 1 
ded Wade: Ga eI sede 
Sura Gen SITE: WeAlstqersfedtacteh: | 9 | 
Uddhava continued :Then, in order to afford delight to His parents (Vasudeva and 
Devaki), the Lord returned to the city (of Mathura), accompanied by Baladeva (His elder half- 
brother) and, knocking down Kamsa (the leader of His enemies) from his high seat and killing 
him, dragged his lifeless body along on the ground. (1) Having learnt the Vedas along with 
the sciences subsidiary to the same (viz., Grammar, Astronomy, Phonetics, Prosody, 
Etymology and Kalpa or the science dealing with the ritual and laying down rules for 
ceremonial or sacrificial acts) from Sandipani (His preceptor), who recited them to Him but 
once, He restored to him his dead son by way of the preceptor's fee after ripping up the belly 
of the demon Paficajana (and recovering him from Yama's abode). (2) Trampling on those 
(king Sigupala and his associates, Jarasandha and others) that had been invited on behalf 
of princess Rukmini (the daughter of king Bhismaka of the Vidarbhas) by her comeliness, 
that vied with Goddess Laksmi's (or by her elder brother, Rukmi, the first two syllables of 
whose name were identical with the corresponding syllables of her own name), and who 
Stood gazing, the Lord carried her away with the intention of marrying her by mutual consent, 
knowing her (as a part manifestation of Goddess Laksmi Herself and as one who had 
dedicated herself to Him) to be His own share, even as Suparna (Garuda) carried away the 
jar containing nectar (that had been won by him). (3) Having (synchronously) tamed (as 
many as seven) bulls whose nostrils had not been bored through, He married princess Satya 
(the daughter of king Nagnajit) atan assembly ofa suitors called for the election of ahusband 
by the princess. But when the other assembled princes, who were foolish enough to retain 


@ passion for her, even though their pride had been curbed (by His superhuman feet), took 
up arms (to contend with Him), He disposed of them with His own (divine) weapons, Himself 














144 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA | [ Dis. 3 
BeBe Me Ke Pe We Be Be Me eS HOR AER A BEE ON ORR RR OR OR A ae ar sr Be Re Re AT Ne AY We Bie we ie SS we Be We Ne Se NY BB wee Her Re Re Hr By Be A Hr Hr ep, 
remaining unscathed. (4) Like a hen-pecked husband, the almighty Lord took away (from 
Indra's paradise) the celestial tree (of Parijata) for His favourite consort (Satyabhama) in order 
to please her; and on this account Indra (the wielder of a thunderbolt), blind with rage, pursued 
Him with his bodyguards (consisting of the forty-nine wind-gods); for Indra is indeed a toy in 
the hands of his wives. (5) Seeing her son (the demon Naraka), who seemed to swallow the 
sky with his (gigantic) body, killed by the Lord's discus, Sudarsana, goddess Earth prayed to 
Him (for mercy) when the Lord bestowed on the deceased's son (Bhagadatta) the portion of 
his kingdom that had not been annexed, and entered the gynaeceum (in Naraka’'s palace). (6) 
Seeing Sri Hari (Sri Krsna), the Befriender of the afflicted, the princesses (numbering not less 
than sixteen thousand) that had been kidnapped (and imprisoned) there by Naraka (the son 
of goddess Earth) sprang on their feet and at once accepted Him as their husband through 
glances that betrayed their excessive joy, bashfulness and love. (7) 


sat «ded «= wafearrmy atfeamiafad aye ouiaqeEa: wae ¢ | 
ARGU ase Aa Add: | What at at seadfdgysai e 
mIOAMMaMedididies «SA: «| OL Site feet wagai as ania 1201 
arat fefae aml qi acamna AlSes adaetdMadicnig Ada 22! 
— VGA uetat: afaarqai aa Y: Hest Aad aes: 1221 
“Wenvleganeralaamt Haat SUA | 
wet Maa wt wat A Ate URL 183! 
foam dalsd = after «= aaglorsitens(reiirye: | 
apremanterest waa as awe  ALIex! 
fam acai wfam fae  aeamedmfactear | 
aur oa «= garadiset egesedera SAT R 


Having assumed by His wonderful divine potency (Yogamaya) an equal number of forms 
suited to those girls, the Lord accepted their hand with due ceremony at one and the same 
hour, though in different palaces. (8) In order to extend the sphere of His Lila (playful activity) 
He begot ten sons through each of them—sons that were His own images in every 
respect.(9) When Kalayavana, Jarasandha (the king of Magadha), Salva and others 
besieged the city (of Mathura) with their armies, He took the initiative Himself and had them 
killed by His people (Mucukunda, Bhima and others), lending to them His own divine 
power.(10) Of the demons Sambara, Bana, Mura and Balwala, Dwivida (the monkey chief) 
and other warriors like Dantavaktra, some He disposed of Himself, while others he caused 
to be despatched (by Balarama, Pradyumna and so on). (11) Thereafter He brought about 
the destruction of monarchs who had joined the sides of your nephews (the sons of 
Dhrtarastra and Pandu), and who made the entire globe rock as they marched to Kuruksetra 
(the scene of the Mahabharata war) with their armies. (12) Nay, He did not rejoice (was not 
Satisfied) even when He saw Suyodhana (a euphemism for Duryodhana) with his satellites 
lying prostrate on the battle-field, his thighs broken (by a blow from Bhima's mace)— 
Suyodhana, who had lost his fortune as well as his life as an outcome of the wicked counsel 
of Karna,Duhsasana (his younger brother) and Sakuni (the son of Subala). (13) (He said to 
Himself) “Even though the earth has been relieved of a huge burden through the destruction 
of armies with a total strength of eighteen Aksauhinis* at the hands of Acarya Drona, Bhisma, 

* One Aksauhini consists of 21,870 elephants, an equal number of chariots, 65,610 horses and 1,09,350 foot. Thus the 
plo ea ven alone involved the destruction of 3,93,660 elephants, the same number of chariots, 11,80,980 horses and 
19,68,300 foot. 


Dis. 3 ] BOOK THREE 145 


gr br Br Be Br Br Hr Br Br He He Hr Sr He Hr Hy He Hr Br Hr Br Br Be Br Sr He Br Ke Ke He Sr Ke Ke We We Ke Ke We Kr Ke Ke Ke Ke He We We Be Ke Ke Ke He Ve We We Ke Be Me We Ke He We Be Be Be Wee Be Ke We We Kee He Gee. He Ge Be Be BEBE 





itis yet negligible when compared to the irresistible might of the Yadus (My own kinsmen 
and proteges), still flourishing under the protection of My part manifestations (Pradyumna 
and others). (14) Drunk with wine, when they quarrel among themselves, their eyes suffused 
with blood, that will be the only way of exterminating them and no other. As a matter of fact, 
they will disappear as soon as | get ready (to depart for My eternal Abode)." (15) 


Ud Cara War aid ergy aes aaa Wea: ANAT aay: asia 12 | 


Seat «ad: | Wea: «Cafe a a slwaediea: yasiaat ea: 1201 
Base aaa ears y: last eamast ta TA Heads: 1221 
wary fag wlndaua: | mmr fade gdemtan: arene: 1291 
faxiimacted are digencuiahaumada  siifiedd alta 1201 


sa wleay da We amt aeqitd ave aaaureiaruretec: 1221 
Tad TAU dae sei yetay ay faa: ans 1221 
coi camy cai: wa ganaiat faesia aha abtaaa: 1231 
Pondering thus, the Lord securely placed king Yudhisthira (the son of Dharma) on his 
(ancestral) throne and brought delight to His near and dear ones by showing them the way 
of the righteous (by His own example). (16) The seed of Puru's line, that was duly planted 
(in the shape of Pariksit) in the womb of Uttara by Abhimanyu (Arjuna's son through 
subhadra, Sri Krsna’s own sister) and was later torn up by the missile (Brahmastra) 
discharged by Aswatthama (the son of Drona), was eventually preserved by the Lord. (17) 
The almighty Lord persuaded Yudhisthira to perform no less than three ASwamedhas 
(horse-sacrifices); and the emperor too, devoted as he was to Sri Krsna, led a happy life, 
protecting the earth with the help of his younger brothers (Bhima and others). (18) The Lord 
as well, who is the Soul of the universe, enjoyed the pleasures of life at Dwaraka, keeping 
to the path chalked out by the Vedas and the Smrtis, and remaining unattached to those 
pleasures in conformity with the spirit of Sankhyayoga (according to which it is matter in the 
form of the senses that reacts on matter in the form of their objects, the spirit ever remaining 
aloof as a witness). (19) Delighting this as well as the other world (heaven), and the Yadus 
in particular, by His endearing smiles and loving glances, His words sweet as nectar, His 
irreproachable conduct and His person, which was the abode of all charm and splendour, 
He revelled by night with His consorts, affording them the pleasure of His company and 
showing them momentary affection. (20-21) As He thus enjoyed life for many years He felt 
an aversion for the performance of religious duties binding on a householder and conducive 
to the pleasures of sense. (22) What man, then, who is in the power of Providence and who 
seeks to please Sri Krsna (the Master of Yogas) through the practice of Devotion, would set 
his heart on the pleasures of sense, which are in the gift of Providence ? (23) 


Wai adifernisheatisipaien: | aaa aaa: atgqsittatetentiear: 12%! 

ad: mlaqantadarsatstaeniad: 1 aq: THM Aes Wedaaledl: 1241 

wm aa fiqeardiga dqsreri adie fast meal agqm ag: 12a! 

frog wd Wat aawikreser an wha Sen at ahaa i201 

aa ded aa aa wATacdomI Miamaiaa: au: wreyfa eli: 1221 
sf sieeermad Ae! URAS Seda dlp fagdsadare Iataiseara: 131 


Once, when the youths of the Yadus and Bhojas were playing in the city (of Dwaraka), 
they offended some sages, who in-their turn pronounced a curse on the boys, knowing as 





= 
a 
: 
= 
~ 
- 








146 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4 


Weer Rr Wr Sr Sr kr Qe BeBe Re Re Re Be Re Re Re Re RAE RAE RE BeBe REBEL HE He Re BT Re Br BL Re Be Ke Br Ke Br He Br Hr Be He He Ke Hr Sr Br Hr Br Sr Hr Br Hr Hr Kr Hr Be Hr Ke Br Br Kr Br Hr Hr Br Ke Hr Hr Br Kr org, 
LL 


they did the intention of the Lord (who was bent upon the destruction of the Yadus). (24) 
Some months after that incident, the Vrsnis, the Bhojas, the Andhakas and others drove in 
their chariots to Prabhasa (a sacred spot on the seaside) with great joy, deluded as they were 
by (the will of) Sri Krsna. (25) Having bathed there and propitiated the manes, gods and Rsis 
by offering them handfuls of water, taken from that place, they gifted cows possessing many 
good qualities to the Brahmanas. (26) They further gave away to them gold, silver, beds, 
wearing apparel, deerskin, blankets, palanquins, chariots, elephants, unmarried girls, plots 
of land as a means of subsistence and foods containing a variety of tastes, in a spirit of 
dedication to the Lord, and then those valiant men, who lived for the sake of cows and the 
Brahmanas alone, bowed to: them with their heads touching the ground. (27-28) 


Thus ends the third discourse in Book Three, consisting of a dialogue between 
Vidura and Uddhava, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


g 2. Ly 
DID 


AA ATatseara: 


Discourse IV 


As directed by Uddhava, Vidura calls on the sage Maitreya 
SEA SATA 


AA A dada Yea Ghat aA areuii da fawkrawa gendd ayy: 1 2 
aa 86 aaereot fetter feerafa «varareiguriia «ada 2 I 
Wad MIA Ae Adaetaet a: | Uadiqaeysa qaqequifaand | 3 | 
We drt wad somhdteu ziaal a sada mae afereldor i x | 
stag aatsstd WMaeaieea | OEASaT Ad: alefascauraa: 1 & | 
saan fafa dad ufisiftd aeaat ade « | 
zamtaad «86 fast || aIdTeuIetera| ettisigiifated dlanlaretuor «ai | 
am state  cfaonattrentess| sfsarsionraentpet 4 waenftorenti ¢ | 
aera SATE | lena fag saa Few | < | 

Taha Wada: WHeMaMAH aA | 

Sadi AMAT are fasmraqara 120 | 


Uddhava continued : Then, after taking their meals with the permission of those 
Brahmanas, they drank wine and, having been deprived of their wits by tipsiness, cut one 
another to the quick by hurling abuses. (1) Their intellect having been perverted due to the 
inebriating effect of wine, by sunset they began fighting (to death) among themselves like 
bamboos rubbing against one another. (2) Beholding the ways of His own Maya (deluding 
potency), the Lord sipped the water from the Saraswati and sat down at the foot of a (peepul) 
tree (near its bank). (3) (Before this) when the Lord, who relieves the agony of those who 
resort to Him for protection, made up His mind to exterminate His race, He told me (even at 
Dwaraka) to proceed to Badarivana (the spot where the divine sages Nara and Narayana 
-still practise their austere penance). (4) Although, O vanquisher of foes, | was aware of His 


Dis. 4 ] - ‘BOOK THREE 147 


intentions, | nevertheless went after Him, unable to bear separation from His feet. (5) Looking 
for my beloved lord, | beheld Him, the abode of all splendour, seated all alone on the bank 
of the Saraswati, although (as a matter of fact) He is shelterless (being the shelter. of all). (6) 
Possessed of a brilliant swarthy form, whichis all Sattva or purity (free from a mixture of Rajas 
or passion), with reddish yet most gentle eyes, He could be easily distinguished by His four 
arms and the yellow silk on His person. (7) Placing His lotus-like right foot on His left thigh, 
He was reclining against a young Aswattha (peepul) tree, and was full of joy, even though 
He had renounced the pleasures of sense. (8) Meandering through the various worlds, there 
came by chance at that moment the enlightened sage Maitreya, a great devotee of the Lord 
and a loving friend and fellow-student of the sage Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa). (9) While that 
devoted sage Stood listening with rapt attention, his head bent low in the ecstasy of delight 

and emotion, Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) spoke to me (as follows), refreshing 

me by His endearing smiles and affectionate glances. (10) 


aged a at ara gram: 

aa qa faggat agi ufefeema aat aap: 122! 

a w mat amt warmed veqet a 

am yo Ww saprd fest ceam fasetqaqe 122! 

qd wat shasta asa ad fauna xnaricat i 

WH #4Uw wnfemamd ag  AMad adhd 1231 

The Lord said : Dwelling within you, | know the desire of your heart and proceed to 

confer on you that which is difficult for others to attain. In your previous incarnation, when 
you were a Vasu, (O Uddhava !) you worshipped Me, in the sacrifice jointly performed by 
the Prajapatis (the lords of created beings ) and the Vasus, with the sole object of attaining 
Me. (11) The present is certainly your last incarnation, O saintly Uddhava, since you have 
earned My grace in this life. You are indeed fortunate in having seen Me on this secluded 
spot, by virtue of your unalloyed devotion, at a time when | am about to leave this mortal 
world (and return to My eternal Abode). (12) (I am going to impart to you) that supreme 
wisdom, revealing My glory, which the sages call by the name of ‘Bhagavata and which 
| taught to Brahma (the unborn), who was seated on the lotus that had sprung from My 
navel, in a former cycle (called the Padma-Kalpa) at the dawn of creation. (13) 


Saladin: TREE aa: MAAS HISTASEAL | 


afa am wa nema wddagrr aq ght 9 aiecl 


Thus politely addressed by the Lord, and a recipient of His constant favour. | returned 











148 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4 


Be Ree Re Re Re Ree Re Re Re RR ERR RR Re RR Re Re RE Re RR RY Ree Re He Bee Be Re MMe BeBe Be BeBe Bee Be We Be Be We Hr Br He Hr Fe BeBe Re He Hee He Be Be He Ke Ke Hr He Hy, 
a ee a a a a E 


in faltering accents with joined palms, the hair on my body standing erect through affection 
and tears flowing from my eyes :— (14) "Which on earth of the four objects (of human pursuit), 
my lord, is difficult to attain for those who are devoted to Your lotus-feet ? Yet, O Perfect One. 
| crave fornone of these, keen as! am to worship Your lotus-feet. (15) That You should resor 
to action, though actionless, should be born, though devoid of birth, should take to Your heels 
for fear of the enemy and seek shelter in a fortress, even though being the Destroyer of all, 
and should take to wife (over) ten thousand damsels though delighting in Your own blissfy| 
Self, puzzles the mind even of the knowing. (16) That You,whose knowledge is unimpeded, 
uninterrupted and ever free from doubt and error, and who are ever awake, should call me 
in Your deliberations and consult me as an ignorant man would do, perplexes our mind as 
it were, O glorious Lord ! (17) Pray, instruct us, my master, in that supreme and integral 
wisdom which unfolds the mystery of Your Being and which You taught to Brahma, in case 
it is fit to be received by us, so that we may easily get over the sorrows (of mundane 
existence)." (18) 

sulafedetela «Wal AAT SOR: | Stfecanefarctar atrea: ura ferries 

a Vannifadtadiatastateranagn eran: | 
wr et Ug aS = fata 101 
ise deaitietcfaarnitad: saint cad aa aaaismaveet 22 
aa ART aal A UTaie:ige dia aa de aaa clHweadt 1221 
When | submitted to Him in these words what was uppermost in my mind, the supreme 

Lord with lotus-like eyes revealed to me His transcendent character. (19) Having thus learnt 
from my worshipful Guru (Sri Krsna) the way of realizing God, who is the only Truth, and 
bowing to the Lord's feet, | went round Him clockwise as a mark of reverence and came away 
to this place, distressed at heart due to separation from Him. (20) Delighted by His sight, but 
now afflicted by separation from Him, O Vidura, | shall proceed to the sacred spot of 
Badarikasrama, His favourite retreat, where the glorious Narayana and the worshipful sage 
Nara are engaged in peaceful yet austere penance extending over a long period (a whole 
Kalpa) for the good of the world. (21-22) 


yh Jaa 
saeciquenua §98=Gecl sae aI aaa «=«6ategafad «= at: 1231 
a a weed asm akady: | fasrsneaene wet pease 12x 
sri Suka continued : The enlightened Vidura assuaged by force of wisdom the grief that 
had burst forth (in his heart) when he heard the unbearable news about the death of his near 
and dear ones. (23) When that great devotee (Uddhava), the chief among the servants of 


Lord Sri Krsna, was about to depart (for Badarikasrama), Vidura (the foremost among the 
Kauravas) spoke to him out of love (as follows). (24) 


fagt sara 
i Ut CIANS: Mehlat acle AtAT Sate | 
ap  Udiaiset ate  famtiyen:  wyendqasta 2k! 
Vidura said: Be pleased to impart to us the supreme wisdom which unfolds the secret 
‘of the Lord's own essential nature and which the divine Sri Krsna, the Master of Yoga, taught 
to you; for the devotees of Lord Visnu move about (in the world) only in order to accomplish 
the object of their servants. (25) 


pis. 4 ] BOOK THREE 149 


spr tr Br Be Be Be Be BeBe BLK BEBE BEG BENE BeBe He Me He He Re Be Ke He Re Be Me Re Re He RRR RE RRC RE REA Re RR Be Be Re He Reh Be Re Be Be Re ee EE REE RE RE REEAEBEREGREAEREREREREREBERE 





S&T SATA 
aq a made aft: aledista Ai arenacraasseet aeletch frereat 1261 


Uddhava replied : For the knowledge of that truth you should wait upon the sage 
Maitreya (son of Kusaru), who was personally instructed in this behalf by the Lord in my 
presence, while He was about to leave this mortal world. (26) 


My Sara 
git We fag §«faagttione «geet orfadream: | 
oi anita ufet ameagqe anfea ailonfatiat ads 1201 
Sri Suka continued : Relieved of his great agony (of separation from the Lord) by the 
nectar-like talk that he thus had with Vidura on the virtues of Lord Sri Krsna (the Soul of 
the universe), Uddhava (the son of Upagu) passed that night as if it were a moment on the 
bank of the Yamuna (the younger sister of god Yama*) and departed thence (early next 


morning). (27) 
UMA 


Preqaag qrargeragqauageag Wea: | 
a qd wma seat agit aaa onefa seller: 1201 
The king asked : When even the topmost generals of the car-warriors among the Vrsnis 
and Bhojas had met their end (as a result of the imprecation pronounced by the sages), nay, 
when Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) Himself, the Supreme Ruler even of the three lords of the universe, 
(viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva), had to leave His body (in the eyes of the world), how is it that 
Uddhava alone, the foremost of those generals, survived ? (28) 


Sy SAA 
Beranaraesla HIoaMaal sod: |G Wao Ta MRACEAaA AAT 123 | 
srenecrenena Afe AA Aaa seqed Ualel WUeIead at: 1301 
Aeaisvafa usa aaquiida: wy: iam awaqt ole meats fied 132! 
wa fieledem ares: wetter acaismmrere «afeiist «= carer 1321 
fagisagaregel | PUTA WIG: | MISAUMCSA HAT Renta Ai3zl 
tear Salis Ataf areata genet UAT fagarer 13¥1 
aa a PONS Fela aaa! aay wd ATad ele TAfsge: 1341 
aise: miata: fag aafasads: ised aad aa fiarqat af: 1261 
sft siteerrat Het Tee Sedat qian fagtaadare Agaiseaa: re! 

Sri Suka replied : When Sri Krsna, whose desire never remains unfulfilled, had 
exterminated His own race through the instrumentality of Death, who appeared in the shape 
of the Brahmanas' execration, and when He was about to cast off His body (in the eyes of 
the world), He reflected thus:—(29) "Now, when | shall have departed from this world, 
Uddhava alone, the foremost among those who have attained Self-Realization, is really 
qualified to receive the knowledge concerning Me. (30) Uddhava is in no wise inferior to Me, 


inasmuch as He has mastered his self and is never perturbed by the objects of sense. So 
let him remain on earth, imparting to the world the knowledge regarding Me." (31) Instructed 


river Yamuna was begotten along with the god Yama by the sun-god. Hence she 


. idi acred a 
The \delly presicing vente was later on won by Lord Sri Krsna (vide Srimad Bhagavata X. Iviii.17—23). 


is spoken of as a sister of Yama. Her hand 





reopiring 


— 
_— 








f 
z 
= 
S 
=F 
4 
4 


150 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 
PRR RRR RRR RR TR AR EER RRR RRR RE A Me RAE RE ARE RE EERE BRE AEE RE RE Re BES SE SE BEER RE BERETS BE BE Be Bee Br 


thus by Sri Krsna, the Preceptor of the three worlds and the Source of the Vedas, Uddhava 
betook himself to BadarikaSrama and adored Sri Hari (Sri Krsna) through abstract 
meditation. (32) When Vidura heard from Uddhava an account of the praiseworthy doings 
of Sri Krsna, the Supreme Spirit, who had assumed a human semblance as a mere sport, 
as well as of the way in which He had quitted His body—which was such as strengthened 
the resolution of the resolute and was something too hard to accomplish for those who have 
a feeble mind and therefore as good as beasts—and when, O Pariksit (the foremost among 
the Kurus), he remembered that Sri Krsna had thought of him (at the time of His departure), 
he was overwhelmed with emotion and wept on parting with that great devotee of the 
Lord. (88—35) Leaving the bank of the Kalindi (Yamuna), the enlightened Vidura (the 
foremost of the Bharatas) reached in a few days the bank of the heavenly river (Ganga), 
where the sage Maitreya (the son of Mitra) was. (36) 


Thus ends the fourth discourse:in Book Three, consisting of a dialogue between 
Vidura and Uddhava, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


CB a 
PII REINS me 


SIN GSaseara: 


Discourse V 
The sage Maitreya describes the process of creation 
in reply to Vidura's question 
Alp Sara 
ak din may: pent Aranda | 
TAIT A ATA: UTES Alaiteaqonfiaga: 1k | 
Sri Suka continued : Vidura, the foremost of the Kurus, whose heart was purified by 

devotion to the imperishable Lord Sri Krsna, approached the sage Maitreya of fathomless 
wisdom, who was staying at Haridwara (the gateway of the celestial river, Ganga, so-called 


because the river descends into the plains at this point) and, gratified by his good disposition 
and other virtues, asked him (the following question): (1) 


fagt sara 
qaa aah ata oat a a: Wa aru ar 
faed Waa Wa Fa AA GH ANAM aca: 1 21 
SARA Ponsraa qalestaitoret ae:Race | 
aes «60a TS ef = ere I 3 I 
aagaaier ad a a: aia wna a dam 
@e fem asia wet wm aan qomi x | 
aia pair paar arena 9  wanatemelier: | 
am Wastin ge file: wena aft wnat farts 4 | 


Dis. 5 ] BOOK THREE 151 


BeBe Be Be Br Be Be Se He Ke Ke Br He Hr Ke Be Be Be Br Ke Be Be Be He Ke Ke Ke We Ke Ke Ge He Hr Hy Ke Ke Ke He Be He Hr He Ke Ke Me Ke Ke He He Ke Ke He Ge Ke Ge He He Re We Be He Be Hr Ke Fe Ge Be Be He Ge Ke He We BeBe Hr He HERE BEA 


am wa: W@W a ge frasa aa wert a faquafi: | 
atari Uh afar «age EISSEHIL | & | 
met | faet 3 fartgquot )=6aara— aatioaaaresa: | 
Tt 2 gaat svat 3: sledge | 9 | 
arava area ae whaler! 
stage fe adera anata stand: seid: 1 t 
a waa seaedeatert ai fee ae 
ARTA fags aT aula fasad 1 @ 1 
aa «86aMtaq oad 6 6 | CU reeresitienrt 
aIqya aero aaa aarya PUTHATAEATA 120 | 
amrarndadstard aq a: affirm 
a: ure ger at waset tet feakr ie 
qmidaasittaguret watt a RAAT Hea: | 
arg 8 86oorageracdiadiat qo mt: AM e2I 
a sera  faadaer fateaaur ati da: 
a: Ualqaldtaadel TAR: STAAL aA 123 | 
aApSsragrafaelsazira Re: eu fanart 
faroirtat CaS VATA A Aaa Syal Ae, 1 YY | 
qa alana Wide: waa aa ae! 
mya «usa sada «fara a: aida citefent: 1241 
a fassraketadaaret Salat: Syetdtalih: | 
aaer  anivafagesitt ariet: aida aft Aiea! 

Vidura said : People perform actions for the sake of happiness; but they neither attain 
happiness nor succeed in ending their sorrow thereby. On the other hand, they undergo 
suffering again and again as a result of those acts. Therefore, O worshipful sage, be 
pleased to tell me what Is advisable under the circumstances. (2) The blessed devotees 
of Lord Janardana (Sri Krsna) move about in this world just in order to shower their grace 
on men who have through ill luck turned their face away from Sri Krsna and are given to 
unrighteousness and are therefore extremely miserable. (3) Be pleased to point out to me, 
O foremost saint, that blessed path by following which people succeed in propitiating the 
Lord, who in His turn settles in their heart, purified by devotion, and bestows on them the 
most ancient wisdom, which brings with it the realization of Truth. (4) Kindly also tell me 
what kind of deeds are performed by the Lord, who is the Ruler of all the three worlds and 
absolutely independent, when He descends into the world of matter; how, though 
- actionless, He brought forth this universe at the dawn of creation; how, having established 
it on a firm footing, He provides a means of subsistence for all created beings; and how 


again, having withdrawn it into the cavity of His heart and refraining from all activity, He 
retires into communion with His Yogamaya; and finally how, having (created this universe 














152 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 


Re Wr Se Re Sr Re Pre Be Kee eee eH AE He Re Re Re Re Rr Re Re Re Re We Ree Ree Re Re Re Be Re Re Me AA BY Be Be Br Sr We Be Ke We He Wr Se Ke He He He Hr We Be Ke He Kr He Rr Hr Vr Hy wy, 
(Dot tlt sat a se e@”@”eerpPPre nnn A 


over again and) entered it as the Inner Controller, the Lord of all Masters of Yoga, though 
one, appears in diverse forms. (5-6) Also recount to me the exploits that He performs as 
amere sport for the well-being of the Brahmanas, the cows and the gods in the course of 
His various Avataras or descents into the world of matter. My mind does not feel sated even 
though | go on hearing the nectar-like stories of Sri Krsna (the Crest-jewel of those enjoying 
fair renown). (7) Pray, further tell me, O chief of the Brahmanas, with what principles that 
suzerain Lord of all the worlds created the different worlds and their guardian deities, as wel] 
as the dark regions (lying beyond the mountain called Lokaloka’*), wherein appear all classes 
of beings entrusted with different duties, and how theself-existent Lord Narayana, the Maker 
of the universe, endowed all created beings with a distinctive disposition, activity, form and 
name. (8-9) | have often heard, O worshipful sage, from the lips of the sage Vyasa about the 
duties of the higher (twice-born) as well as the lower classes of men; but | am now fed up with 
all other Dharmas, conducive as they are to trivial joys, and find my sole delight in the stream 
of nectar that flows from the stories of Sri Krsna. (10) As a matter of fact, who can be sated 
with the stories of Sri Krsna (whose feet are the abode of all sanctity), which are sung with 
praise by seers (like Narada) in the assemblies of holy men like you ? For, entering the cavity 
of a man's ears (through His stories) the Lord cuts asunder the bond of attachment to his 
home, which throws one into the whirlpool of metempsychosis. (11) It was with the intention 
of recounting the Lord's virtues that your friend, the sage Krsna Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa), 
composed the Mahabharata. For even there, while (apparently) dwelling on the pleasures 
of sense, the mind of human beings is (ultimately) drawn towards the stories of Sri Hari. (12) 
The attraction (thus generated) for the stories of Sri Hari, when it grows, creates aversion in 
the mind of a devout man for other things. Nay, it speedily puts an end to all the sorrows of 
the man who has tasted the joy flowing from the constant remembrance of Sri Hari's feet. (13) 
| deplore those ignorant men who have a dislike for the stories of Sri Hari due to their sins 
and, therefore, deserve to be pitied even by the pitiable. The deity presiding over time cuts 
short (every moment) their allotted span of life, engaged as they are (all the time) in idle talk, 
idle activities and idle thought. (14). Therefore, O Maitreya (son of Kusaru), friend of the 
afflicted, even as a bee gathers honey from the flowers, so be pleased to extract the essence 
of all stories in the shape of the stories of Sri Hari, the Bestower of blessedness and the 
Abode of sacred renown, and relate the same to me for my good. (15) Also kindly recount 
to me the superhuman feats performed by the Lord when He descended into the world of 
matter, assuming His energy (known by the name of Maya) for the sake of creation, 
preservation and dissolution of the universe. (16) 


Ayah Sava 
a Wa War ys: xen aranfed: i gat f:taaa qe ae Aa I2V! 


Sri Suka continued : Questioned thus by Vidura for the supreme good of men, the 
worshipful sage Maitreya (the son of Kusaru) addressed him as follows, showing great 
honour to him. (17) 


WAT sara 
MM GS aa MeN Glen AeaaVed! | hile fadadl Giles SAIS ASIA: 1221 
adfaat 80s afar daca | Teltstaaad arta falar: 12°! 
TUCSTa «| saaaa)« AA: | Wd: AA BTA Bra: Walaa | 2o | 


*A belt or circle of mountains surrounding the outermost of the seven seas and dividing the visible world from the region 
of darkness (As the sun is within this wall of mountains, they are light on one side and dark on the other). 





Dis. 5 | BOOK THREE 153 


Be We Re Me He Be Be We Ke Kee He Ke Ke Wee Ke We We We We We Ke We eee Re We We Me We We We eRe Me VR Re eR Re RR RR ROR Re Re Re RR RR Re eR RR RE ERE RE Me BER Re RR Be Ke Be Be He 


Wa Wradt Met Wad: AAT Al ger Waleanea Asses ASL 1221 

aa a Waele anmaugied: i faskrepsarnat  avlarearqyest: 1221 
Maitreya said : O pious Vidura, you have put mankind under a deep obligation by asking 
me this excellent question. Your mind is already fixed on the Lord who is beyond sense- 
perception; and your fame will thus be spread far and wide in this world. (18) Vidura, it is not 
to be wondered at that you should have thus captivated Sri Hari, the Lord of the universe, by 
your exclusive devotion, begotten as you are by no less a personage than the sage 
Badarayana (Vedavyasa). (19) You are no other than the worshipful Yama, the punisher of all 
creatures, descended, as a result of the imprecation pronounced by the sage Mandavya, from 
the loins of the sage Vyasa (son of Satyavati) through the maid-servant and concubine of the 
latter's (deceased) uterine brother (Vicitravirya, who was also born of Satyavati). (20) 
Moreover, you are ever beloved of the Lord as well as of His devotees; that is why, while 
departing from this world, the Lord commanded me to teach you wisdom . (21) I, therefore, 
now proceed to recount in due order the Lord's pastimes, unfolded by His Yogamaya 
(wondertul divine potency) for the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe. (22) 


Warich AMAA Besse fay: | ASAIN AAT AGUA: 1231 
a Mt Wl aal SB AuRae qeatontle | WAsadMarar Cealkntaqnee 1261 
a at Wet se: wih: Acealiaent | Ara ATA Best aad PAA fay: 1241 
lege Aaa Wmeenmetest: i yeaoneayd ddan  didarirsi 
adsuad Teradekienlerdiedidt | fagtaraissneeer fas agiaatae: 1201 
CUSARMUTSATOTAT Wise SNE: | SAM Aenteren fase fageran 1221 
Tetallsqpauncedca Saad | hla RUTshaay YairsatAa: 12k I 





aaikoestas arsed eri adacnismatenamt dentine 
acne a cal staifieast Ad: 1301 
wwearitsanad «=6oaMedaenft 60a ama aagenieda: WG feguie: 1321 


aoa  wWesled AY laAvaisHed wet fagdfartaste 1321 

aieist fapatut addiedeitad: | dat wade Vaio ore 1331 

3ttemirad wHtfdepdaratfara | Serr «Tate «HISAR: 13¥1 

SATA STATS fapdgarctiaat! Fat | TRATUIMTesOATaaranTa: 1341 

Va ANB  AIAMaTa i aa waa Ws fag: 134! 

W wat: Hen faat: Hematos: | Aaeaearean: May: MAA faz 13 | 
Before creation this universe existed in no other form than the Lord, who Is the very Self 
and the Ruler of all the Jivas (individual souls). The Spirit did not appear then in the form of 
many a subject and object; for it was His will that He should remain alone. (23) He cast His eyes 
all round, but failed to perceive any object; for He shone all alone at that time. He felt as though 
He were non-existent: for all His powers lay dormant, although His consciousness was wide 
awake. (24) It is this energy of the all-perceiving Lord (in the form of search for an object) that 
is called Maya, which is of the nature of both cause and effect. It was with the help of this Maya, 
O blessed Vidura, that the almighty Lord created this universe. (25) When the equilibrium of 
the three Gunas constituting this Maya was disturbed by force of Time, the transcendent Lord, 
whois spiritual in essence, placed therein as Purusa, who is His own fragment. His seed in the 
form of Cidabhasa (the Jiva). (26) From this Unmanifest (Maya or Prakrti), impelled by Time, 
was evolved the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), which, as the dispeller of 











& 
re 
iB 
f. 


td — = Dis 
SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 
TO ceee teem maettiteet ttt titre Qt ts tei BBB RM eH RRR ARSE SRSA RES ATAESSSCESBESY BEB BIER Teh 


was evolved the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), which, as the dispeller of 
darkness (in the form of ignorance),.is of the nature of understanding and is capable of 
manifesting the universe existing in itself (in a subtle form). (27) Subject to the Cidabhasa 
(Jiva), the three Gunas (constituting Maya) and Time, this Mahat, when it fell within the range 
of the Lord's vision, transformed itself with the intention of creating this universe. (28) From 
the Mahat-tattva, as it underwent transformation, was evolved the principle of ‘Aham' (the 
ego) which, being of the nature of Adhibhuta, Adhyatma and Adhidaiva, is the cause of the 
five gross elements, the Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action) 
and the mind. (29) Ahankara (the ego) is of three kinds—Vaikarika (Sattvika), Taijasa 
(Rajasika) and Tamasika. From the Sattvika ego, as it underwent transformation, sprang up 
the mind, as well as the deities presiding over the senses, who are all of a Sattvika type, 
revealing as they do the objects of senses. (80) The senses of perception as well as the 
organs of action are evolutes of the Rajasika ego alone; whereas from the Tamasika ego was 
evolved the source of the other subtle elements, (viz., sound). And this latter, again, is the 
cause of ether, which (by virtue of its all-pervasiveness) serves as an illustration of the Spirit 
(Brahma). (31) When ether came within the range of the Lord's vision along with Time, Maya 
and the Jiva, they combined to produce the sensation of touch; and this latter, as it underwent 
transformation, evolved the air. (82) The most powerful air, even as it underwent transfor- 
mation, combined with ether to produce the sensation of colour and from colour was evolved 
fire, the illuminator of the world. (33) Fire, when it came within the range of the Lord's vision 
and underwent transformation, combined with air as well as with Time, Maya and the Jiva 
to produce water, which is an evolute of taste. (84) Water, when it came within the sight of 
the all-perceiving Brahma and underwent transformation, combined with fire as well as with 
Time, Maya and the Jiva to evolve the earth which has odour for its special characteristic. (35) 
Of the elements beginning with ether (viz., ether, air, fire, water and earth), O blessed Vidura, 
the later in evolution the elements, the larger number of qualities it should be understood to 
possess; for every effect naturally inherits the characteristics of its cause along with its own 
characteristics.(36) The deities presiding over the Mahat-tattva and other categories, 
sharing as they do the characteristics of Time, Maya and the Jiva (viz., transformation, 
distraction and consciousness), are rays of Lord Visnu Himself. But when they were unable 
to do their work (of creating the universe) because of their heterogeneity (and lack of co- 
ordination), they prayed to the almighty Lord with joined palms:—(37) 


ede wa ga siarenoxaduive 23a ati 
Sheed Wdikdetrsa  waladmad STAaA 13°21 
aif di  yaurideecquthedt fafa 
rearerra cae TaT: we Ud = dteue: UAT: (so | 
wee | Ate RTT aaa 
Wt oaresed eit a aSSfETERTo Ive 
faa Waheriaaaaresy Harada Uerasi > | 
awa ad Ut ada Ad seat Ayer ise 
TAIT ASA eee AMS MASSARTOT | 


DIS®O3| feu BOOK THREE 155 


FeKeRERERERE SD SRRE eee eae ewe eken ew kweeee SE EES AER GEES eRe ee ee ETRE EEE EERE 
Gat Yat aadnst gat wm ad wad Ueletix3! 
am a  geegffnfaitt aedariza: aa t 
aa A wre wi @ a vuexafacranee: ixvi 
Ua oa wt purge: saguen fae 2 


arg sew ate  aengrerdtacpusfiwaq xu! 
qatar «= fated «= TALI 
cama et: yet fata ast sa: wa gq aan ave! 

The gods said : We bow, O Lord, to Your lotus-feet, that relieve the agony of the suppliant 
even as an umbrella affords relief from the heat of the sun, and by resorting to whose soles striving 
men easily drive away the endless woes of earthly existence. (38) Because living beings in this 
world, O Creator and Lord of the universe, never enjoy peace of mind, stricken as they are by 
the threefold agony, therefore, O Lord, do we resort to the shade of Your feet, which is the abode 
of wisdom. (39) We have taken shelter in Your feet, which are the abode of sanctity, which the 
seers search for in seclusion with the help of Vedic Mantras, that are like birds having their nest 
in the lotus of Your mouth, and which are the source of the Ganga, the foremost of all the rivers 
whose water possesses the virtue of wiping out one's sins. (40) We resort to the footstool bearing 
Your lotus-feet, by contemplating on which in their heart, that is being purified through reverence 
and devotion in the shape of hearing (and chanting) the divine names and glory etc., Yourvotaries 
succeed in controlling their mind with the help of wisdom strengthened by dispassion. (41) Lord, 
You have descendedinto the world of matterfor creating, preserving and destroying the universe. 
We all take refuge in Your lotus-feet, which, when meditated upon, vouchsafe fearlessness to 
their worshippers. (42) We resort, O Lord, to Your lotus-feet, which are far removed from 
(inaccessible to) such men as have deep-rooted, though false, identification with their frail body 
and habitation as well as with persons and things connected with them, looking upon them either 
as their very self or their own—even though You dwell in their own body (heart) as the Inner 
Controller. (43) They whose inner mind is led astray by their senses, that are ever moving among 
the unworthy objects of the world, O suzerain Lord of wide renown! are, therefore, surely unable 
to see those devotees who enjoy the privilege of beholding the elegance of Your graceful 
footsteps. (44) They, on the other hand, O Lord, whose heart has been purified through devotion 
intensified by drinking the nectar of Your stories, duly attain that spiritual insight whose essence 
lies in dispassion, and easily ascend to Your eternal Abode (Vaikuntha). (45) Even so other wise 
men, who have conquered Your most powerful Prakrti (Maya) by force of Yoga consisting in 
concentration of mind on the Self, undoubtedly enter You, the Supreme Spirit, though their 
hardship is great; whereas there is no hardship in adoring You. (46) 


a aq wefagana  aaagetafaaamM: = 
at fam: iat 3 wmacieda Aixer 
qage ast WA ae am ad waanem aa 
agate Os SRST: IKI 
a a: Aare AraaMt REV Bel: YEA: YR: | 
a @@ wet Wredat wean aflanediss: ive! 
at ad aaqa ae aye aan ff 21 


a 4: waa: uke ween ea fart aqquemn ito! 
sft StaerTad ASM TRACE Medal Idina TSAISeATA: 141 











156 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6 


BeBe BeBe We Re Re Re Be Re Re Re Re Re Re Re ERE BER RE ER RE RE RE RE RE RE REE RERRERE RBR AE RE R eY RE ERE Re Be Re Be Re eRe BE Re Hy Ry Be Bee By By Re ee By Re He Be By Be Be ry wy 





O Primal Lord, we, who are ever Yours, have been created by You one after another with the 
help of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), that constitute our very nature, with the 
intention of evolving the universe. Yet, (possessed as we are of a diversified nature) we are 
all disjoined (independent of one another and hence incapable of taking concerted action). 
That is why we are unable to (evolve and) present to You the universe, which will serve as 
a means of carrying on Your future pastimes. (47) Therefore, O Unborn Lord, devise some 
means whereby we may be enabled to (create the universe anq) offer our tribute to You in 
its entirety at the allotted time and whereby we may also derive our sustenance and all the 
beings (that come hereafter) may (be securely placed and) get their food without any let or 
hindrance, offering their tribute to You as well as to us. (48) You, the immutable Ancient 
Person alone, are the prime cause of us gods as well as of the other evolutes. It was You 
again, O Unborn Lord, who (of yore) placed the seed in the form of the conscious Jiva in the 
womb of Your energy, Maya, whois the source of the three Gunas as well as of all activity.(49) 
O Supreme Spirit, what shall we, the deities presiding over the Mahat-tattva and others, do 
for You, since that is the purpose for which we are born ? O Lord, we depend on Your grace 
alone; therefore, for success in the work of creation, pray confer on us Your divine vision 
(insight) along with Your creative energy. (50) 


Thus ends the fifth discourse in Book Three of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


“et 2.2 2.>: + 
PISS SIS 


ZIAD WHSeaAa: 


Discourse VI 
Appearance of the Cosmic Body 


gid dea Saket ada a: 1 sqqelHaoo fram afar: 1 2 | 
alot del edt feekeqens: i aalfaaisaarmt wr ances 2 | 
Miswiast waist a TMI fia dalam qd wa yale 3 | 
Wigan cat wafaafant mw: 1 Adissmacaniaiiaer |X I 
uo fast eterna faaga: | aalaraaarare afdiecvtenarret: 1 & | 
fewma: A Gee: weeahaanr| sea saramg adawtadfed: 1 & | 
@ a faggst wat taqnieakear faaasnemissanaateen aren frei 0 | 
WI «| MRSeAMTaI: «9 UTA: | StreNSaa aareat sean faved i ct 
Mena: afacas alae sia frei fae son eafaer une ecada a1 e | 


The sage Maitreya said: When the almighty Lord saw that His own powers (the Mahat- 
tattva and the rest) were unable to start the work of creating the universe, because there was 
no harmony among them, He assumed His divine potency known by the name of Kala (Time) 
and simultaneously entered the twenty-three categories (viz., the Mahat-tattva, the Ego, the 
five senses of perception, the five organs of action and the mind, the five subtle elements and 
the five gross elements). (1-2) Having entered these categories, that stood disconnected, He 


Oe es BOOK THREE 157 
BEBE RG ARRAS BR BAAR TARE ARAL ERRATA ERLE A IAT 


united them by His active power, stimulating their dormant energy. (3) When they were thus 
roused Into activity, the twenty-three categories, impelled as they were by God, evolved the 
Cosmic Body out of their own parts. (4) In other words, even as the Supreme entered them 
that group of twenty-th ree categories, which had taken upon themselves the work of creating 
the universe, partially underwent transformation as a result of mutual co-operation. It is this 
transformation of the twenty-three categories which goes by the name of the Cosmic Body, 
the abode of the whole animate and inanimate creation. (5) That all-effulgent Cosmic Being 
dwelt with all the Jivas (that lay dormantin an unmanifest state) for a thousand celestial years 
(3,60,000 human years) in the space having the shape of the interior of an egg with water 
surrounding it on all sides. (6) That Cosmic Body, the evolute of the categories entrusted with 
the work of creating the universe, endowed as it was with knowledge, activity and the power 
of enjoyment, manifested itself of its own accord as one (the heart), as ten (the ten vital airs) 
and as three (Adhyatmika, Adhidaivika and Adhibhautika aspects). (7) (As the totality of all 
the Jivas) He is the Soul (support) of all living beings; (as an embodied spirit) He is a part 
manifestation of the Supreme Spirit and (as the first manifestation of Reality) He is the prime 

Avatara. The entire living creation takes its shape in Him. (8) As possessed of Adhyatma, 

Adhidaiva and Adhibhtta,* the Cosmic Being is of three kinds; as the Prana, He is of tent 

kinds and as the heart, He is only one. (9) 


we, faggemien = fagnftanetest: i faustaaueda «= asta Ss fated 1201 
aq denise «oft ara gifted cami af A Med: 3 122! 
Tare fin crassa arm Maa amet gare sfaqed 1221 
Ain ae asl claueisarat: | fea a wi aarat sfaced 23 
fafa aft ara fae cinemas were sfaafadat waciex 
fafia stfaroit ast mrenaeisfratet: | ager wart sicattdat wa eu! 
fiftiarrea aati areqesheistart Wore det aarat sawed 126! 
aaniae fafifiat firs a fafaqica: 1 stave seq fate aa sued 1201 
ame fafafitat fafeerfifwanteet: 1 otgta tafe: aug aeat sfaaerdt 1eci 
ag qe fats wfeord a safe trae aAaalre 2 Mita 1281 
Te ust fata fier ote onfeei meat «aareat feet iment 1201 
sera faftenfes: elite ara gest aa git sad 1221 
wea fata arent fase! wet MR eat aa wel sed 1221 
afg are fafiat arian ferveitarta! aime  atgemfaufadda wad i231 
et ore fifi aa frmernfeert ara aareat fafenat  sfamerd 121 
stat ae fifiantrarisfaraen adage fart adei ofa 1241 
five senses of perception and the five organs of action) ane the ms roakarrh 
means the deities presiding over the Ind tyas ar ames of Prana, Abana, Vyana, Udana, Samana, Naga, Kurma, Kikala, 
Devadatta and Dhanafijaya. The air which we inhale and exhale either through the nostrils or through the ous pnts oes 
sat inhelungs cae rina: at wih hge a conta rae ol Satara hal uhh an upwaré course an has 
its seat in the throat is known by the name of pale pat id carat i Ae ered es On Reeaite ine? voy 


i ana; hich enables us to belch is 
onan Recah exis our hunger is known by the name of Krkala; that which enables us to yawn is called Devadatta and 


that which nourishes the body is known as Dhananijaya. 


* Adhyatma denotes the ten Indriyas (the 











— 
4 
4 
’ 
— 
- 
= 
¥ 


158 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6 


BRE Ree eRe eM Re EERE RR Re RE RE RERERT BERERTR RE RR RRER R RE RR RB Be HM R Be Me We We We Be Me Be Me He We Be We Ke Ke Ke We Rr Ge Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Hr Hew, 
LL 


Recalling the prayer of the deities presiding over the Mahat-tattva and other categories 
(that had been entrusted with the duty of creating the universe), the Lord whois beyond sense- 
perception illumined (aroused) the Cosmic Being with His own effulgence (in the shape of 
consciousness) in order to awaken their potentialities. (10) Now hear from Me as | tell you how 
many abodes for the deities (presiding over the senses of perception and the organs of action) 
appeared (in the body) of the Cosmic Being, illumined as He now was (by the Lord's effulgence 
in the shape of consciousness). (11) (First of all) there appeared in Him a mouth: the god of 
fire, one of the (ten) protectors of the world, whose abode it is, entered it along with his power, 
the organ of speech, by means of which the Jiva (embodied soul) utters words. (12) Then 
appeared in (the body of) Sri Hari (the Cosmic Being) a palate, the abode of Varuna (the god 
presiding over the waters), another protector of the world, who entered it along with his power, 
the sense of taste, by means of which the Jiva perceives taste. (13) Next appeared in (the body 

of) the Cosmic Being a pair of nostrils, the abode of the twin gods Aswins (the celestial 
physicians), who entered them along with their power, the olfactory sense, the means of 
perceiving odour. (14) Now appeared in (the body of) the Cosmic Being a pair of eyes: Twasta 
(the sun-goq), another protector of the world, entered them, along with his power, the sense 
of sight, the means of perceiving colours. (15) Again, appeared on His body the skin (the seat 
of the tactile sense); the wind-god, another protector of the world, entered it along with his 
power, the tactile sense, by means of which the Jiva experiences touch. (16) Further, appeared 
in His body a pair of ears, the personal abode of Digdevatas (the deities presiding over the 
cardinal points), who entered them along with their power, the auditory sense by means of 
which the Jiva perceives sound. (17) Then appeared on His body the skin* (the seat of the hair), 
the abode of the deities presiding over the annual plants or herbs (that die after they have 
ripened), who entered it along with their power in the shape of the hair, by means of which the 
Jiva feels the itching sensation. (18) Next appeared on His body a penis, the abode of 
Prajapati himself (the god presiding over creation), who entered it along with his power, the 
capacity to procreate, by means of which the Jiva experiences the joy of copulation. (19) Now 
appeared in (the body of) the Cosmic Being an anus: the god Mitra (one of the twelve sons 


_ of Aditi who preside over the sun by rotation for one month), a protector of the world, entered 


it along with his power, the organ of defecation, by means of which the Jiva evacuates his 
bowels. (20) Again appeared on His body a pair of hands (arms): the god Indra, the lord of 
paradise, entered them along with his power, the capacity to hold and let go an object, by 
means of which the Jiva makes his living.(21) Further appeared on His person a pair of feet 
(legs): Lord Visnu, the (supreme) protector of the world, entered them along with His Power, 
the faculty of locomotion, by means of which the Jiva reaches the place he intends to visit.(22) 
subsequently appeared in Him the intellect, the abode of Brahma (the lord of Saraswati, the 
goddess presiding over speech), who entered it along with his power, the faculty of 
understanding, the means of apprehending that which is to be known. (23) Thereafter 
appeared in Him a heart, the abode of the moon-god, who entered it along with his power, 
the mind, by means of which the Jiva indulges in thoughts of various kinds. (24) Subsequent 
to this appeared in Him the ego, the abode of the god Rudra (the deity presiding over the ego), 
who entered it along with his power, the feeling of egotism, by means of which the Jiva 
entertains the sense of duty. (25) 


Ga ore faritia aereraquiaadi fda aarat faa sfaqeaies 
Seotisa Mela wast GW AMecdedd | Wort qual aq sda |uew: 1201 


*Skin has been enumerated twice in this connection because itis believed to be the seat of two distinct senses, the sense 
of touch and the itching sensation. In the former case the presiding deity is the wind-god, while in the latter case it is said to 
be the abode of the deities presiding over annual plants or herbs, that die as soon as they have ripened. (See Il: X. 22) 





Dis. 6 ] BOOK THREE 159 


Br Ke Be Bre Ke Se Ke He He Hr Br Hr Hr Hr Kr Ke We We Ke Hr We Ge Wr We We We Ke He He He Ke He He Mr Ke Ke He Ke He Ke Ke Hr Ke We Hr He Pe Ke Ke Ke Ge Ke Ve He He Be We Be Hr He He Be Ve Bee Be Wee Be He He We BeBe He We Hee Ht Ve HEH 
aS ...cccaaaaaaaaaaagaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaammaaaa cn nn nn 


ead wea fed wa: wofti at weauda wet a a aq irc 
ade waned wna: swat aa a sauder Won: 12°21 


Then appeared in Him a Citta (the seat of intellection), the abode of Brahma (the deity 
presiding over the Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence), who entered it along 
with his power, the faculty ofintellection, by means of which the Jiva distinguishes between right 
and wrong etc. (26) From His head emanated the heavenly world, the earth from His feet and 
the sky (the space between heaven and earth) from His navel. In these regions are found the 
gods and other beings (such as men and ghosts etc.) , the evolutes of Sativa, Rajas and Tamas 
respectively. (27) Out of these, the gods through the predominance of Sattva (the quality of 
goodness) found their abode in heaven; human beings and other creatures that are useful to 
the latter obtained their residence on earth because of their Rajasika temperament; while the 
hosts of Rudra's attendants (spirits, ghosts etc.), took up their residence in the sky between 
heaven and earth, which represents the navel of the Cosmic Being. (28-29) 


Gedisait sa UR PR aeEcsuiat WelsugME WE: 1301 
aTeaisait at  atfseeiedad: | at aera aula Ute: ued 1321 
fagisata deltalefagiinitfest: | dsacesal art at a: anadai3e 
Vesa Wat Sa YT elf TAT Aa: UT Yat Fagen quad eft: 1331 
Ut aul: waar aata wae aft searssmfageued aon: de gra: 131 
Urendttad Cama: |ch: Meee = ArTATaaAelaa 1341 
sata aaitaras aera aera calf et: Ml Geed Pra saradt 136 | 

Vario 86a = ye Getemetteeiorarene: | 

TAL fagiaearpaai HUGAMAHAAAAT 1 319 | 
sieisafadt aa afen afaaisseari dacndeerd fsa 9 artfaaewar 3c 
aal wtadt are Afaarmfa alfeitiacad armaaion a aq fHqamt 13¢1 


GSA Wadd AY AAA Wel ae Ura sa eared Wiad AA: xo! 
sfa sieerrad Ae) URASeT Gleca Talal FSIS: 16 | 

From the mouth of the Cosmic Being emanated the Vedas, O Vidura (ornament of the 
Kurus), as well as the Brahmana who came to be the foremost of all the Varnas (grades of 
society) as well as their teacher only because he sprang from the mouth of the Cosmic 
Being.(30) From the arms (of the Cosmic Being) emanated the vocation ofa Ksatriya (viz., 
the protection and governance of the people) as well as the Ksatriya himself, whois devoted 
to that profession and who, being a ray of Lord Visnu (the Protector of the universe), is born 
to protect the other Varnas (classes) against the ravages of thieves and robbers. (31) From 
the thighs of that almighty Lord (the Cosmic Being) proceeded agriculture and other 
occupations of a VaiSya—which provide subsistence (in the shape of food and other 
necessaries of life) to the whole world—as also the Vaisya himself, who (by his own pursuit) 
procures a living for all mankind. (32) From the Lord's feet was evolved the calling of service, 
which is essential for the (proper) discharge of all sacred duties; and (from those very feet) 
for carrying on this pursuit was produced of yore the sudra, whose very occupation secures 
the pleasure* of the Lord. (33) For the ourification of their heart all these four classes 
* Service is the root of the successful performance of all sacred duties; no sacred obligation can be discharged without 


- i i f all virtues, is indeed high among all the Varmas. 
se : e the place of the Sidra, whose allotted duty is service, the rooto nea 
TRS Rae st a Brahmana has Moksa (final beatitude) for its goal; that of a Ksatriya has enjoyment for its objective; that 











10" We Stn Ge iapiaomees 


160 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


Br We Sr Gr Be Se Re Be Ke Ke Ve Bee Be ee BEE Bee ee Ree Be Ke Ke Be Wr Ve Kr Me Ke Hy Ke Ke Br Hr Br Ke We Ke Hr He Se Me Mr Sr He Kr Ke Ke Hr Fr Hr Hr Gr Sr We Br Gr Ke He Hr Hr gy 





reverently adore by means of their respective duties their own Father, Sri Hari, from whom 
they all sprang up along with their several occupations. (34) Who can dare describe in full, 
O Vidura, the cosmic body of the Lord, who has Time, Karma (destiny) and Swabhava (the 
innate disposition) of the Jivas for His potencies—the body which reveals the might of the 
Lord's Yogamaya (divine power)? (35) Yet, inorder to purify my own speech which has been 
rendered foul by other (profane) talk, | proceed to sing, dear Vidura, the glory of Sri Hari 
according to my own (poor) lights and on the basis of what | have heard (from my 
preceptor).(36) The wise declare that the sole utility of men’s speech decidedly lies in uttering 
the praises of the Lord, who is the foremost of those enjoying the highest renown, and that 
the sole utility of one's ears lies in their coming into touch with the nectar-like discourses on 
Sri Hari, delivered by learned men. (37) Was it possible, dear child, for Brahma (the first of 
all seers) to fathom the glory of Sri Hari (the Universal Spirit) even after pondering it for a 
thousand (celestial) years with his intellect ripened through the practice of Yoga ? (38) 
Therefore, the Lord's Maya deludes even those skilled in creating illusions. When the Lord 
Himself does not know the course of His own Maya, how can others fathom it ? (89) 
Obeisance to the Lord, from whom not only speech and mind but even Rudra (the deity 
presiding over the ego) and the other gods (those presiding over the senses and the organs 
of action) return disappointed, unable to reach Him. (40) 


Thus ends the sixth discourse in Book Three of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


Set PET BETH, 
CITES DI OD 


SIT AAAS: 


Discourse VII 
Vidura’'s questions 
Ah SAA 
Wa gam waa sured ge: istvria wen fact: yard! 2 | 
Sri Suka continued : When Maitreya spoke thus, the enlightened Vidura, son of 
Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa) further asked him as follows, delighting him by his speech as it 


were. (1) 
fagt Sara 
Se HA WMadisaaeiacnior: | Geant ata qeartarorar qo: fara: | 2 | 
missmish  capmigcnifesad: |edee a we fan wera: 1 3 | 
Teaatieta faa Weenssaa ida 9 wenmaaaga: seafaerenfa i x | 
ead: hie ASMaad: Masa: | Magara AT Aaa HNL & | 
aaah Uda adage: | qe stir at San aT aif: Gat: | & | 


ee 
ofa Vaisya has wealth forits goal; while that of a Sidra has Dharma (religious merit) forits object. In this way while the Dharma 
of the first three Varnas has the other three Purusarthas (objects of human pursuit) for their goal, that of a Sidra has Dharma 
itself for its goal; hence it is declared above that the very occupation of a Sudra secures the pleasure of the Lord . 


b 


is. 7 ] 
sansnttensensetsensnensesssenenenss Oo ooelt e snsnsnnanenennenannannensananmas el 
uafert rt fag Reeisgmage | ata: ume fast aaa ae We! © | 

Vidura asked : O holy sage, how can the Lord, who is pure consciousness, 
immutable and unqualified (absolute), come to be associated with attributes and activity 
evenin sport? (2) Itis the hankering (for pleasure) and the desire to play with another (child 
or plaything) that impels a child to betake itself to play. But how can the Lord, whois satisfied 
in Himself and Is ever one without a second, take to play ? (3) It was through His own Maya, 
consisting of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), that the Lord created the universe. 
Nay, itis through the same Maya that He sustains it and shall finally withdraw it. (4) How can 
He whose knowledge—which is His very nature—is never obscured by space, time or 
circumstance either by itself or through any other external cause, be associated with 
Maya?(5) Itis the Lord alone who is present in all bodies (as the enjoyer); how can there be 
any ill luck for Him, and how can He suffer any agony due to Karmas ? (6) My mind, O sage, 
is much distracted, stuck as it is in this morass of ignorance. Remove, my lord, this great 
confusion of my mind. (7) 

Mle Fa 


a ga ciea: aot aah aA: see wrafea: wafa mae: 1c | 
Sri Suka went on: Interrupted thus by Vidura, who was keen to know the truth, the sage, 
who was free from all conceit replied as though smiling (at him), his mind fixed on the Lord. (8) 
Haq Sara 

aa wad wet aaa faeadigar faqmer avaqa ae | 

aeia faa «ogaoaneafanda: 1 stad 3as8: wilanedatian: igo! 

aM We ws: Hanleetepal WT: | aeadsaata set Aa WUT: 1221 

a a faferin aganeuaivnasharta fated aie 1221 

aefsarrisa sprit at etl facitad wal en: Game Grea: 1231 

STATA AAA faerd TUMTaATeAAUT UM: | 
Ghd: GARTEN eareOR TAA ITT 1 LY I 
Maitreya said : That the Spirit, who is the ruler (of Prakrti) and ever free, should feel 
miserable and fall into bondage is against all logic; yet such is the Lords Maya (deluding 
potency). (9) It is because of this Maya that the Jiva appears to be bound etc., (which is 
something contrary to its nature), even though such bondage does not exist in reality, just 
as a man sees himself beheaded in a dream (even though in reality his head has not been 
severed). (10) Again, just as trembling and other characteristics, which are attributable to 
water alone are seen in the moon (as reflected) in water, though really non-existent there- 
in, so the attributes (birth etc.) of the body (which is not the soul) appear in the soul that has 
identified ‘tself with a body. (11) That false identification gradually disappears through the 
ractice of devotion to the Lord, which Is possible only by the grace of Lord Vasudeva (Sri 
K Ste hi its turn is secured by discharging one's duties in a disinterested spirit in this 
eae rans . the senses have withdrawn from their objects and get exclusively devoted 
t ah ct (12) Be eme Spirit and Seer, all the distractions of the soul (in the shape of 
gna ion etc.) vanish as in the case of a man buried in deep sleep. (13) All 
attachment and EIS. id f by uttering and hearing the praises of Sri Krsna (the Slayer of 
Hae a ae Sah ewandee then, that such a result should be brought about by fondness 
sayelanad see heart for worshipping the dust of His lotus-feet? (14) 











162 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


Re RE Re Re Re Re Ree Re Re Re RR Re RR RE Re ER ER RR REE RR RRR RR Re RR RY Ree Be BEY Bee Ry Br Hr BY Bee Be Hy Hy Hr Se He AY He Br He By Hr Sr Hr Rr Hr Br Br Br Wr Wr We We Hr He Hr Hy 





fagt Sara 

isa: Us va da gaan fatisvear wanaat A waerafa eu 

Meade ed agama St: lamar faye fasqes a agile: 1261 

aq yea oh a Ge: WwW Tai mat Tadd fReaeradt ws: 1g 

staisra fafafara sdicenfa ara:iat ala agqMawmade any) 12d 

qaqa wad: meee Hates: ital sedis:  oeatetaatds: 12° 

geudqa: dal agusaciqiaaaiad fe eadal Galea: 1201 
Vidura said : My doubts have been eradicated by the sword of your reasoned exposition, 
my lord. My mind has now clearly grasped both the points (the Lord's freedom and the Jiva's 
dependence). (15) You have rightly observed, O sage, that the bondage etc., of the Jiva is 
attributable to Sri Hari's own Maya (deluding potency). Such bondage is only apparent without 
any reality or foundation; for the universe itself has no foundation except the Lord's Maya. (16) 
He who is the most ignorant and he who has realized God, who is beyond the reach of mind, 
both these lead a care-free life in this world; while he who stands between the two (is full of 
doubt) lives in misery. (17) Having concluded that the material world, though appearing to exist, 
is not real, | shall now, by the service of your feet, get rid even of that false appearance (mental 
illusion). (18) Through the service of these feet can be had the feast of intense devotion to the 
feet of the immutable Lord, the Slayer of the demon Madhu—devotion that puts an end to the 
agony of birth and death. (19) The service of the Lord's devotees, who are living approaches 
to Lord Visnu (or His divine realm) and in whose company are ever sung the praises of Lord 
Janardana (lit., He who is invoked by His devotees), who is adored even by gods, cannot be 

easily secured by men of little penance. (20) 


Usa «= Aeclelfa «Ss Gfaceroaaeari aeat fase aay iferarfeay: 1221 

ae Yet  aeeletediend| aa fag ga ole: alana Arad 1221 

aha calla: smo: arsaritsakaad | aah adt autefeydidet A: 1231 

a ws das aga: we West: 1 sen fafeorpaa sreq afahe ary ieyl 

Tada A UME aM TIM aTsaetis | weer 124 | 

wena aqs dad aisadas a clr wAtoresirad 1261 

wa BAN WAN a Yotna a avila fdenecanmt Mtkaaadieaqoney_ 
ae A: WMlaeare Maelesitesary 1291 

WUTadaaeA Miata | Usd: sitar aAraedlentama 1261 

aurisaraaniisy Sasa: | BAO Baeaife Aca a fandur ize! 

ama a fade aera a aa: Nat Aenea a Areal ted AT WATAaAT 130 | 

5 \Sitaet Taal ast aradiforentist: 1321 
(You have just told me that) at the dawn of creation the almighty Lord brought forth in their 
order of sequence the Mahat-tattva and other categories along with their evolutes and, 
having evolved the Cosmic Body out of those categories, eventually entered the same. (21) 
It is that Cosmic Being whom the Vedas call the most ancient Person, who is endowed with 
thousands of ( a myriad) feet, thighs and arms and in whom all these different worlds abide 
with ample space about them. (22) Nay, it is in that Cosmic Being, as you declare, that the 
ten vital airs,each of which again manifests itself in three forms (viz., Vigour, will-power and 


bodily strength) abide along with the Indriyas and their objects as well as the deities presiding 
over them; and from the same Being have emanated the four classes of society. Pray, speak 


Dis. 7 ] BOOK THREE 163 


Br Br Br Be Hee Ree Re Re A Be Re Re eRe Ree Bee ae Re Re Re RRR RR RR Re RT Re Re Be Be ee Be Be Re Re Re Bee Be Be Be Re Ke Be Re He Be Be Be Ree Re ERE Re Be Be Be REE Re Re ee MR RAT Be 


to me now about the glorious manifestations (Brahma and others) of that Cosmic Being, from 
whom were evolved along with their sons and grandsons, great grandsons and kinsmen, 
living beings of various forms and shapes, who filled this universe. (23-24) Who are the 
Prajapatis (lords of created beings) that were evolved by Brahma (that lord of Prajapatis)? 
Again, what are the main categories of beings that he created and what are their subdivisions ? 
And in what order did he evolve the fourteen Manus (Swayambhuva and others), that preside 
over one full Manvantara each ? (25) Pray, also let me know their lines of descent and narrate 
the doings of their descendants; and further describe, O Maitreya (son of Mitra), the relative 
position and dimensions of the spheres that are located above and below the earth, as well 
as of the terrestrial region,and the detailed process of creation of beasts, human beings and 
gods, reptiles and birds, in short, of all living beings—viviparous and oviparous, those born 
of sweat and those sprouting from the soil (such as trees and plants). (26-27) Also kindly 
recount at length the glorious exploits—connected with the creation, preservation and 
dissolution of the universe—of the Lord who is the abode of Sri (the goddess of beauty and 
prosperity), and who bodied Himself forth as Brahma, Visnu and Siva, His manifestations 

with reference to a particular Guna (mode of Prakrti). (28) O lord, further tell me the grouping 

of society into so many Varnas (grades or classes) and ASramas (stages of life) on the basis 

of outward marks, conduct and temperament, the birth and doings etc., of the Rsis (seers) 

and the division of the Vedas, the extensive details of sacrifices, the path of Yoga 

(disinterested action), the path of renunciation and the path of Knowledge or discrimination 

between Matter and Spirit, the Vaisnava Cult (the Paficaratra Agama) taught by the Lord (to 

the sage Narada), the heterogeneity caused by the dissemination of heretic doctrines, the 

descent of races through a mother belonging toa higher caste than the father, and the nature 

and variety of destinies reached by men after their death according to their Gunas 

(characteristics) and Karma (doings). (29—31) 


eTateien aa aaraTi faftrarafented: | arafar custiass sider a fafet gam 1321 
sea a fafa sem aqui aida ai aeqaadoT Hleladaaieiiaa. 133 | 
aaa at alfa adsmdal: meqinvaaewea a anf as ga safe 13x 
wa at wvnanqecedafstada: | adie at aermdcrente are 3k 
ayaa rent gaat a fesiraismrmgsata gaat  ditacdten: 131 
aarMat wraest clan wsadna: i cad & Sh m 3S faa i3y! 
UR UW UI Bet a We Aig DA AWA adaqeRmesat 136! 
fife a ade Skee ak: | al Wa Ga: Gat sincera ar i3¢! 
WI Usd: WI R: wdfafacaiste Asser Macias Asa: ixot 
wa aay aay qa aaa aMaisiawdaseadqa A Hale Heri ise! 


Also tell me, O holy Brahmana, the means conducive severally to religious merit, worldly 
riches, sensuous enjoyment and final beatitude without prejudice to one another, the 
methods, one by one, of agriculture, trade etc., as well as of administration of justice and 
study of the Vedas, the method of performing Sraddha (a ceremony in honour and for the 
benefit of dead relatives) and even so the evolution of the Pitrs (the manes), and likewise the 
relative position of the planets, lunar mansions and other stars among the heavenly bodies 
as determining the divisions of time. (82-33) Whatis the reward of charitable gifts, austere 
penance, sacrificial acts and works of public utility (such as the digging of wells and tanks, 
the construction of roads and temples, the cultivation of gardens etc.)? What are the duties 
of one living abroad as well as of a man in adverse circumstances ? (34) Also tell me, O 











164 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8 


Re Re Be Re Re Br Pe eRe Re RR ee BBE RE Re RRR YR RR Re eR AY Be Be BBM BB BeBe Me ee We We He Be Be Wr He Wr Hr Be We Me Be We Pe Ky Ke He Hr Hr We Hy Hy 
Deen eee eee e eee eee £_££_0*°"eOeemlmlmesppp FREQ Ss 


sinless Maitreya, the means by which Lord Sri Krsna (who is invoked by His devotees), the 
source of piety, can be propitiated, and what type of men are able to win His pleasure. (35) 
Teachers who are kind to the meek, O chief of the Brahmanas, tell their devoted pupils and 
sons even what they may not have asked. (36) In how many ways, O worshipful sage, do 
these elements (earth etc.) return to their source (Primordial Matter)? And who wait on Him 
even during a Pralaya and who get merged in Him while He is in Yoganidra ? (37) What is 
the true nature of the Jiva (embodied soul) and the essential character of the Supreme ? 
What is the wisdom taught by the Upanisads and what, again, is the use a teacher has for 
his pupil and vice versa ? (88) Then, what are the means suggested by the wise, O sinless 
one, for attaining that wisdom? For neither spiritual enlightenment nor Devotion nor 
dispassion can be had by itself. (39) Therefore, being friendly disposed towards me, kindly 
answer these questions of mine, that | have asked with intent to acquaint myself with the 
exploits of Sri Hari, ignorant as | am and blinded by Maya. (40) (The study of) all the Vedas, 
sacrificial acts and austere penance and charitable gifts. O holy one, cannot equal even a 
fraction of the merit that one acquires by rendering a Jiva (embodied soul) immune from the 
fear of birth and death (through instruction in the truth about God). (41) 


sige Sara 
a SAATGEUTUTACU: Horas OPTI: 
Tageat WacHAar Patladet WeAlaas 12 | 
a AA eMad AM UASa Sleds Ida GAAISeATA: 191 | 
srt Suka continued : When Vidura (the foremost of the Kurus) asked Maitreya (the chief 


of the sages) questions bearing on the theme of the Puranas, the latter was immensely 
delighted on being urged to narrate the stories of the Lord, and smilingly spoke as follows. (42) 


Thus ends the seventh discourse in Book Three of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PII SSS es 


STATSAISeaTa: 


Discourse VIII 
Brahma's manifestation 


WAT Sara 
aaa at Usdel aeolauel  wanaaenn: | 
ayfagtertsictantiaarest ue ue FAA |e 
ase Fi waeoqaa aq use fama ai 
Wada Unad rot Sele A atTaTaTyfaa: 1 2 1 
AAA CHTaAATEL agent eanuSaray | 
fatactaetrand: Wa ARGS TANS 2 I 
aaa feed ag amet a areata | 
Tea M aArgystenlaratae esa faqeleara |X | 


Dis. 8 ] BOOK THREE 165 


Br Br Br Br Br Be Br Hr Hr Hr Be Br He Sr Hr Gr Hr Sr Hr Kr Hr Ke Be He Hr Hr He He Ke Be Hr He Hr He He He Ke Hr He Ke Ke Be Me Ge Kr Ke He Hr Hee Be Be Be He BeBe Be He Be BeBe BEB He BeBe Be BEEBE RE BEBE BE BEBE Ke B- Be Br 


Weaala: ACTH OTSA AAO ETAL | 
TV wdwietet: aa aa  afefudaat: 14 1 
Wert 8 aaeTeaeee eI TT I 
featleateerattrsrctcnsren fect erarcnurrea sera. lel 


Maitreya said : Oh! the race of Puru has become worthy of adoration even by noble men 
ever since you were born into it—you, who are no other than the god Yama (one of the 
protectors of the world), so devoted to the Lord; and you lend fresher and newer charm at 
every step and every moment to the garland of Sri Hari's glories (by your pertinent 
questions). (1) Now, in order to relieve the great woe of men who fall into it in their search 
for trivial delights (of sense), | commence the Bhagavata-Purana, which Lord Sankarsana 
(Sesa) himself was pleased to teach the seers (Sanaka and others). (2) Eager to know the 
truth about the Lord whois even higher than Sankarsana, Sanatkumara and the other sages 
approached and questioned Lord Sankarsana, the first among the gods, whose wisdom 
knows no obstruction and who had ensconced himself in the subterranean region (of 
Patala).(3) Sankarsana was (at that time) engaged in offering (mental) worship to his own 
(source and) stay, whom the Vedas call by the name of Lord Vasudeva; and in order to afford 
delight to the sages (Sanatkumara and others) he had now partially opened his eyes, that 
resembled a pair of lotus buds and which he had turned inward till then. (4) The sages 
(reverentially) touched with their matted locks, drenched’ by the water of the heavenly river 
(Ganga), the lotus that served as a support for his feet, and which daughters of the serpent 
chiefs, lovingly worshipped through various offerings with a longing to obtain a suitable 
match. (5) The sages, who were conversant with his doings, repeatedly extolled them in 
accents that faltered on account of affection. The thousand noble hoods of the serpent-god 
were brightened by superb gems set in his thousand crowns. (6) 


3k facta fafreratiaaa a | 
Weep «=A OMe SCS: ATS HTT 1 9 I 
Seas: UNAS faaeraron wWrafeydt: | 
SATTE Ase grastaaa URNA Ges | ct 
Wart aC CATE CO: eee Ter 
Qst aadqmwn aq wglead  feanqaaai ei 
Tradition says that the mostworshipful Sankarsana taughtthis Bhagavata to Sanatkumara, 
who is devoted to the path of renunciation; and the latter in his turn, O dear Vidura, imparted 
it to Sankhyayana, who had taken a vow (of strict celibacy) and asked him questions about the 
same. (7) Sankhyayana, the foremost among those who had realized the truth, in his 
eagerness to recount the glories of the Lord, repeated it to his devoted pupil and our preceptor, 
Parasara, and then to the sage Brhaspati. (8) Urged by Pulastya, the gracious sage Parasara 
reproduced that foremost Purana (Srimad Bhagavata) to me; and | now proceed to teach the 
same to you, dear child, who are so reverent and ever devoted to me.(9) 


Sarge faufae daissdia afasadifedece aaiead 
aréraaeasiinerart Uh: PAI: werd fra: 101 
*While coming from the highest heaven, Satyaloka, to the nethermost region of Patala, it seems, Sanatkumara and 


others had coursed through the stream of the Ganga, which flows from Satyaloka right up to Patala washing on its way all the 
other celestial spheres, the atmosphere, the surface of the earth and all the other terrestrial regions. This obviously accounts 


for the wetness of their matted locks. 











166 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8 


LEAL LALLA LLL LAK KKK KK ALM KOK AK K ALL K eRe Re Re Vee Re Re Be Re Ree RR Re Be Me Be Re Re Re Be Me He Br Be Bee We We Me Be Hr We We My Br Ke Kr Br Kr Hr Be Hr Hr Br Mr Fr Hr gr vy 





ASA: Maas aA: chlelictcht BHAA: | 
sams ifs Ae Ce CAC creer Sagal: 1 eet 
ait «3a wee ea OMidiicat |= aT 
HIGReAaASSAladehaa Micha regal Wee 1221 
TAMA apap sra a sat Cal qatar | 
TH eid fag geet  afydends23! 
a uel:  ealelsdq wed  Hdofcated | 
auifast «cies «Sf Ss feet STITT: 12% 
demiau od 3 wa fay: wmMeatlaacddqonasa| 
de wa acu fama eas F WH acha aisyieul 
qt 8689) astteeenftieramafent CIARA: | 
UReat ata faqnaasah  otsqiesr  aerfried 
TATE AMA ATAU seat Heloh lea ea, 
surista: may lend aa agifacafeda: 12191 


(Prior to the creation) the whole of this universe was submerged in water. At that time the only 
one that existed was Lord Narayana, who lay on His couch of Sesa (the lord of serpents), having 
shut His eyes on account of sleep (in the form of deep meditation), although His consciousness 
was wide awake even then, ceasing from all activity (in the form of creation, preservation and 
dissolution of the universe) and revelling in the bliss of His own Self. (10) Having deposited the 
subtle bodies ofall the Jivas (embodied souls) in His own body, the Lord reposed on those waters, 
which served as His resting-place—even as fire remains latent in wood, concealing its burning 
capacity etc.,—keeping only His potency in the shape of Time active (in order to rouse Him when 
the time of creation arrived again). (11) Having thus slept on those waters for (a period equivalent 
to) one thousand rounds of the four Yugas with His own energy in the form of consciousness 
about Him, when He was shown the residue of Karma of all the Jivas by His potency called Time, 
which had already been directed by Him for this purpose, He saw countless worlds merged in 
His own body. (12) When His eye thus fell on the subtle matter (in the shape of subtle bodies) 
which lay deposited in His body and which was now roused into activity by) the Rajoguna (the 
principle of activity impelled by Time, the same issued out of His navel in order to evolve grosser 
forms. (13) By force of Time, which roused into activity the residue of Karma of the Jivas, that 
subile matter which came out of the navel of Lord Visnu sprang all of a sudden in the form of a 
lotus bud, illuminating with its splendour that vast expanse of water even as the sun. (14) The 
all-pervading Lord Visnu Himself, O Vidura, entered as the innercontrollerthatlotus representing 
all the (fourteen) worlds, which brought to light (later on) all the objects of sensuous enjoyment. 
(When the Lord entered the lotus ), there appeared from it the Creator (Brahma), who is no other 
than Veda personified and whom they call "Self-born" (because his Progenitor was not to be 
seen). (15) Perched on the pericarp of the iotus, Brahma failed to perceive any world. Turning 
his neck all round, therefore, he looked aboutin the sky with distended eyes and was immediately 
endowed with four faces, one on each side. (16) Lo! resting on that lotus, which had emerged 
from the waters uproarious with waves tossed by the (furious) winds which characterized 
the period of universal destruction, Brahma (the first god) could not make out the reality of 
that lotus, which formed the basis of the coming worlds, nor of himself. (17) 





Dis. 8 ] BOOK THREE 167 


BeBe Re Re Re Re Re Re Pe Re ERE RE Re Hae Re Re Re Re Re Ree Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Re eee Re Re Be He eRe Re eM Re BeBe Be Be Be Be Re Me Be Be Be Bt Be Ge Be Be Be He Ke LEM HEE HEHE He 


Ss WW aAsMaeys  UWepd AewHtaay! 
at weenie fesaactiet ar aa Y Ale 1k! 
| (He said to himself.) “Who am I, seated on the pericarp of this lotus, and whence can 
this lotus be, standing on these waters all alone (without any support)? It can, therefore, be 


easily understood by any sane person that there must be something underneath it, on which 
this stands supported." (18) 


a surges ASAT SAAS SANaAaT | 





a at 8 8 wire: uffavieaae aricnvall 
ad Medisiieermm: wwaner gw: a aa: 


iia AHSCT: 1221 
cleat GSH: qeanrerfasadan faacata: | 
aa dardtaqasa MAHAR asa aa Gar 1221 
MUTATE ae Medea eee 1231 
Watt faard Sieataents: PAA aSaeaAya: | 
Talaemnta fares AUST: 12% | 
Sra fared: aareed ClATAASTT | 
fafaafeearsaurigtoart HPasaqaansrtagess, 12% | 


Stronfaraarercferarstrar Tae Wrest WAT 1291 
Hea leHAech Uasaraar Wend AaeHal Fras | 
SIT Arde at MAMAA: WAGACHAA 1261 


BY RR LU OL CICUCEST CC PIECE § I 
BISRHYC AAS TA AAS AM IAAT 12 
aRrentch WTA HSA ae Afra | 


dela Seer TA faze | 

cat war wit faa aa: a  clefaatieis: 1221 

a aidht waa: mm: fagafzaea pl 

STR aR STRAT SAT eA A Teta reTTCAT 1331 
sf staerrad AEM GRAS Geta WalaraISEAISEAE: 121 








168 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8 


Re Re Re Re Re Re RR Re Re Re RR RR RR RE RRR RRR RE  R RRR R R RE R RR R RR R Y R RT Re  e Br Re BE AT Be RE BY By Be He Br Be Br He AY Br Be HY He Se He Bee He He Be He Hr Re Hr Hr Hr r , 
LL 


Reasoning thus, he dived into the water through the pores in the stalk of that lotus. But 
much as he strove to find out the base of the lotus stalk, Brahma (the unborn) failed to get at 
it then, even though he approached it. (19) While he thus looked about for his own source in 
that impenetrable darkness, O Vidura, there elapsed a very long time—time, which is nothing 
but the Lord's discus (SudarSana), that inspires terror in the heart of living creatures and cuts 
short the allotted span of their life (every moment). (20) At last he gave up the search without 
achieving the object of his desire; and, returning to his resting-place, the deity gradually 
controlled his breath, withdrew his mind from everything else and sat down in Samadhi (deep 
meditation on the Lord). (21) When he had unremittingly practised Yoga for a hundred years 
(the full life-span of a healthy man) the light of wisdom dawned on him and he saw revealed 
in his heart of its own accord that which he had failed to perceive before. (22) On the waters 
that had submerged the whole universe during the period of universal destruction Brahma 
beheld the one Supreme Person (Lord Narayana) lying on the huge body of Sesa, which was 
white as a lotus fibre, and served as a bed for Him. The (extensive) hoods of the serpent-god, 
numbering ten thousand, served as so many umbrellas for the Lord and the gems set on his 
(myriad) crowns dispelled by their brilliance the darkness all round. (23) (By the effulgence of 
His swarthy person) He obscured the splendour of a mountain of emerald; (by His yellow loin- 
cloth) He outshone the bright evening clouds hanging round the sides of such a mountain; (by 
the brilliant crown adorning His head) He stole the charm of its many peaks of gold; (by His 
wreath of sylvan flowers) He eclipsed the beauty of the gems, rills, shining herbs and flowers 
adorning the breast of such a mountain; (by His shapely arms) He excelled the bamboos 
looking like the arms of that mountain and (by His beautiful legs) He threw into the background 
the trees constituting its legs. (24) His person, which contained all the three worlds, was its own 
compeer both in length and breadth; even though it added grace to the wonderful divine 
Ornaments and robes themselves, yet He had chosen to adorn it with the same. (25) He 
graciously showed (by placing them in a prominent position) His wish-yielding lotus-feet to 
devotees that worshipped Him through faultless processes for the gratification of their own 
desire—lotus-feet whose petals in the shape of toes could be distinctly seen (though closely 
united with one another) through the rays of their moon-like nails. (26) Nay, He greeted His 
worshippers with His countenance, which was endowed with a beautiful nose and graceful 
eyebrows and lit up with a smile that was enough to relieve the agony of the whole world, and 
which was graced with brilliant ear-rings and reflected the ruddy lustre of His lips, that 
resembled a ripe Bimba fruit. (27) His buttocks were adorned with a loin-cloth yellow as the 
filaments of a Kadamba flower, as well as with a girdle; while His bosom, dear son, was marked 
with a golden streak and graced with its favourite necklace, which was invaluable. (28) In the 
shape of the fourteen worlds Heis like a sandal tree, the king of trees, with His pair of stout arms, 
adorned with most precious armlets and the best of gems, for its numberless boughs, with its 
root unknown (because it has no root other than itself) and with the hoods of Sesa (the lord of 
serpents) coiled about its trunk. (29) (Lying in the midst of the ocean) the Lord further looked 
like a mountain surrounded by water. Even as a mountain affords shelter to both animate and 
inanimate beings, the Lord is the resting-place of the whole animate and inanimate creation. 
Even as a mountain is friendly (hospitable) to large serpents, the Lord is a friend of Sesa (the 
lord of serpents). The thousands of diadems that adorned the hoods of Sesa appeared like 
SO many peaks of gold; while the diamond called Kaustubha that shone on the bosom of the 
Lord looked like a gem emerging from the heart of a mountain. (30) Brahma now had a clear 
view of Sri Hari, who wore round His neck a wreath of sylvan flowers, that represented 
His glory and was graced by the Vedas that had taken the form of bees to hymn His praises. He 
was inaccessible even to the sun, the moon, the air and fire, and could hardly be approached 


Dis. 9] BOOK THREE 169 
dr Be Wr We Br He Ke Ke He He Kr We Ke Ke Ke Hr Fr Hr Be Be Re Be We Be Ke he We Be Be Re Ne Ke Re He Re Re Re Re Re eRe Re Ree eRe Re Ree Re Re Re ee Re Ree RR eR RRR BORE REHOME BER ARERE Re AE Re 
SAAR RRR ER REE RRR BEBE BER BRERA BEBE BORE REBT BERR BEE BEBE RRARORTRE RE RRR AER REREAD A AAAI 


(by His enemies), being closely guarded by His weapons (like Sudarsana and others) who 
were truth, consciousness and bliss personified (i.e., had divine forms of their own), and ever 
paraded round Him. (31) That very moment, Brahma, the would-be creator of the world, who 
was intent on evolving the universe, beheld (in his heart along with the Lord) the lotus which 
had shot forth from His navel, the water (that surrounded Him), the blast (that was blowing), 
the sky (that hung over his head like a canopy) as well as himself (seated on the lotus) and 
nothing other than these. (32) Dominated as he was by the quality of Rajas (the principle of 
activity), he desired to undertake the work of evolving the creation; but when he saw only the 
aforesaid meterial for the same, he fixed his mind on the Lord, whose ways are unknown to 
anyone, and thus began to extol Him who is the only one deserving of praise, intent as he 
was on Creation. (33) 


Thus ends the eighth discourse in Book Three of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


oS Pret T rect? 
OD ODI HIRI 


319 AAAS: 
Discourse IX 
Brahma extols the Lord 


SENATA 
Weis Asa Afatay gest A Wad wad Aaheaaey | 
arerdeet want dat wae Aamuredtnceeedura | 2 | 
wa 0 addeaciteraledt «= afagqudya: «= _- qe | 


usa faygstenfaanen yarsactedad sarisrdishe | 2 | 
Tal FA YEAS AROSE AM MH at ail A SATE | 
qa AR unadsqaan qa alstedl acHuitsaeras: | xX | 
qq adamant fata auifaat: afrarditar | 
WHAM YAMA: UA A AST Ae ast eaarqecieagars | & | 
dasa sfaomedgatad ain: Wer akeval faqes; wr: | 
qaqaaaeaAe side Alaa Asamiya Nquila oie: | & | 
Saq 2 adil wad: segraagaawisaqeisa 4 1 
gata arEeeaes sar MTSE MOT WA |e | 
arqefrera tate Wetelamt: Ba Tradaahedcaeal | 
MAA FAT A YeHtoT Maal AA soma ied Ai ¢ | 
mragqueatenrnt sreaiaraate Wad SA gat Teach | 
daa wget sfrdeta stale guatag aedt feet <i 
[S64] B. M. 8— 








170 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. g 


eR RR RR RRR RE RE RE RE RE RE RR ERE REE RE RE ERE BERR Re Re RT Re ME MY Be Be Me Be He Me He Be HE AE Me Ae He He Hee He Be Be Be Ree Hr Hr Ry He He Me Hr Be Kr Hr Be Hr Hr Br Ke Pr kr Hr ge —, 


Brahma said: Itis after a very long time that | have come to know You today. It is really 
shameful that living beings should fail to realize the true nature of the Lord (Yourself). (In fact) 
there is nothing other than You; and even that which appears to exist is not real. For, when 
the equilibrium of the Gunas of Mayais disturbed, itis You alone who appear as many. (1)The 
light of wisdom, which Is synonymous with joy, being ever manifest in You, the darkness of 
ignorance can never approach You. This form, which Is the seed of hundreds of forthcoming 
Avataras, and from the lotus sprung from whose navel I have emanated, has been assumed 
by You for the first time just in order to show Your grace to the worshippers. (2) | do not regard 
Your essence, which is purely blissful and undifferentiated and of the nature of unobscured 
effulgence, as something other than this form of Yours, O Supreme Spirit. That is why | have 
taken refuge in this very form, which, though creating the universe, is yet beyond the universe 
and is the source of all the five elements and the ten Indriyas. (8) It is for the good of Your 
worshipper in me, O source of blessings to the world, that You have revealed this form of 
Yours to me. | make obeisance again and again to You, who are disregarded only by people 
that are addicted to the pleasures of sense and thus deserve a place in hell. (4) O Lord, You 
never leave the lotus heart of Your devotees, who take in through the opening of their ears 
the fragrance (delightful glory) of Your lotus-feet, wafted by the breeze of the Vedas, Your 
feet being held fast by the cords of supreme devotion. (5) A man is subject to fear, grief, 
covetousness, ignominy and inordinate greed proceeding from wealth, house and kinsmen; 
nay, he is obsessed with the false sense of mineness in respect of the same, which is the 
root of all sorrow, only so long as he does not take refuge in Your feet, which secure immunity 
from all fear. (6) Programmes connected with You (such as the hearing and chanting of Your 
praises etc.) destroy all evil. They have, therefore, been robbed of their wits by (an 
unpropitious) fate, who, having withdrawn their senses from such a programme, remain 
constantly engaged in sinful pursuits, their mind possessed with covetousness for the most 
trivial pleasures of sense, and feeling miserable on that account. (7) It pains my soul, O 
immortal Lord of infinite power, to see these* creatures being repeatedly tormented by 
hunger and thirst, by the three humours (flatulence, bile and phlegm), by cold, heat, storm 
and rain, as well as by one another, and by the unbearable fire of passion as also by 
anger.(8) So long as a man, O Lord, continues to regard himself as apart from (other than) 
the Lord (Yourself) on account of Your Maya (which stands between You and him) in the 
shape of the senses and their objects, the cycle of birth and death will not cease for him. 
Though this cycle has no reality, it is a perennial source of sorrows; for through this a man 
reaps the fruit of his actions. (9) 


Aeagdidcnwn fe gam ammanateea aortas: | 
cmedtitan mais ta yasogfaqa se dard gol 
a WMaaranwfadeast sa acta Aq aa Gar 
aaa da soma famed dadeg: sorra equa 122! 
arate «= darofedieanafed: qariéfe ager: | 
Aca Yeates waachi AMsMgated: Wear 1221 
Gard  fafaaediaeauedeiaa aauea adadar al 
Sa Wada anenat eaista: afefaarad aA aries! 
aaeaeuneda fadiadentera ateferaura 97a: ut 


* Although no living being was present before Brahma at that time, since the work of creation had not been started till 
then, he could see their subtle bodies in the person of the Lord, and evidently was able to read their future life as if he actually 


saw it. 








Dis. 9 ] ‘~ BOOK THREE 171 


Br Br Be BeBe Bt BeBe Be ACR Ge He Be Br Re Re Ke He Be Ke Be Hr Be He Ne He Be Ke Kee Bee Be Ke Be He Be Bee Kee Kee KEG Ee He Ke Be eRe BEEK KEK EBC BEBE BEBE BEBE BBE BEBE BE RE BEBE RE BE BEBE 


faatsafetioay fifrasienrm cd Aq sa apna iex 
Tat adiasanma amit asa faaen yor | 

q vase ude feat daramqaqd aast sue eu 
at at sé a fits fay: aa a ferasatodeda Beye | 
Brat fureqa wR seer aal wad Yergnta 12! 
Sah fresifea: gad sue: anlerd wget wae a 
aM aeate sifsaat aakerahtar ais AH i201 
aenfgraeat 9 fguueifiwanenfad: anecladaehd al 
a Al agdalsceEcaAEe AM wads Fz 18C1 
reguetageniag § — sitaatirgreresat a: | 
7M 8 86frenfrmaeseeeet «=A Ta (ss TTT 12° 1 
aistaaruedst anda fsa Aatkpdetnan: | 
seiosenueiqnet daitinters saa qa faquaz iol 
aaa stasegaradiea MlemaAaeAN AeqASUT | 
TH and sxwuae anfaaaneaaerena 1221 
Ast AAAS Ueew Bie Gea aysad War whe | : 
a A amaqumeae eet ydated sorafratsat 1221 
UW Waa Wassayea senha WJelaquradne: | 
dhe lamate Gaaist ad Gaia Heda a aa fasta, 123 | 
aifigalies adie ser Wel fagarkreateaaastern: | 
wu fafeatiere faqvadt A of diets frome fri faa: 12x! 
Asaaquaem war faqead qaardee legs | 
sua faufasara a at faste are Praqaareges: GUT: 1241 


Those who have an aversion for programmes connected with You have to pass through 
a series of births and deaths in this world, no matter if they are born in a family of seers. For 
the mind and senses of such men are occupied with mundane pursuits and distracted with 
worldly thoughts by day, and they remain buried in slumber at night, although their sleep is 
disturbed moment after moment, their mind being tossed about by ambitions of various kinds, 
and their endeavours for the realization of their object are frustrated by Providence. (10) The 
path leading to You can be discovered only by hearing Your praises etc., and You surely dwell 
in the lotus-like heart of Your devotees, purified through the practice of Devotion. In order to 
oblige Your devotees You assume that very form in which they think of You, O Lord, who are 
profusely praised ! (11) One (without a second), You are the disinterested friend, nay, the 
very inner Self of all beings seated in their very heart. That is why You are not pleased so 
much when worshipped by the gods with some deep-rooted desire in their heart, though ~ 
through abundant materials, as through compassion towards all beings, a virtue 
which cannot be acquiréd by the wicked. (12) Therefore, the highest reward of a man's act 
is to win Your pleasure, O Lord, through various religious pursuits such as sacrificial 
performances, charitable gifts, austere penance and observing sacred vows; for a religious ; 
act that has been dedicated to You never dies (brings inexhaustible merit). (13) The illusion bata 











172 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 9 


Be Re Re Ree Re Re Re Be Bee Re BE Re BER Be BER MME ee BT Re BBE Be Be My Me Me He rr rr Kr Br Br B Be Br He Hy By Mr Hr Hr Br Hr Ke We Re He we wr we Br By Be Hy He Me Ke Br Re Hr Hr By Re Re Hr Hr Hr er wy 
ee ae aa. ok. a, ek a 


of diversity stands eternally swallowed by the very effulgence of Your Being, the abode of 
wisdom. My obeisance to You, the Supreme Person, You take delight in the sportful activities 
of Maya, who is responsible for the creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe. 
| have, therefore, made obeisance to You, the Ruler of the universe. (14) They who utter Your 
names, signifying Your descent, virtues and exploits, even in an unconscious state at the 
moment of death, are immediately rid of their sins of many lives and attain (oneness with) 
Brahma, who shines beyond the veil of Maya. |, therefore, take refuge in You, who are 
unborn. (15) Obeisance to the Lord manifesting Himself (at the time of creation) as the tree 
of this universe, which evolves from Prakrti—that has its root, again, in the Lord Himself— 
splitting it up into the three Gunas (Rajas, Sattva and Tamas), and appearing first of all as 
its three trunks, viz., myself (Brahma), Lord Visnu Himself and Lord Siva (who dwells on 
Mount Kailasa)—who are severally responsible for the creation, preservation and dissolu- 
tion of the universe—and thereafter grows into numerous boughs and branches (viz., the 
various lords of created beings, Manus and so on). (16) Your worship has been declared by 
Yourself as a man's duty yielding happy results. But neglecting this duty, man remains 
(mostly) engaged in prohibited acts. Time, however, which is most powerful and vigilant too, 
cuts off in a moment his hope of survival. As a matter of fact, it is You who appear in the form 
of Time; my obeisance is, therefore, due to You. (17) Even |, who preside over the Satyaloka 
(the highest heaven), that endures for two Parardhas (the allotted span of Brahma's life) and 
is adored by all the other spheres, am afraid of Time. It was with the object of attaining You 
(and thus securing immunity from the ravages of Time) that | practised austere penance for 
many years. My obeisance to You, who preside over all sacrifices. (18) (Being ever satisfied 
by Your own blissful nature) You have no craving for sense-delights. Yet, with a view to 
maintaining the standards of morality and virtue established by Yourself, You have voluntarily 
assumed forms in different species of life, such as birds, beasts, human beings, gods and 
others ! My salutation to You, the divine Purusottama (the Supreme Person). (19) Though 
untainted by Avidya (nescience) which appears in five forms (viz., Avidya or fundamental 
ignorance, Asmita or egotism, Raga or attraction, Dwesa or aversion and AbhiniveSa or the 
fear of death), You have enjoyed sleep in the midst of water tossed by fearful waves—a sleep 
which has proved delightful to You on account of the (soft) touch of the serpent (Lord Sesa), 
who serves as a bed for You—having deposited all the worlds in Your belly, thereby illustrating 
the relief which a man enjoys during sleep (or allowing a respite to the Jivas from ceaseless 
exertion during successive births for a whole Kalpa consisting of 4,32,00,00,000 human 
years). (20) It is from the lotus sprung from Your navel, O praiseworthy Lord, that | have 
emerged and itis by Your grace that! have secured this opportunity of serving the three worlds 
by creating them. You kept the universe (as a safe deposit) in Your belly for such a long time 
(a whole Kalpa) and Your lotus eyes have just opened, indicating thereby that Your sleep in 
the form of abstract meditation has come to an end. I, therefore, make obeisance to You. (21). 
You are the sole well-wisher and friend, nay, the very Self (Inner Controller) of all animate and 
inanimate beings and the lover of the suppliant. Therefore, pray, endow my vision (understand- 
ing) with the same wisdom and supernatural power by which You delight the universe, so that 
| may be able to create this universe as it existed in the preceding Kalpa. (22) You grant the 
wishes of those who take refuge in You. Therefore, when | proceed to create the universe, 
which will be nothing but an exhibition of Your own creative power, be pleased to fill my mind 
with (the thought of) each and every exploit You may perform in course of the descents YOu 
take along with Your own divine Energy, Goddess Rama, manifesting many a divine virtue, 
so that | may remain untainted by the impurities (in the shape of egotism etc.) attaching to 
the work of creation. (23) | am the deity presiding over the Mahat-tattva, which represents 
Your power of understanding, one of the innumerable powers possessed by You, and sprang 


Dis. 9 ] BOOK THREE 173 


HARASS ABBR BB RR RR BERR RR BER BRE RE REA HERE BEBE RE RE REBAR RERERERE REE LERCH ERE RE RE He Be RRA A AAR RE RE RE RRERERE RARER RE RE LEBER 





from the pool of Your navel even while You, the Supreme Person, slept on these waters. 
Therefore, as | proceed to bring to light the wonderful creation, which will be Your own 
manifestation, let not my utterance of the Vedic words fail. (24) You are the most ancient 
Person possessing Infinite grace. Be pleased, O Lord, to open Your lotus eyes with a smile 
expressive of abundant love; and, rising (from Your bed in the shape of the serpent-god) for 
the creation of the universe, dispel my despondency by Your mellifluous speech. (25) 


Sara 
weasa 8 Premid adifaeraafits: | areasmiec: wen fear a fanaa 126! 
aaa se 8 aeged: ifasuuddd aa eUeriteHsTaT 1201 
MHA Bie: URE: | aMEMM aren Hee aaah 12! 


Maitreya continued: Having thus beheld his Father by dint of austere penance, worship 
and abstract meditation, Brahma extolled Him as best as his mind and speech allowed him 
to do, and then stood silent, as though exhausted. (26) When Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the 
demon Madhu) came to know the intention of Brahma, who was depressed in spirits at the 
sight of the waters surging all round during that period of universal dissolution, and was at 
aloss to know the relative position of the various worlds (to be created by him), He addressed 
Him in deep accents as though removing his faint-heartedness. (27-28) 


m™ aad mers at sana! aaaissaied aa ani sietad Yar?! 
qaea aa sufas fast aa nesramiianamdde se wlnrseeradr 130 | 
dd ste oleh a afnam: aaa: 1 safe at dd serafa cleans: 1321 
at qd addy aeshmita fan sfaaaiia at otal Setela Hea 1321 
wer Ceara Si WM sITTUTIATA: | UT Aad Usa MRA 1331 
qa @ifadaa set al: fagara: | arradieataet antardeqe: 13%! 
fia a aaa adtareal wi: | at af Fes sen: aguas 7134! 
Wise Vad aa agers cami ant a aaesam yAisaqunraiu: 1341 
aa ufgfafecarararean A afafctsafe: 1 ateaA Ales Ges UeHte faferad: 1301 


The Lord said : Do not fall a prey to lassitude (born of despair), O Brahma (repository 
of the Vedas); exert yourself for creation. | have already arranged what you ask of Me. (29) 
Practise penance once more and offer worship through Mantras sacred to Me; thereby, O 
Brahma, you shall find the worlds revealed in your heart. (30) Then, full of devotion and 
concentrated in mind, O Brahma, you will find Me pervading yourself as well as the whole 
universe, and will see the worlds as well as the Jivas (embodied souls) resting in Me. (31) 
The very moment a man finds Me present in all beings as fire in every piece of wood, he is 
rid of all infatuation. (32) And, when he realizes himself as devoid of the five elements, the 
Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action), the Gunas (the modes 
of Prakrti) and the inner sense, and identical with Me, his very Self, he attains liberation. (33) 
Even though you desire to evolve innumerable creatures according to the stock of their past 
Karma, your mind does not feel perplexed in regard to this matter; that is because you have 
My grace in abundance. (34) The wicked Rajoguna (the principle of activity) will not bind you, 
the first seer, since your mind will remain attached to Me even while you are occupied with 
the work of evolving the creation. (35) Today you have come to know Me, even though living 
beings find it difficult to know Me; for you regard Me as free from the five elements, the 
Indriyas, the Gunas and the inner sense. (36) Doubting My existence, when you proceeded 








174 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


eRe Re Re Re Gee eRe Hee He BEEBE BEEBE HERE BER BEEBE AEE RE AT AEE RE HERE Be ML Be Be He Me Be HE Re BH Br He Se He Ae He Se Ke We Be Be Hee Ny He we Be Be He We He Be Hr Hr AY Hr Re By Re Re Re Hr er ew, 
IS SSS EEE ESS eee“? YFP. ee RL 


to look out for the base of the lotus under water along its stalk, | revealed to you My being 
in your very heart. (37) 


qaeule nada aengetisa aa aafa a fet A WI AaqmE: 1361 
Taisen we A lami fasktwariaaatskforad fer argaviaz13ei 
IW We Wal AAT A wi daa AeA: Ixot 
Wa wet agetditaeriwe A:tedt Gat vaitireraiany ise t 
SENIAISSAAT ld: NS: VA AaaTafa i srat ula wea qHaleetiedend fra: 121 
Aa aa AAAS AT lsat: Ost sag as wed 1x31 


That you have offered Me praises interspersed with the glory of My stories or that you 
have developed faith in austere penance, dear Brahma, all this is due to My grace. (38) May 
success attend you ! | am pleased with you since you have extolled Me in your eagerness 
to create the worlds, describing Me as destitute of the Gunas (modes of Prakrti), even though 
| appear as endowed with such Gunas. (39) I, the Bestower of all desired objects and 
blessings, shall be quickly and immensely pleased with the man who offers worship to Me 
everyday, extolling Me through this hymn of praise. (40) The knowers of Truth are of the 
opinion that My pleasure alone is the highest good to be attained by men through works of 
public utility (such as the digging of wells etc.), austere penance, sacrificial performances, 
charitable gifts, practice of Yoga (control of mind) and abstract meditation. (41) | am the Self 
of all embodied souls, O Brahma (the Creator), and the dearest of all dear ones. Therefore, 
a man should bestow his love on Me alone; for the body and other things are dear only on 
My account. (42) Now evolve the three worlds as well as the beings who are lying hidden in 
Me even as in the Kalpa preceding the period of universal dissolution by means of your own 
personality, that has emanated from Me, and which is an embodiment of all the Vedas. (43) 

WAY Sara 
qa UW Wires SIA: aede Wa WaT Haafees vx! 
Sit AAeMad AO GRASS Gleda Tdlaea ATHISeATA: 11 FI 

The sage Maitreya continued: The Lord whose navel is distinguished by a lotus sprung 

from it, and who is the Ruler of both Matter and Spirit, thus disclosed to Brahma (the Creator 


of the universe) the means of evolving the creation and concealed from his view His divine 
form (the form which is known by the name of Narayana). (44) 


Thus ends the ninth discourse in Book Three of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


FI SSE I 


SA Sara Seale: 


Discourse X 
Description of the tenfold creation 
fagt sara 
srdfed «Ua «sen Glenfcrame: ioe: wast after steatatretfey: 1 2 | 
aaa We YR agaad a aqenqyem fora a: adder. 2 | 


Dis. 10 ] BOOK THREE 175 


Sr Be Br Be Be BeBe BBL He BE Be BEL Be Be Be Be Br He Be Be He He BEBE Re Ke Re Be Re Re He Be EE RHEE RE Re RR RR RB Re Be Be Re Re Re Re Re eRe Be Re Re RARER ERE REE RE REBEL BERBER RE RE BERE 





Vidura said : When the Lord had disappeared from view, how many species of life did Brahma, 
the grandfather of the whole creation, evolve either from his body or from his mind? (1) Pray, also 
elucidate one after another the points that | have referred to you, O worshipful sage, and 
resolve all my doubts, foremost as you are of those possessing a vast knowledge. (2) 

Ud sald 
Wa Patera ae alanal gf: | sila: sere a Sar gees aria 1 3 | 

Suta continued : Thus requested by Vidura, O Saunaka (a scion of Bhrgu), the sage 
Maitreya (son of Kusaru) felt highly pleased and proceeded to answer the queries (by 
Vidura), which he had borne in his mind.(3) 

WAq sara 
fakes aa ah feet ada ag: | onerenaaasa dele Wars: |X | 
Temes aga aalefya: i ceramy denlecpadidor apfaa & | 
awa wear fad area faqgaamact =e ay aersrat € | 
digetea faaceta gent aefeisar saa clear sre Hedda | © | 
umn «=o dalssfaga = aendteitfad: | Uh casgigeen Prem wet feaeM | ¢ | 
Udaslacniees denve: wed: |e amide faa: aerate i 


The sage Maitreya said : Brahma (the Creator) practised austere penance for a 
hundred celestial years with his mind fixed on Sri Narayana, as he had been told by 
the Lord, who is devoid of birth. (4) The lotus-born god now saw the lotus on which he 
was perched, as well as the water all round, being tossed by the wind, whose fury had 
been intensified by the period of universal destruction. (5) His knowledge (about 
creation) and creative power having been greatly enhanced by his ever-growing 
penance and worship through the Mantras sacred to the Lord, he drank up the wind along 
with the water. (6) Perceiving the lotus on which he sat, and which rose to the very sky, - 
he thought he should bring back to light the worlds that had disappeared at the end of the 
preceding Kalpa, by means of that very lotus. (7) Directed by the Lord to carry on the work 
_of creation, Brahma entered the corolla of the lotus and split it up into three parts (viz., 
Bhth, Bhuvah and Swah), although it was so big that it could be divided into fourteen 
Or even more parts. (8) It is these three worlds alone that have been declared (in the 
Scriptures) as constituting the realm where the Jivas (embodied souls) experience the 
fruit of their actions. As for Brahma, i.e., his abode (the Satyaloka) and the three worlds 
immediately below it (viz., Maharloka, Janaloka and Tapoloka), they are the rewards 
Of virtue practised without any selfish aoe (9) 

SAA 


aa qe BUGIS: | HITS GAT Ha AM AVS A: TAT 10! 
Vidura said : Tell me in detail, my lord, about the potency—referred to by you under the 
name of Time—of Sri Hari of marvellous deeds, who appears as many (in the form of the 


Universe). (10) 
DAT sara 
Tureaftcn tent fafaarsisatdisd: | Geadeaearan MIMAGSAA 122 I 
fag a naa den faeprarisam wea 8 aledterngida 1221 
ade amt a usTeeiddlen ait aafaere Med sepa a: 1231 
arene fifa: sfadena: tamer ed: ant Wordeman: 1x! 








176 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


Se ee ee ee ee erie Bd Bel hal Peed Pa) Pcs Pied iad Me Mil ed Mid Pic Met Piel Med Rel ed Me ic) Mick el eM id Md Md Ml Ml We We We We We We We Ae We eee ee Hee We We He He we We we 
eee acc cece ee 


fadlaeaen OC (Gs IIIA ea: | Yada «aa sera eu 
sae Ufsa: ait ae wefhare: idee eae: carat art wa: 1261 
USe] ade: at aedghand: sali sfeA wpa: atl apa A Wy ie 
Maitreya said : Time, which in itself is undifferentiated and has no beginning or end, 
appears in the form of metamorphosis of worldly phenomena. Making it His instrument, the 
Lord (the Supreme Person) sportfully manifested Himself (in the form of the universe). (1 1) 
Having been dissolved by the Maya (wonderful potency) of Lord Visnu, this universe existed 
(during the period of universal destruction) as no other than Brahma God, then evolved it 
as a distinct entity through the instrumentality of Time, which is undifferentiated in itself. (12) 
As the universe exists today, so it was before and So it will continue to be hereafter. Ninefold 
is its creation, the one proceeding both from Prakrti (God) and Vikrti (Brahma) being the 
tenth. (13) The reabsorption (dissolution) of the universe, again, is threefold, viz., through 
Time, elements and the Gunas (modes of Prakrti). (Now as regards the ninefold creation ) 
the first in order of sequence is the creation of the Mahat-tattva, which takes place only when 
the equilibrium of the Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) is disturbed by the will of God 
Himself. (14) The second is the evolution of the ego (Aham), from which proceed the five gross 
elements as well as the five senses of perception and the five organs of action. The third is 
the evolution of the subtle elements, which in their turn evolve the gross elements. (15) The 
fourth is the evolution of the Indriyas, i.e., the senses of perception and the organs of action; 
while the fifth is the evolution of the deities (presiding over the Indriyas), who are born of the 
sattvika ego, as well as of the mind, which is also a product of the Sattvika ego. (16) The 
sixth is the evolution of Tamas (the principle of nescience), which clouds the reason and 
distracts the mind of the Jivas. These six varieties of creation proceed from Prakrti (God, 
the Cause of causes); now hear of those that proceed from Vikrti (Brahma, who sprang up 
from the Lord). (17) 


Wiaet Wad sed emer: | aaa Gerth velaeaaye a a: 1221 
aq SedaeaRt  ateel gal: | Sceldaeta: Bea sira:eaarl faarfeat: 12°! 
farsa: «at: atspifaatger ua: iafaer yaaeat mor gerdfes: 1201 
Tis afes: pe: Ged Tat ve: i feet: wTasA seeps AAT 1R2! 
GUSHISH WR: BACUAA AM Ud VeHaHl: VA: YO] USAT VA 1221 
Ol Gael Gal SA Arse: Aalaleoeht | fe: cHfarist: Hat Men a Aedes: 1231 
He Nlaeqat va aec ha eul: | gaaneashleiniched: = AM: 121 
Waiealde Aaa: atdtenfaent FOL! wish: edad sa a qantas: 1241 
appdata wad eae ada dain a: Sin: mHlaeqeanae: 1261 


(As a matter of fact) the creation proceeding from Brahma too is a pastime of the Lord, 
the very thought of whom rids one of all sorrows and who assumes the quality of Rajas 
(in order to carry on the work of creation as Brahma). The seventh is the sixfold creation 
of immobile creatures (plants and trees etc.), which is the first (in order of sequence of the 
three categories of creation proceeding from Brahma, and which is subdivided into six 
varieties.(18) These consist of (i) trees which bear fruit without flowering, (e.g., the banyan, 
the Peepul and so on), (ii) annual plants and herbs that die as soon as their fruit is ripe (such 
as the cereals), (iii) creepers that grow on the support of other trees or walls etc., (iv) plants 
which have a hard bark (such as the bamboo), (v) creepers that creep on the ground alone, 
being too stiff to climb upwards (such as the melon, the water-melon and soon) and (vi) trees 
which bear fruit after blossoming. All these draw their nutriment from below; they are almost 


. O ] 
Dis. M We We We We Wr We We Ws He He BOOK THREE 77 


wanting in sensibility, have an inward feeling of touch alone and possess some peculiarity 
of their own. (19) The eighth is the creation of animals (lit., living beings that draw their 
nutriment horizontally). They are believed to have as many as twenty-eight varieties, have 
no sense of time, are Irrational (led by instinct alone), can perceive (what is desirable for 
them) with their olfactory sense, and cannot take a long view of things. (20) Of these, the 
bovine Class, the goat, the buffalo, the black antelope, the swine, the Gavaya (a wild animal 
very closely resembling the cow), the Ruru (a species of deer), the sheep and the camel, O 
noblest of men, belong to the category of cloven-hocfed beasts. (21) The donkey, the horse, 
the mule, the Gaura ( a white antelope), Sarabha (an eight-legged animal extinct now) and 
the yak (a kind of wild ox, the bushy end of whose tail is employed as Chowrie)—all these 
are classed as the whole—hoofed beasts. Now hear, O Vidura, the names of the beasts who 
are endowed with five claws. (22) They are: the dog, the jackal, the wolf, the tiger, the cat, 
the hare, the hedgehog, the lion, the monkey, the elephant, the tortoise, the iguana (a large 
arboreal lizard) and the alligator etc. (23) The heron, the vulture, the quail, the hawk, the 
Bhasa (a bird of prey), the BhallUka, the peacock, the swan, the crane, the Cakrawaka, the 
crow, the owl etc., are birds moving in the air. (24) The ninth is the creation of the human 
species, which, O Vidura, is only of one kind and whose current of nutriment tends 
downwards. Human beings have an abundance of Rajas (the principle of activity), are active 
by nature and take delight in the pleasures of sense, which are rooted in sorrow. (25) Allthese 
three (viz., the immobile creation, the beasts and birds and the human species) as well as 
the creation of the gods (to be discussed hereafter), O noblest of men, are creations that 
have proceeded from Brahma. As for the deities (presiding over the Indriyas and) born of 
the Sattvika ego they have already been dealt with (in verse 16 above under the category 
of the creation proceeding from God); while the creation of the sages Sanaka and others is 
classed as proceeding from God and Brahma both.* (26) 


camisnfam  faaen:  farisqu: | teat: fag aaah arom: 1201 
ada fan: fades: 1 aaa faarenan: ante fasgerd: 1221 
3a: at sae aera Aiwa Wey: ae Aeaiaqeyh: | 
GIANTS SHARAAAIGT 128 | 
sfa sterrad AER URS Seca UeaHa SAAISeAMA: 120 | 


The creation of heavenly beings consists of eight varieties, viz., the gods; the manes; the 
demons; the Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and the Apsaras (celestial dancing girls); the 
Yaksas and the Raksasas; the Siddhas (a class of heavenly beings endowed with 
Supernatural powers), the Caranas (the celestial bards) and the Vidyadharas; the Bhutas 
(ghosts), Pretas (spirits) and PiSacas (fiends); the Kinnaras, Kimpurusas and ASwamukhas. 
| have thus told you, O Vidura, the ten creations evolved by the Lord personally as well as 
in the form of Brahma (the Creator of the universe). (27-28) After this | shall speak to you 
of the ruling dynasties as well as the periods presided over by the Manus, United with Rajas 
(the principle of activity) as the self-born Brahma, the creator, none other than Sri Hari of 
unfailing resolve thus projects Himself (in the form of the universe) by Himself at the 


beginning of every Kalpa. (29) 


Thus ends the tenth discourse in Book Three of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 
DISSES 


rn nnn EEEEEEE EEE 
*Sanaka and others, being the mind-born sons of Brahma, obviously belong to the creation proceeding from Brahma. 


But having been created before all others, even before Rudra and the Prajapatis (the progenitors of all created beings), they 
are also classed as a creation proceeding from God Himself. 








178 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


LALLA AAA AAA AA ALARA RG EL ER LEBER ER RRR RR BEEBE REMY Re BEBE BBE RE ERE He Be Be Be RE Re BEBE Be GRE HE BER Be BEBE Re BER Be He He He ag, 
UU UII ===] [EEE -"_ Sl axa = 7.) <a ee cc oe 2 


ST DeHean sear: 


- Discourse XI 


Divisions of Time such as Manvantara and so on 


WAY Sara 
aa: «- Afealeunaacnisdad: Peri amigy: a faaal qordaawat aa: 2 | 
@dq wa uate eect adicart uamAerfastst fea: 21 
Ud MIMASaTAd: MRI Viel A AAA | GAIAYaAT Waren Swyhay: 1 3 
a chia: aay at Yer AMA! aalsfastayae A Hie: WA Aer! x | 
Maitreya continued : The minutest particle of material substance (which cannot be 
further divided), which has not yet evolved, nay, not even been combined with other similar 
particles and hence eternally exists (in that causal state) should be known by the name of 
Paramanu. It is the combination of more than one such Paramanus that creates in the mind 
of men the illusory notion of a unit. (1) Even so the entire range of material substances taken 
as an unspecified and undifferentiated whole, before it undergoes further transformation, 
i.e., returns to its ultimate source (Prakrti), constitutes what is known as the largest size. (2) 
(Just as the minutest particle of a material substance such as earth and so on leads us to 
postulate the existence of a Paramanu, and the combination of material substances to that 
of the largest size), so can we infer the long and short measures of time, which (being a 
potency of the Lord) is the same as the Lord, all-pervading and unmanifest, and which is the 
circumscriber of finite objects inasmuch as (in the form of the sun) it travels across the large 
and small dimensions of things. (3) The measure of time which (in the form of the sun) flits 
across the smallest particle of matter is called a Param&anu; while that which extends over 
the whole life-span of the universe (viz., from its creation to dissolution) is the longest 
measure of time (in relation to the cosmos, viz., a couple of Parardhas, constituting the life- 
span of Brahma). (4) 


Set UA, AIA: Ad: i Metehead: «= - NATIT I & 
ACU ach Yexh a: cle: A Ale: Wd: | Ware Aa: Uikafd oa: wa: 1g i 
Faas Wl Sade FA: AT: | Av Us fae: HB oa a al ws A | 
CUA a AA ca ws a Alfsnria & Ged: Wet: WSN: UA aI FON! C | 
Blemeaerar agitate: | AoA: FaGR AAGUITS TTL | | 
aMigasant  Adidedt  Stiae: usenet ae: Hoy ae 1201 
dat: aaaat ara: fagui aceftartist aad: seat afaot arat fefaiee 
Sat digit Medal gee Gd: i daa FM wMahafsa ee 
Tetdarea: Wale BWAidi data  wlafafast fay: 1231 
Ade: Uae gsaek wa Alswqaat aang facta sare ier 
a: Qeaakrdeeegrat aan Geiss fete erate ytee: | 
Sona «TU seid afs ad aus iu 
Two Paramanus make one Anu (an atom); while three Anus constitute a Trasarenu” (the 


*The words ‘Anu’ and ‘Trasarenu' though primarily denoting the dimensions of material objects, also signify the measure 
of time taken by the sun to travel across the aforesaid dimensions. 


Dis. 11 ] » BOOK THREE 179 


minutest particle of matter or mote), seen floating in space through the sun's rays that enter 
a room through the eye-holes of a lattice. (5) The measure of time which (in the form of the 
sun) travels across a composite of three Trasarenus is known as a Truti; a Vedha consists 
of a hundred Trutis, while three Vedhas constitute what is known as a Lava. (6) Acomposite 
of three Lavas should be known by the name of Nimesa (the twinkling of an eye); while three 
Nimesas are spoken of as one moment (Ksana). A composite of five moments is known as 
a Kastha; while fifteen Kasthas go to make a Laghu. (7) Fifteen Laghus taken together are 
called a Nadika; a couple of Nadikas constitute one Muhurta, while six or seven Nadikas 
(according as the day or night is short or long) make a Prahara, which forms one quarter of 
a day or night of human beings. (8) A pot (of copper) weighing six Palas or ninety-six Masas 
(8 Tolas) and with a capacity of one Prastha (two seers) of water should be bored (at the 
bottom) with a gold needle weighing four Masas and four Angulas (a finger's breadth) long, 
and left on water. The time which will be taken by such a potto be filled with and consequently 
submerged in water is known as a Nadika. (9) The day and night of human beings consist 
of four Yamas or quarters each: while fifteen days and nights constitute a fortnight, which 
is bright and dark (alternately), O respecter of others. (10) Both these fortnights, taken 
together, make one month, which constitutes a day and night of the Pitrs (manes). Two 
months, taken together, go to make a Rtu (season); while an Ayana consists of six months. 
An Ayana is southerly and northerly by turns ( according as the sun takes a southerly or 
northerly course), and the two Ayanas constitute a day and night of the gods in heaven. 
These are known as one year or twelve months (on earth) and a hundred years have been 
declared as the full life-span of human beings. (11-12) The ever-vigilant sun-god, who is 
manifestation of the Lord Himself and identical with the Time-Spirit, and stays in the midst 
of planets, lunar mansions and other stars, goes round the whole universe in course of time 
beginning from a Paramanu and extending to a whole year. (13) The year, O Vidura, is 
variously termed as Samvatsara', Parivatsara?, Idavatsara’, Anuvatsara* and Vatsara? 
(according as it is calculated on the basis of the revolutions of the sun, the Jupiter, the moon 
and so on). (14) Bear offerings, (O men!) to the sun-god, the originator of these five kinds 
of years, who by his potency called Time unfolds in various forms the capacity of the seed 
etc., to germinate, who as (a huge ball of) fire, which is one of the five gross elements, 
courses through the heavens in order to dispel the delusion of men (by cutting short their 
span of life and thus ridding them of their attachment for the pleasures of sense) and who 
(for those performing sacrifices etc., with some interested motive) yields many kinds of 
material fruits (in the shape of heavenly and other enjoyments) through sacrificial 


performances. (15) 
fagt sara | 


fiqranqerorag: «ae THI OST east SA: Heda aAleida: 1261 
Wad a wea Me Wad Adifad fasted sit ard aa igo! 
Vidura said : The full life-span of the manes, gods and human beings has thus been 


4. Sarnvatsara is the name of the solar year or the period taken by the sun to pass through all the twelve signs of the zodiac 


(viz., 372 days). 
2. Parivatsara is the name of the period taken by the Jupiter to pass from one sign of the zodiac to another. The Jupiter 
takes approximately twelve years to complete its circuit through all the twelve signs. 
3. Idavatsara is the name of the Savanas year, each month of which has a uniform duration of 30 days. 
4.Anuvatsara is the name of the lunar year, each month of which ends on the Amavasya. 
5. Vatsara is the name of the year, each month of which consists of 27 days only, the period taken by the moon to pass 


through each Naksatra or lunar mansion. 








oh bebo 


180 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 11 


RRR RE RRR RR RARER AR RR RRR RR RR RR RE RE RE ER RE Be RR ROR RR Re RE RE Re RRR RE Be Re Re REM Re RR Re A BR Re ay, 
SE 


stated by you (as consisting of a hundred years according to the measure% of time Severally 
obtaining in the three worlds). Now kindly tell me the life-span of other (higher) enlightened 
beings (such as Brahma, Sanaka, Bhrgu and others), who live outside the three worlds (i.e. 
in the spheres beyond Indra's paradise). (16) Your holiness surely knows the course of the 
all-powerful Time; for the wise can see the whole universe with their eye perfected through 
Yoga (union with God). (17) 

WAY Sara 


gai Ad wat a aiesf agai feeteeaitdt: mam ferries 
Maitreya replied : The four Yugas,viz., Krtayuga (Satyayuga), Treta, Dwapara and Kali 
along with their Sandhya (the transitional period marking the beginning of each Yuga) and 
Sandhyamsa (the transitional period marking the end of each Yuga) have been declared as 
consisting of 12,000 celestial years (or 43,20,000 human years). (18) 


aa ait ¢ ah pafey aera dena aeenth fen ant a iee 
SAMMI A: SIG: Wiel: | Aaa MT aA raf fala Rot 
waa wd WAdadd | a warageor aft ued alate 
ele Beaea atest fei dada Man aa afadieta faage 1221 
Pada «SRS )«Olmeectisqadd | aed «Ta HST 1231 
BS oie Aaa Uleenl Mera! Waly AAaeseaT «AAA: «AT: | 
Vata Aa Bass F A a1 2X 

TW der: ail steeeladada: | fdecfaqeamt waral aa apf: 1241 
Tame wa fru waft: | Warley fasmacifadarea: 1261 
Tae Middeghaha: | HAAR se PT fear 1201 
qaraatard oer Wer: | arama  frdmarferarenci2c 
ele eae Wea assent | agen veelHrmed wrateatstat: 1221 
Waleyat aa: cmeurdiafaea: | ylaawdenclelqauanhktara: 1301 
Std: der Glee steastdarea et: | arises: WAAR sated: 1321 
udfaarenn: lentaaetatd: | safardtrarearta UAT a: BAA 132 1 


The Krtayuga and the succeeding Yugas severally consist of four, three, two and one 
thousand celestial years plus twice as many hundred years (representing the Sandhya 
and Sandhyamsa of each Yuga)t. (19) Those who are conversant with the divisions of time 
call only the period intervening a Sandhya and the following Sandhyam$Sa, each of which 
comprises of a hundred celestial years, as Yuga proper; for each of these Yugas a special 
Dharma (code of virtue) is prescribed. (20) In the Krtayuga, Dharma (virtue) exists, for 
men, complete in its four limbs (viz., austere penance, internal and external purity, 





* Aday and night of the Pitrs (manes) consist of 30 days and nights of human beings. Hence the full life-span of Pitrs would 
be reckoned at 3,000 years. Even so a day and night of the gods consist of two Ayanas or 360 human days and nights. Thus 
the full life-span of the generality of gods would work up to 36,000 human years. 

+ Thus a Satyayuga consists of 4,800 celestial years all told (4,000 years of Satyayuga proper and 800 years representing 
the Sandhya and Sandhyamsa combined). Similarly a Treta consists of 3,600, Dwapara of 2,400 and Kali of 1,200 celestial 
years all told. In other words, a Kaliyuga consists of 4,32,000 human years, a Dwapara of twice as many, i.e., 8,64,000 years, 
a Treta of thrice as many or 12,96,000 years and a Satyayuga of four times as many or 17,28,000 years. 


is. 11 
TS Ne _ OOK THREE eH 
SRE ERR RTH RE RRR ARERR RREAERAE BER ESB BEBE AE BE AAAAERERE 


compassioniand truthfulness). In the other Yugas, even as unrighteousness advances, 
virtue diminishes by one limb successively* (21) Beyond the three worlds, (from the 
Maharloka) as far as the abode of Brahma, one thousand revolutions of the four Yugas 
constitute a day; and equal in length is the night, dear Vidura, when Brahma (the Creator of 
the univer Se) goes to sleep (withdrawing all the three worlds into his belly). (22) At the close 
of night the creation of the three worlds commences (as in the preceding Kalpa) and 
continues for the livelong day of Brahma, which embraces the regime of the fourteen 
Manus.(23) Each Manu holds power for the period allotted to him, which is a little over 
seventy-one (71 and 6/14) revolutions of the four Yugas. During these Manvantaras there 
are separate Manus and their descendants, separate groups of seven Rsis and gods, and 
separate Indras (the rulers of all the three worlds) and their attendants (Gandharvas and so 
on), all of whom (excepting, of course, the descendants of Manu) are born together. (24) This 
is the day-to-day creation of Brahma, which affects the three worlds alone and in which the 
sub-human creatures, human beings, manes and gods are born according to their respective 
Karma. (25) During these Manvantaras the Lord assumes the quality of Sattva (harmony) 
and protects the universe, exhibiting His strength in the form of Manus and others, who are 
His own manifestations. (26) At the close of the day Brahma assumes an iota of Tamoguna 
(the principle of inertia) and, winding up his activity (in the shape of creation), becomes quiet 
(retires for the night). At that time everything else is withdrawn into him by force of time. (27) 
Again, when the night (of universal dissolution) sets in, the moon and the sun as well 
disappear and all the three worlds, viz., Bhuh, Bhuvah and Swah get reabsorbed into his 
body. (28) (How this happens Is described now.) When the three worlds are being consumed 
by the divine energy in the shape of fire emitted by the mouth of Lord Sankarsana (the 
serpent-god), the sages Bhrgu and others (who have their abode in the Maharloka, 
immediately above Indra's paradise) feel oppressed by the heat (of that huge conflagration) 
and ascend from the Maharloka to the Janaloka (the next higher world). (29) Meanwhile all 
the seven oceans exceed their limits at the approach of universal destruction. Their waters 
get unusually swollen and with their waves tossed by boisterous and fearful gusts of wind 
they submerge all the three worlds in no time. (30) In the midst of that (vast expanse of) water 
lies Sri Hari on His couch of Lord Ananta (Sesa), His eyes closed on account of sleep in the 
form of abstract meditation, the inhabitants of the Janaloka extolling Him (on all sides). (31) 
With the alternation of days and nights of the above description, which can be (easily) 
deduced from the (constant) flux of time, the hundred years even of Brahma's life which is 


the longest in this creation, are well-nigh spent. (32) 
ASAT cueaiaetad i ga: ueretisasmrdt URIS! Sade 1331 
ude ureder ATet AA AEM! Heck aatad eM Team a fag: 13x 
aaa aa aetisye a weattaad | cai StTalewicaeey 1341 
aT q afer: aon fade WR ante sit fend aareicget ee: 1361 
ars foray fae scadd | tenga SATs: 1319 1 
SIS  UAaeiarat «= Se Aa SeyA get area 3c 


One-half of Brahmas life is called Parardha. The first Parardha has already expired and 
the second is now running (has commenced from the current Kalpa). (33) The first Parardha 
Opened with a momentous Kalpa, the Brahma Kalpa, in which appeared Brahma, whom the 

* That is to say, in Treta austere penance falls into destitute; only purity, compassion and truthfulness are practised in 
the name of virtue. In the Dwapara, however, penance and purity both become obsolete; compassion and truth alone prevail. 


And in Kali truthfulness alone remains, the other three virtues become very rare. 





ech eetnernaeneeenieeee 
re -_ 8 et gen eee — —_= 


Tot — = he aa 
J Sau “a Vie si 


~ 


7 7 ==, 


, 
f 
: 
: 





182 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 42 


LHARKRAKALHARAHRRAR RARE LE LL LAK LLAMA HH HH HH HH RH A A re re 
——————————lUS==av_s.,.,V7<5Gv lll ll ll TT TT TT creat 


wise recognize as Veda personified. (34) The Kalpa that marked the end of the same 
Parardha is called the Padma Kalpa, in which sprang from the pool of Sri Hari's navel the 
lotus representing all the worlds. (35) The present has been declared as the opening Kalpa 
of the second Parardha, O Vidura, (a scion of Bharata). It is known by the name of Varaha- 
Kalpa, inasmuch as Sri Hari took the form of a boar in this Kalpa. (36) The aforesaid period 
of two Parardhas is figuratively spoken of as the mere twinkling of an eye of the immutable, 
immortal, beginningless Lord, the Soul (origin) of the universe. (37) This all-powerful Time, 
ranging from a Paramanu (the smallest measure) to the length of two Parardhas, has no 
control over the all-embracing Lord; it holds sway only on those who have identified 
themselves with the body and all that is associated with it. (38) 


fast:  afedt aafdararfafiaad: | siemien afer usierentfefarga: 1391 

Rasa Was: aad weadsatasra atfeet Wem: ixol 

eaTETAT Hel Aden | fastata at MaANgEI Agi: 1x2! 

Sf Sead ASM GRASS Sears Ta Wepreanseara: 122 

This egg-shaped universe, constituted as it is of the eight causal principles (viz., 
Primordial Matter, the Mahat-tattva, the Ego and the five subtle elements) and the sixteen 
evolutes (viz., the mind, the five senses of perception, the five organs of action and the five 
gross elements, none of which evolves further), has a breadth of five million Yojanas (or forty 
million miles) and is covered outside by seven sheaths (viz., earth; water, fire, air, ether, the 
Ego and the Mahat-tattva), each of which is ten times larger than the one it surrounds. That 
cause of all causes, in which this universe with all its covering sheaths looks like a Paramanu, 
and which comprises myriads of other universes, is called the indestructible Brahma; and 


that is the transcendent reality of the most ancient Person, Lord Visnu, the Supreme Spirit 
in embodied form. (39—41) 


Thus ends the eleventh discourse in Book Three of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


et Pet Pet HS 
FI -SSESESR SID 


AA Slaantseara: 


Discourse XIl 


The multiplication of creation 


HAY Saray 
Sfa A alvia: ad: Hier: are: | afeat aandfsa aureneitfaater 21 2 | 
Pasa AaAa amaatcd| Fete UA ae A aAasMMMAada: | 2 | 
SBI Uda gis Ae Agta WagaGed AAA aAdlsgeid! 2 | 
We A ae A Mey lara a Uifafemarediaa: | x | 
ar AN SY: YAM I: God Yew: | dares aeration argqeaatao: | & | 
isda: Udtd Waa: ima aed sid frerqqaamas & | 


Dis. 12 ] BOOK THREE 183 


faa fryers = yardeqrasnad: | delisted AI: HANI alootfed: 1 © t 

@ a ete tart weit amar wa: | am He 8 oe: SII a aM | CI 

git Wa aa: TAN sa oars! see VSM AA AI Vekedewaia a 1 st 

aga: Ue Want sa sem: | aaeamfiereha ATA vA sft ISM: 1201 

dersaagqaia 0 aninis «6 at i qdeecda wR aa 21221 

aera «= Aiea MEA: |SAT «a: HIN areal asd: 1221 

didi ai  fraraftifieracn 1 saadt gen den caer ea a fer: 1231 

Tenth AM writ a wareur: | UM: Gat WaT aM: Teas Aadla: 12x! 

sarees: A Wen wnaioeted: | aad Aastieaa: eT: 1241 

: ; a — F et 

ae oT: Gerfatteaife: giarina we ceriifafdasafifscaut: i201 

am ste Ww A WaeEaeianda aad ast faate warieci 

wea wut wifiineadnetesmadyaqeerage feet Aries 
Maitreya continued : Thus | have told you, O Vidura, the glory of the Supreme Spirit 
under the name of Time. Now hear from me how Brahma (the repository of the Vedas) 
proceeded with the work of creation. (1) To begin with, Brahma (the first maker) evolved the 
five varieties of ignorance* viz., Tamas (ignorance about one's own self), Moha (self- 
identification with the body etc.), Mahamoha (the craving for enjoyment), Tamisra (anger) 
and Andhatamisra (looking upon death as one s own end). (2) He was, however, not pleased 
with himself to see this most wicked creation. Through his mind, purified by meditation on 
the Lord Brahma (the self-born) then evolved a creation (different from the above), viz., the 
sages Sanaka and Sanandana and Sanatana and Sanatkumara, who refrained from all 
worldly activity and were Urdhvaretast (lifelong celibates). (3-4) Brahma (the self-born) said 
to these sons, "Dear sons, do you beget offspring." They, however, were little inclined to do 
SO, since they had set their heart on Lord Vasudeva as the highest goal and had taken a vow 
of renunciation as a road to liberation. (5) Thus disregarded by his own sons, who had flouted 
his command, Brahma strove to curb the fierce anger generated in him. (6) But notwith- 
Standing his effort to restrain it by force of reason, the passion of Brahma (the lord of created 
beings) forthwith broke through the middle of his brows in the form of a boy of dark-red 
hue. (7) The body, who was no other than Lord Rudra (the eldest-born of the gods), cried, 
"Give me names, O Creator, and also allow me abodes, father of the world.” (8) Intending 
to comply with this prayer of the boy, the worshipful Brahma (who was born of the lotus) 
replied in kind tones : "Do not cry, | shall presently do it for you. (9) Since you wept as a 


frightened child, O chief of the gods, hence people will call you by the name of Rudra (lit., 
one who weeps). (10) The heart, the senses, the vital air, ether, the air, fire, water, earth, the 








* The Visnu-Purana says— 
aHISTHAGT WE: Seat MUOaWA: | AeMeed fara MeaPTASaM It 
AU Baaha afta IY SoA | Alaa WAIT Wee AeA: I 
Cf. Patanjali— 
afaentaanmesiram: Ta Fig: | 
According to the great Acarya Visnuswami, the fivefold ignorance consists in Ajnana (ignorance), Viparyasa (error or 


delusion), Bheda (sense of diversity), Bhaya (fear) and Soka (grief). 
+ 'Urdhvareta' literally means he whose generative fluid has begun to flow upwards instead of downwards as in the case 








| 


184 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12 


sun and the moon and austere penance—these are the abodes | have already assigned to 
you. (11) You will be further called Manyu, Manu, Mahinasa, Mahan, Siva, Rtadhwaja, 
Ugrareta, Bhava, Kala, Vamadeva and Dhrtavrata (according to the abodes assigned to 
you). (12) Dhi, Vriti, Usana, Uma, Niyut, Sarpi, lla, Ambika, lravati, Sudha and Diksa, 9 
Rudra, shall be your wives, who will all be called Rudranis (as a class). (13) Accept these 
names and abodes andconsorts too, and beget through these numerous progeny, since you 
are a Prajapati (a god presiding over creation)." (14) Thus enjoined by his father (Brahma), 
Lord Nilalohita (so-called because of his dark-red hue) begot progeny resembling himself 
in strength, appearance and disposition. (15) Brahma (the lord of created beings) was 
alarmed to see numberless hosts of Rudras (gods presiding over destruction), procreated 
by Rudra, devouring the creation on all sides. (16) "Beget no more of such progeny, O chief 
of the gods, who are burning with their fearful eyes all the four quarters including myself. (17) 
Practise austere penance that may bring happiness to all living beings; God bless you. 
Through penance alone you will be able to create this universe as it was before (in the Kalpa 
preceding the last Pralaya). (18) And through penance alone can a man easily attain the 
Lord, who is supreme effulgence, nay, who is beyond sense-perception and dwells in the 
heart of all living beings." (19) 
WAY sara 


wanrenyasses: uke fri uf aretaqursa fade ad aqirot 

AmMaeaad: Bi at Ua: wilt! waohhama Bleateda: 122! 

Tea UE: Ue: «hd: | eae) ea SRT AR: 12D 

SUGAR Te SAISHBIMATG: | HTUTe(as: Tale Yeats cheer: 122 | 

Geel Afadl sit goed: culate: | se Wadtsaunstritifraatssad, 12% | 

ad: area art ART: was: ysdt aaArqaetnvase: 1241 

Gq HA Ya: MIM HIUMeENawdeld| srenalereat Agito: AANATAA: 12E | 

Baa: Heat Wet easel: Ud: WY: 1 Ate cease Te fag WIT! 
Maitreya continued : Thus instructed by Brahma (the self-born), Rudra said, "All right!” 
and, taking leave of the lord of speech and going round him (as a mark of respect), he retired 
to the woods with intent to practise austere penance. (20) Equipped with the creative energy 
of the Lord, Brahma now contemplated further creation and presently produced ten more 
sons, who were instrumental in multiplying the creation, viz., Marici, Atri, Angira, Pulastya, 
Pulaha, Kratu, Bhrgu, Vasistha and Daksa, Narada being the tenth. (21-22) Narada sprang 
up from Brahma’'s lap, Daksa from his thumb, Vasistha from his breath, Bhrgu from his skin 
and Kratu was evolved from his hand. (23) Pulaha emanated from his navel, the sage 
Pulastya from his ears, Angira from his mouth, Atri from-his eyes and Marici came out of his 
mind. (24) Dharma (the god of virtue), from whom was descended Lord Narayana Himself 
(in the form of the twin brothers Nara and Narayana), appeared from his right breast. Even 


so Adharma (the spirit presiding over unrighteousness), from whom sprang the god of death, 
the terror of the whole world, appeared from his back. (25) From his heart sprang up Kama 





of ordinary male adults. We find mention in our scriptures of hosts of Rsis who had mastered their sexual impulse so thoroughly 
that the flow of their generative fluid had turned upwards, a thing unknown in any other part of the world. This shows to what 
inconceivable length our forefathers had developed the art of preserving the vital fluid and utilizing it towards the noblest end 
of God-Realization (afea-m anad aia : Cf. Bhagavadgita VIll.11). 


Dis. 12 ] BOOK THREE 185 


We Wr Ke We Ke We Ke Ke ee We We Ke Bee Hee Re ee Re Re He Re eR Re eRe Re eR Ree ee Ree ee eR ee eR Re ee ee Re eee eee ee He Be Re We Be We He He He He He 





(the god of love), Anger from his brows, and Greed from his lower lip, Vak (the goddess of 
speech) from his mouth, the oceans from his penis, and Nirrti (the chief of the Raksasas and 
the regent of the south-west), the spirit presiding over sin, from his anus. (26) The sage 
Kardama, the spouse of Devahiti (the mother of Lord Kapila) and a master of his self, was 
evolved from his shadow. (In this way) the whole of this creation was evolved either from the 
mind or from the body of Brahma (the maker of the universe). (27) 


art gett dit wmeygtdi na: 1 stent Gena ad: Genres sla A: AML IRI 
aed aaa faster ftaz Ga: | atthe «AA fasranereratera 1291 
tage: gd wad a ahaha amtiad feat Tags WY: 1301 
sitet gta Yeelet wet | gags a cle: aaa wed 1321 
wa AAT Wad 4 s wa Veni snes agama a xt mand 1321 
a 3M We: WM WW gp ssnodissnofaaerd aa sAisaet 
oT feat SrygEtet tert atageTa: 133 1 

chdlfele earid: wpcler SACHA | HA SATAg Gh AAA AA GUT 13%. 
adel Hddaquadeda: Ue | ater Wea aaa: 1341 


Vidura, we are told that, eager to push on the work of creation, Brahma (the self-born) 
fell in love with his own daughter, Vak, who was most handsome and captivating, but she 
had no carnal desire in her.* (28) Finding that their father had set his heart on unrighteousness, 
his sons, Marici and the other sages, remonstrated with him out of filial affection: (29) "It is 
Strange that you, a master of your self, should seek to copulate with your own daughter, 
unable to control your passion! It is something which was never done by your predecessors 
in office (the Brahmas that preceded you) nor will it be done hereafter by your successors 
(the Brahmas that are going to follow you). (30) This is not something praiseworthy even for 
the all-powerful, O preceptor of the world ! For it is by following the conduct of such people 
that the world finds its way to happiness. (31) Obeisance to the Lord who by His own light 
of wisdom manifested this universe, which already lay dormant in Him! May He protect the 
cause of righteousness." (32) Brahma (the lord of Prajapatis) felt much ashamed to see his 
own sons, the lords of created beings, thus pleading with him before his very eyes, and 
immediately cast off his body. The four quarters picked up that fearful body, which continued 
in the form of fog, also known by the name of darkness. (33) Once when Brahma (the 
Creator) was pondering how should he be able to create the worlds as an organic whole as 
before, the four Vedas issued from his four mouths (one from each). (34) Even so the four 
supplementary Vedas, logic and other allied sciences (such as dialectics, Mimamsay and 
SO On), the functions of the four priests required to officiate at a sacrificial performance, the 








* Even though Brahma, who had been commissioned by the Lord to carry on His own work of creation and has been F 
spoken of above as the first seer (Adikavi), Vedagarbha (a repository of the Vedas) and Vedamurti (Veda personified), and i 
who had not only been blessed by the Lord never to fall a prey to delusion while proceeding with the work of creation but had 
been admitted by Him as having known His truth (vide Ill. ix. 34—36 above), could not evidently have stooped to such depths 
of moral degradation. The incident is only intended to illustrate the blindness of passion and to justify the note of warning 
sounded by our wise forefathers not to see even one's own mother, sister or daughter when she was ali alone. We read 


elsewhere in Srimad Bhagavata itself— 


TTA FEN Slea TT A fafaeHraal Had, | Actes fagraars aia 11 (1X. xx. 17) 


"One should never remain alone even with one's own mother, sister or daughter. Powerful are the senses, which lead 


astray even a learned man.” 
+ A system of philosophy concerning itself chiefly with the correct interpretation of the Vedic ritual and text. 








j 


i 
~ 


Bi Lak! | #) “ 


186 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12 


We We We We Re rR eee ee eT wc Sr Br Sr Sr Bt Ke By Br He By Hr Mr Br Sr Sr Br Hy Br Br Br Be Pr Me Sr Hr Wr Br He He He Hy 
a 


elaborate procedure of performing sacrifices, the four pillars of virtue, the four ASramas 
(stages of life) and the duties assigned to each also appeared from his mouths. (35) 
fagt sara 


a a feagerign adie qadisyend| aq ae Sargeig eaters ale water 13q1 


Vidura said : When that lord of the Prajapatis (the progenitors of the world) evolved from 
his mouths the Vedas and other things (enumerated by you), tell me, in detail, O great 
ascetic, what did he produce from which mouth or other organ? (36) 

WAY Sarg 
ag: Baaaaer dar yatferte: | teaftcat wired srafari srencHar 1319 t 
adde «6 de SRT (i TIA: | DIT, Tes Aes HTIlfefaa:: 131 
sera HC HT: | Wa aa: Ags Adasla: 1391 
aezaaelt ydaearqiefugaaa | sieratafert a ante AMAA 1X0 | 
fam ea aa: aad adefa waht aismmisa ameemgnee afaft: ixel 
Gat wea A wa as qe adidasamemiess sft a Weve 
aaMa defariea: tat ati adn: yd age daftfenat xa 
srcifet sat amt quetifcatla Aiwa aedasead Wet We aga: ev 
TANITA Maat Se ate fast: | AVAATAASTVST TARA: «| ASAT: 1S | 
Ws: Vehhedat sedi Wurdisvad| Maleate: TU ee dled: IMEI 
Saar savateed So I aeons: | tau: aq faeru waa Wt sea: Ix! 
Weesteaaaea | Alesha: AW: 1 mavauita faaat amt wWeeudled: isc 

Maitreya replied : Brahma brought out the four Vedas called the Rgveda, the Yajurveda, 
the Samaveda and the Atharvaveda severally from his mouths facing the east, south, west 
and north; and in the same order did he create Sastra (the duty of the priest called Hota) 
ljya (the duty of the Adhwaryu), Stutistoma (the duty of the Udgata) and Prayascitta (the duty 
of the Brahma). (37) In the same way he released Ayurveda (the science of medicine), 
Dhanurveda (the science of archery), Gandharvaveda (the science of music) and 
othapatyaveda (the science of architecture) severally from his easterly and other mouths.(38) 
The all-seeing Brahma then discharged from all his four mouths the class of literature known 
by the name of Itihasa and Purana, which is recognized as the fifth Veda. (39) Similarly 
he sent out a pair of sacrifices from each of his easterly and other mouths, viz., Sodasi 
and Uktha from the eastern, Purisi and Agnistoma from the southern, Aptoryama and 
Atiratra from the western, and Vajapeya and Gosava from his northern mouth. (40) Inthe 
same order he evolved the four pillars of virtue, viz., Vidya (purity acquired through 
knowledge of God), Dana (charity prompted by compassion), Tapas (austerity) and Satya 
(truthfulness) as well as the four ASramas or stages of life and the mode of life prescribed 
for each.(41) The Savitra (a vow of purity undertaken for a period of three days following 
the ceremony of Upanayana or investiture with the sacred thread for the Japa of the 
Gayatri), the Prajapatya (a vow of celibacy undertaken for a period of one year), the 
Brahma (a vow of celibacy undertaken for the entire period of prosecuting the study of the 
Vedas) and the Brhat ( a vow of lifelong celibacy), are the four modes of life prescribed for 
a Brahmacani (religious student). Even so Varta (agriculture and other vocations sanctioned 
by the Sastras), Saficaya (officiating at sacrificial performances), Salina (living on whatever 





Dis. 12 ] ' BOOK THREE 187 


REPRE RRR RRR REET RE REMEBER RRR BORE RE REET RE ROR RE REMOTE RE REE RE ROR RE REE BERR RE RE RE RE RE RE RRR RE RRR RAR AAR 


may be got without asking) and Siloficha (living on foodgrains found scattered and gleaned 
from the fields after the harvest has been reaped or from the grain market when the stock 
has either been sold or removed)—these are the four means of livelihood prescribed for 
a (Brahmana) householder. (42) Similarly Vaikhanasas (those living on the produce of 
uncultivated land), Valakhilyas (those who give away the old stock of foodgrains on 
receiving a new one), Audumbaras (those who live on fruits etc., brought exclusively from 
the quarter which they happen to face when quitting their bed after a night's rest) and 
Phenapas (those who live on fruits etc., dropped from trees of their own accord) are the 
four types of Vanaprasthas (anchorites dwelling in the forest in the third stage of their life). 
And the Kuticaka (he who lives in a thatched hut at one place, fully observing the rules of 
conduct prescribed for a recluse), the Bahidaka (he who regards the rules of conduct as 
of secondary importance and accords a superior place to knowledge), the Harnsa (he who 
treads the path of knowledge) and the Niskriya or Paramahamsa (he who has attained 
spiritual wisdom and Jivanmukti or liberation in this very life)—these are the four types of 
Samnyasis or recluses (those who have renounced their hearth and home in the fourth or 

last stage of their life). (43) Even so the four branches of knowledge, viz., Anviksiki (the 

knowledge of the Spirit, which is conducive to liberation), Trayi (the knowledge of the ritual, 

which leads to enjoyment in heaven), Varta (the technical knowledge of agriculture, 

commerce, etc.), and Dandaniti (political science), and the four Vyahrtis or mystical 

formulae uttered at the beginning of the Gayatri (Bhuh, Bhuvah, Swah, and the combina- 

tion of the three, viz., Bhurbnuvahswah) issued from his mouths in the same order; while 

Pranava (the mystic syllable OM) flowed from the cavity of his heart. (44) Again, the Vedic 

metre of Usnik appeared from the hair on the body of the all-powerful creator, and Gayatri 

(another Vedic metre) from his skin. The Tristubh metre emerged from his flesh, Anustubh 

from his sinews and Jagati from the bones of the lord of creation. (45) From his marrow 

emanated Pankti, while Brhati came forth from his breath. Similarly his consciousness 

came to be the hard consonants, while his body itself passed by the name of vowels. (46) 

His Indriyas are termed as the sibilants (the sounds represented by the letters Sa, Sa, Sa 

and Ha), while his physical strength goes by the name of Antahsthas or semi-vowels (the 

sounds represented by the letters Ya,Ra,La and Wa. And the seven notes of the gamut 

(Sadja, Rsabha, Gandhara, Madhyama, Paficama, Dhaivata and Nisada) proceeded from 

the recreation of the lord of created beings. (47) Being Sabdabrahma (Veda or sound) 

personified, Brahmais manifest in the form of Vaikhari (articulate utterance) and unmanifest 

in the form of Pranava. Beyond him shines the Supreme, who pervades everything as 

Brahma (the Infinite) and is possessed of various potencies as the almighty Lord. (48) 


aaa «ACTA ae ato aetatonafa © atinfaeqay 1xe 
aeat deyed warden alas steqqtat aargaenta eet iol 
a aa unt qi dana faaeqivwd gmadedte aa Ualdatdedal 142! 
we wonye gar aenraaitaadiarar eataarmar at Aare 1421 
TR TA YAM BSA: SSS: ATE Att ASSHSAT ATM ASST AIA: 143 | 
aa | fagererict oT | Memayfatia aid ated Geass 14s 
fraadaaaet fra: wma wndionafidasts  wsalakfe arr iu 
step waa Melee FT AAA calles A Ad SMG S14! 


sia saad ASM GRASS Alearal Ileal STeRMSeAA: 1221 . 
(Having cast off his previous body, which had been defiled by sinful thought and which 











= 
| 


188 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [-Dis. 13 


SERRAKAKKLLKHHHHKKLKLLAHE KALAMA MH KN HN NN AA ME RB Ke RE RE RE RT RERY RERE MR RR MERE RRR RH Br Rew, 
— SS, 


continued to exist in the form of fog) Brahma (now) assumed another body distinct from the 
former and set his heart once more on creation. Realizing in his heart that the creation had 
not expanded even at the hands of seers (Marici and others) who were endowed with 
extraordinary powers, he thought once more within himself, O Vidura : "Oh, how strange that, 
even though | am ever up and doing, my progeny are not multiplying. Surely an adverse fate 
stands in my way.” Brahma always did what was desirable at the moment. While he was thus 
waiting for (a more propitious) Providence, Brahmas body became twofold. A human body 
(whether male or female) has come to be known by the name of Kaya* (in Sanskrit) only 
because it originally belonged to Brahma. Those two distinct parts turned out to be a man and 
a woman. (49—52) Of those two forms the male was Swayambhuvat+ Manu, the first 
independent sovereign of the entire globe. And the female came to be the spouse of that 
noble soul and was called Satarupa. (53) The creation then multiplied through copulation. 
Swayambhuva Manu too begot five issues through Satarupa. (54) They were Priyavrata 
and Uttanapada and three daughters, Akiti, Devahtti and Prastti by name, O most pious 
Vidura. (55) He gave away Akiti (the eldest) to Ruci (a lord of created beings), the 
middie one (Devahtti) to the sage Kardama (another Prajapati) and Prastti (the 
youngest) to Daksa (one of the ten sons of Brahma enumerated in verses 22 and 23 
above). The progeny of these three girls filled the whole universe. (56) 


Thus ends the twelfth discourse in Book Three of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


CAPT LET HS 
I-III SIS 


SID AMEN SLA: 


Discourse XIlll 


The Lord's Descent as the Divine Boar 
AIP SAT 
Fara art aadl WA: Wwadat qaiya: uses aivell argqdacmead: | @ | 
Sri Suka continued : On hearing this most sacred discourse from the lips of the sage 


(Maitreya), who was proceeding with the same, O king, Vidura made the following enquiry 
again, fond as he was of hearing the stories of Bhagavan Sri Krsna (son of Vasudeva). (1) 


fagt Sara 
@ a alana: ae fra: ga: wana: | sftena frat uct fe wen ad Gti 2 | 
Grd dal Uitelemte  aaiate A seama fagacas wat 3 | 
ma ua ween Tage afefitfecdisel: | 
AAT GON AAA eprautantard ecag Sar | ¥ | 


* The word Kayam' has been derived from the noun ‘Ka’ (a name of Brahma)—#=1 ¥e4]_ (that which belongs to Brahma). 
+The Manu owed his name to his father, Swayambhd (the self-born Brahma). The word has been derived as 44533: 


area Fart’ (the son of Swayambh6). 





Dis. 13 ] BOOK THREE 189 


Br br Br Br Br or Br Br Br Br Sr trtr 
Br Br fr er Br Br Be Fr Gr Ke Ke Hr Hr Hr Ke Rr Hr Hr Br Br Br Ge Br Be Kr Ke BeBe Be Be He He Ke He Ge Ke Ke BeBe Or He Be Ke Br BeBe Be REE BE Be Be We Ke Be Sz Be BEB ERE LE BEBE BeBe Ke BERT 





Vidura Said : Having secured a spouse after his own heart O sage, what did Emperor 
Swayambhuva, the beloved son of Brahma (the self-born), do next? (2) Full of reverence as 
| am, please narrate to me, O most pious Maitreya, the story of that royal sage, the first 
sovereign (of the globe), since he had taken refuge in Viswaksena (Lord Visnu, lit., the 
universal lord or He who exerts His power all round). (3) The highest reward, commended 
by the wise, of learning acquired by men with great pains extending over a long period, is 
to hear the praises of those who have installed the lotus-feet of Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower 
of Liberation) in their heart. (4) _ 

Sah Sara 


git = gamt(isdfeetfeita Ss Geeatwieoioera 
xe TESTA WAH AAaL sonar OPA 1 & I 
Sri Suka went on : When Vidura, who was full of modesty and had had the honour of 
bearing in his lap the feet of Sri Krsna (who was no other than the thousand-headed Purusa), 
spoke thus and urged Maitreya to the narration of the Lord's stories, the sage's hair stood 
erect and he replied to him as follows. (5) 
SOTA 


ael MUG We We: Bal Aq: i Mee: swoasxe aandareadi « | 
aan: Paya wane afte: fiat serfs a: seat a Bel Sa aT Wa! 9 1 
agate wre addtencaihyiaeneae aa fagmaa a vaeia: ici 


_ Maitreya said : When Swayambhuva Manu came into existence with his consort 
(Sataripa), he bowed respectfully to Brahma ( the repository of the Vedas) and addressed 
him thus with joined palms : (6) "You are the one (undisputed) father—progenitor as well as 
sustainer—of all living beings. Yet in what way can we, your children, be of service to you? 
(7) We make obeisance to you, O praiseworthy father; from among duties we may be found 
capable of kindly prescribe that by discharging which we may enjoy celebrity all round in this 


world and a happy destiny in the other." (8) 


Maane dd ait enel fadtexi afacictea eat anf Acremday ¢ 1 
wraaema arat waoafakeittiameasriaa aet dat: 1201 
A BaMAGeA AaMAMe Wl: 1 sare Wa alot Wi a: Get aT ee! 
Ut Be va Asma 7 imate TAA eHeaMsyTait 1221 
Jet A ql War Ales Sales: | ast sat Warala Aart Aled: aH 1231 


Brahma replied : May all be well with both of you, O sovereign of the globe. |am pleased 
with you, my son, since with a guileless heart you have of your own accord surrendered 
yourself to me with the words "Enjoinme (what to do)." (9) The way in which sons should offer 
worship to their father, my valiant son, is only this that, free from jealousy (towards their 
brothers), they should reverently and dutifully carry out his behest to the best of their ability. 
(10) Begetting, through her, issues that may prove to be your compeers in virtues, therefore, 
rule over the earth with righteousness and worship the Supreme Person through sacrificial 
performances. (11) The best service you will be doing to me will be through the governance 
of the people, O ruler on men. Lord Sri Hari (the Controller of the senses) will be pleased 
with you when He sees you looking after your subjects. (12) Their labours prove of little avail, 
who fail to win the pleasure of Lord Janardana, who reveals Himself in the form of sacrifices; 











ry 
i 


490 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13 


SOAK ALAALLKAKLLALLKLAOKLKAHNKHLK ANAL ALLN ALLAN LAKH HL HK HH NAA Br Br He Be Hr Br Be Hy By Hr Hr Hr Br By Br Be Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr Gr Hr Hr Hr Hr Hy Hr Hr Hr hr Fy 


for that way they disregard their own self (who is no other than the Lord). (13) 
TIAA 
SSRIS wat adadiagen | WH fkagasiife Wat AA A NAT ex! 
aa: dda wat vat Hersfai stem sel aet ea een faeitaarieu 
Manu said : | shall abide by your command, O destroyer of sin! Kindly assign an abode 
to me as well as to my progeny, my lord. (14) The terrestrial globe, which is the abode of all 


living beings, stands submerged in the vast expanse of water. Efforts should be made, my 
lord, to recover the goddess (Earth). (15) 


Sa 
UG wal ael aM Wamael AAI Heaaat aqaer sia aeat fear faeries 
Gad a fatale: greaamt wai wat stent feenqparenfe: atatista: 1 


Wee Cealela A san faced A 1291 
Maitreya continued : Finding the earth submerged in water, as at the time of final 
dissolution, Brahma taxed his brain for a long time as to how he should be able to lift her up. (16) 
"Even as | was engaged in pushing on the work of creation,” he said to himself, "the earth, 
which was all the time being washed by the waters, sank to the lowest depths. Now what 
should be done in the matter by us, who have been charged with the work of creation? Let 
the Lord, from whose heart (thought) | sprang, contrive some device for me." (17) 


Sarena ATA aaa | Asettent Premag yaaa: 1&2 
daaasad: Ge: att feo URI mM: YBwaql  cAagqawaed ee! 
Tiaras:  patiqa’  aAeiapr delet “wa achamara fee iol 
fie wa emai sel angie ara A fafrgai2et 
SBISqEtaRAA: aos: | sia fastane at A Wasa: 1221 
sfa dintaqetel seu: ae Gale: i ana ages sretittsafay: 1231 
Fat waa ahs fei aahicd aU: staat fay: 12x 

feraassiiaAsiti Cae rT TTI | 

Weare = Fatt: Ufa, AT NRG 

wat at 

favr at )«=Ssfaaeteara stato «= roerTfarataT 126 1 

sketdaie: Wat: mek: wer fagaq waa | 

leary: fades Saeatictal teat WAAL: 1291 

WM yen: uddi fat mise:  Waneaiy: | 

PUCANSAH Ug ease fast, TUTA Sa 12S | 

a anenele Marder tarantuignter: ReagAeart | 

SHEATH SLA THAT a |Ooufe Afa 1291 

Gt: ade samt fra warm! 

cal 1 2S (iT) Claret «= ETT IZ01 


As he was thus reflecting, a tiny boar, just as big as a thumb, emerged all of a sudden 





Dis. 13 ] BOOK THREE 191 


Be Se Hr Br Ke Sr He Ke Ke Hr Hr He Kr He He He He Gr Ke Hr Hr Kr We Ke Ke Hr Ke Ke Mr He Hr Re Ke Hr He Be Be Ke He Be Be Be Be Be Me Ke Hr Be He He He Hr Kr Ke Br Ke He He Br Ke He Mr Be Be Gr Br Br Ke Ke He Ge He Ke Be Ke Le HEHE Be He He Hr 


from one of his nostrils, O sinless Vidura. (18) While Brahma stood looking on, the boar 
in the air instantly grew to the size of an elephant, O Vidura (descendant of Bharata)! This 
was really most wonderful. (19) Beholding that (strange) form of a boar, Brahma with Marici 
and other Brahmanas, Sanaka and his three brothers and Swayambhuva Manu speculated 
about it in various ways:—(20) "Who can be this weird creature standing in the guise of a 
boar ? Oh, how strange that it came out of my nostrils! (21) Even though (at first sight) it 
looked only as big as the upper part of a thumb, in an instant it grew to the size of a huge 
rock. Might it be Lord Visnu Himself who is exercising my mind ?" (22) While Brahma was 
thus pondering along with his sons, the Lord presiding over sacrifices (for the boar was none 
other than He) who now looked like a huge mountain, roared aloud. (23) The all-powerful Sri Hari 
delighted Brahma and those foremost Brahmanas by His loud roar, which made the quarters 
resound. (24) Hearing the roar of the Lord disguised as a boar, which removed their 
perplexity, the sages, who all belonged to the Janaloka, Tapoloka or Satyaloka, began to 
extol Him through the holy Mantras of the three Vedas. (25) The Lord, whose form has been 

glorified in the Vedas, took the tribute paid to His virtues by those holy men as Veda itself. He 

gave aloud roar once more and, sporting like a lordly elephant, entered the waters in the interest 
of the gods. (26) The divine Boar (the Saviour of the earth), who was possessed of a steel-like 

frame and whose skin had a thick coat of stiff bristles, first sprang into the air, erecting His 

tail and shaking His mane, and tore the clouds with His hoofs. He shone most splendid at 

that time with His white tusks, shedding a lustre wherever He cast His glance. (27) Having 

disguised Himself as a boar, even though He was no other than Lord Narayana, representing 

all the sacrifices in His own person, He went smelling about with His nose in search of the 

earth; and even though possessed of fearful tusks, He regarded with a gentle look the 

Brahmanas (Marici and others) who were extolling Him, and dived into the water. (28) With 

its bowels torn open by the headlong plunge taken by His body, which resembled a mountain 

of adamant, the ocean thundered aloud and, tossing up its high waves like so many arms, 

Cried as it were in distress: "Protect me, O Lord of sacrifices!" (29) Cleaving the waters with 

His hoofs, which were sharp as arrows, the Lord, who represents all the sacrifices in His 

person, then reached the other end of that fathomless ocean and discovered in the depths 

of it the terrestrial globe, which is the abode of all living beings; and which the Lord had 

absorbed into His body while about to retire at the end of the previous Kalpa. (30) 


espa wel frat a sie: eed ae: | 
aarfa ad TeasSadad Parvarataadtar: 132 1 
Wad eiddddiand a stead Arisa 
damusisamequt am Wrest wid fafreq 132 
AAT erAe fadardtenteat era eraed TAMIA | 
Tea Teg Aa Sqatehlahespaqea SAAT 133 1 
The Lord shone most resplendent as He rose lifting up the earth on His tusks out of the 
depths of the ocean, where it had been lying submerged. While He was yet in those waters, 
a demon (Hiranyaksa by name) of irresistible prowess assailed Him with his club in order 
to obstruct His way. This excited His fury, which blazed forth like His discus (Sudarsana) and 
He playfully disposed of him even as a lion kills an elephant without any exertion. With His 
temples and snout stained by the demon's blood He presented the appearance of a lordly 
elephant that had just turned up the earth (ofa mound of red ochre). (31-32) Evenas the Lord, 


who was dark as a Tamala tree, lifted the earth (out of the water) on the ends of His white 
tusks, like an elephant (carrying a lotus on his tusks), dear Vidura, Brahma (the Creator) and 











192 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13 


AAKAKALLLKLALKAAKLLKLLLKLALKLKRHLKLHHN ALKA LKAKLKLKK HLL KHKHAN HLH KHAN NA HH k Sr Br Br Kr Sr Hr Hr Ke Hr Hr Hr Hr Br Hr Br Be Ke He Hr Ht Sr Be He Br He hr g, 
— SSSI tl 


others recognized Him and, joining palms, waited upon Him with hymns of praise that closely 
resembled Vedic Mantras. (33) 
EIT Sq: 

fea fad asia agqurad Fat aq wat uktead aa: | 
aad «0 lffeeaeateest A: SRT (ts BNI 
Su dddaq  dehdiet adald ea asa 
Sdia aa au afeimara ee aeta adei3u 
agus sda etree? «ame: «= moiety 
Taare «Tat CeCe Tee 1361 
atatqsraraae: fret ad TWTACHAANASE: 
fel satieta atte cat: araaed faaasaat fF 21301 
ae wa: waarafeta: denfaterda 2a emaa: | 
Gata Gartar Ihara Seu erat Rg) 
vat AARISRA SA aAcaA RATT Wdenda 
Rata «86 faa zw ae 
Siiaian Wied yt fam yee FY AYN! 
aM aa aT TT ARRIBA er Ivo! 
aaa cue a almt yaueda at aa a 
Unie Fiera YW perdesa ala fara: xe 
Seat Idi «Saat lea Cdiafa «oot fra 
faaq ae anal we aa ae wasistaftanonan: 1s21 
om: Seiad wat wt wer ya sfeador 

a fagisat «fa faafrea at arae aaesffaaar isa 
faqanm act fst agsineu-aafafet aa 
Aeleratgdigraragere atealyerar WRTATaT Utfadt: 1¥¥ 
@ ai ad wsafaedan a a: ado ound: | 
aaIrmanparmiied fax aad wnaq faafe arise 


The sages said : "Victory, victory to You, O invincible Lord, the Promoter of sacrifices! 
We make obeisance to You even as You shake Your own (divine) Body, consisting of the 
three Vedas (in order tofree it from moisture). We bow once more to You, who have assumed 
the form of a boar with a special object (that of rescuing the earth) and in the pores of whose 
bristles lie hidden the various sacrifices. (34) This form of Yours, O Lord, made up as it is 
of sacrifices, is one that cannot be easily perceived by the sinful. The various Vedic metres 
(Gayatri etc.) find a place in Your skin, the (holy) Kusa grass in Your bristles, clarified butter 
in Your eyes and the functions of the four priests (the Hota and others) in.Your four legs. (35) 
The Sruk (a sort of large wooden ladle used for pouring clarified butter on a sacrificial fire) 
is located in Your snout; the Sruva (a smaller ladle used for pouring clarified butter into the 
Sruk), O almighty Lord, finds a place in Your nostrils; the Ida (a dish or plate from which food 
is taken at a sacrifice) exists in Your belly; the Camasas (vessels used at sacrifices for 


Dis. 13] BOOK THREE 193 


Br Be Br Br Br Be Be Br Br Be Be Br Hr Hr Be Be Be He Re Be Be He Ge Ke Br Ke Br Kr Be Be Hr He He Ke Me Be He Ke He Ke Be He Ke Be He He He He Be He He Be Be Be He Be Be HAE BeBe BeBe Be He Be BEBE HM Bt Be Be Be Vs He Mt Be He He He Ne 





drinking the Soma, generally of a square shape, made of wood and furnished with a handle) 
abide in the cavity of Your ears; the Prasitra (a vessel in which the Brahma’'s share is poured) 
exists in Your mouth and the Grahas (ladles or vessels employed for taking up a portion of 
some fluid, especially of Soma, out of a larger vessel) in Your throat. And Your act of chewing, 
O Lord; constitutes the Agnihotra (pouring oblations into the sacred fire). (86) Your repeated 
descent (into the world of matter) is what is known as the Diksaniya Isti (the offering of 
oblations into the sacred fire at the time of consecration for a sacrifice); the three Istis known 
by the name of Upasads (which precede the Sutya or pressing of the Soma in a Jyotistoma 
sacrifice) constitute Your neck; the Prayaniya Isti (that which follows the Diksa or consecration) 
and the Udayaniya Isti (that which is performed at the end of a sacrifice) are Your tusks; the 
Pravargya (the ceremony called Mahavira performed at the beginning of every Upasad) 
forms Your tongue; the Sabhya and the Avasathya fires form Your head and the putting of 
bricks in layers or rows for the preparation of a sacrificial altar constitutes Your vital airs, 
revealed as You are in the form of a sacrifice. (37) Your generative fluid is the Soma and Your 
sitting posture constitutes the sacrificial rites performed thrice (in the morning, at midday and 
in the evening) everyday. The seven constituents of Your body are the seven classes of main 
sacrifices (viz., Agnistoma, Atyagnistoma, Uktha, Sodasi, Vajapeya, Atiratraand Aptoryama); 
while the joints of Your body constitute all the Satras (series of sacrifices continued for a 
number of days). In this way You combine in Your person all the Yajhas (sacrifices in which 
the Soma is not used) and Kratus (those in which the Soma is used), the tendons of Your 
body forming the various sacrifices. (38) Hail, hail to You, who represent in Your person all 
the Mantras (sacred formulas) employed, the deities worshipped and the materials used (by 
way of oblations etc.) ina sacrifice, as well as all sacrificial acts and other activities. Nay, You 
also embody the wisdom gained through dispassion, Devotion and self-control, and are our 
teacher imparting all sorts of knowledge. Hail, hail to You. (89) Borne by You on the pointed 
ends of Your tusks, O Lord, the earth with its mountains, O Supporter of the globe; shines 
resplendent like a lotus plant with leaves supported on the tusks of a lordly elephant 
emerging from water. (40) Again, with the terrestrial globe supported on the tusks, this boar- 
like form of Yours, which consists of the three Vedas (Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda) 
looks as charming as the beauty of a huge mountain with a mass of clouds hanging on its 
summit. (41) (Kindly) place this mother ofthe entire animate and inanimate creation, who 
is Your spouse, firmly (on water) in order to make her habitable for all; for You are their Father. 
Then we shall make obeisance to You as well as to her, in whom You have deposited Your 
seed (in the form of sustaining power) even as the sacrificer invokes the sacrificial fire in the 
Arani (the piece of wood used for kindling of_fire by attrition with the chanting of sacred 
formulas). (42) Who else than You, O Lord, could venture to lift up the earth, that had sunk 
into the lowest depths of water? This is, however, nothing miraculous for You, the abode of 
all wonders, who have created this most marvellous universe by Your Maya (wondertul 
creative energy). (43) When You shook Your body composed of the Vedas, we, the 
inhabitants of the Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka, got splashed and thoroughly depurated 
by the drops of holy water flying from the end of Your mane. (44) Alas! he has verily lost his 
wits, who seeks to know Your endless exploits in their totality. O Lord, bring happiness to 
the whole universe, which stands deluded through contact with the objects of senses, 


brought about by Your Yogamaya. (45) 
HAY Jara 


Squier arsieraniat: laf Geteard sorernfadnatr 1g! 
a sat ware fagada: sonafa: i carer clealetarmg er sat eft: Iso! 








194 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14 


q wana eemeat ew: wat qual cperitacrfer: | 
i: quid Va Madd aladi warcaisema ee swelela ive 
dad NaN dao sat fe aid ans wari: | 
SES Midi Wee: wa fart wait we: WI Ise! 
el Wa lh Gearianfad Guna 9 wreaccHergen | 
sila 46s cUligif@fasiarcemmet «= fae =f ARAL Iho | 
Sit Sttartad ASN URSA Seda THARP Y AEM Mayas AAaaiseara: 1231 


Maitreya resumed : While being thus extolled by those sages through verses closely 
resembling the Vedic hymns, the Protector of the universe (in the form of the Boar) placed 
the earth on the surface of the water, which supported His hoofs. (46) Having thus placed 
on the water the earth, which He had sporttully lifted up from its depths, the almighty Lord 
Sri Hari, the Protector of all beings, went out of sight. (47) Lord Janardana is quickly pleased 
in His heart of hearts with him who thus listens to or narrates with devotion the blissful and 
charming story of Sri Hari, the very thought on whom rids one of all sorrows and sins and 
whose sportful activities are all worth recounting. (48) What is hard to obtain when He who 
is capable of granting all our desires is pleased? So have done with such blessings as are of 
little value. For, on those who adore Him with their mind exclusively fixed on Him, that supreme 
Lord, who Is seated in the heart of all, confers His highest state of His own accord. (49) Having 
Known the real worth of all the objects of human pursuit and having once quaffed with the 
cup of one's ears the nectar of the Lord's stories, sifted from among other old legends—the 
nectar which ends the cycle of births and deaths—who in this world would feel surfeited, 
unless he is other than a human being? (50) 


Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book Three, narrating among other things the 
descent of the Divine Boar, of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


WEP SaT HT HS 
PRR AIR 


SID Ad*eanseara: 


Discourse XIV 





Diti's conception 
My SAA 
fara 4 oalenfauaatiat mt: wal aiuMmnuce: | 
T: A We dqedeted «ata faq yaad! et 


Sri Suka continued: Vidura, who had taken a vow of hearing the Lord's praises, did not 
feel satiated even on listening from the mouth of Maitreya (the son of Kusaru): to the story 
| of Sri Hari, who had taken the form of a boar with a special motive (that of rescuing the earth). 
: With joined palms uplifted he, therefore, questioned the sage again. (1) 
3 fag sara 
wa od waas efon aaafiarismecen feat et seqyar! 2 | 





Dis. 14 ] BOOK THREE 195 


Br Be Ke Kr Be He Ke Ke He Br Be He Ke Gr Sr Sr Se He Br He Be Sr Kt Sr We He We Ke He He Ge eRe Br Be Ke Be He Be Re BeAr BeBe He BEB AE BEE HE BEBE BRE BORE Be BEBE BCL Be BE BE BEBE BEB BEET EBERT BS BEBE 


Ta Aart: avi wes Sea ee A Ae Head CeTqA: | 2 | 


Vidura said : We have just heard from you, O crest-jewel of sages, how Hiranyaksa, the 
earliest of the Daityas (sons of Diti), was slain by Sri Hari, who had taken the form of a boar 
(representing all sacrifices). (2) As He was playfully engaged in lifting up the earth out of 


water on the ends of His tusks, how did He come to have an encounter with that demon king, 
O holy sage? (8) 
WAT Sara 


ay at SM YyERadeat Riad gefe vata yeorefsenadeli ¥ | 

ware: Ut aa tiaste: i qet: aaa wedefimnede et: We & | 

aaritaaist sit A aftia: qaiseon eadda  earmmMqgearci ¢ | 

fefretareott amaittt aad uf seem wen cea asada © | 

splice cae Ged aE ulmi freak smdiarerm ante ¢ 1 

Maitreya replied : You have asked a good question, O valiant Vidura, inasmuch as your 

enquiry relates to the story of Sri Hari's descent (as the divine Boar), which cuts asunder the 
noose of (birth and) death in the case of mortals. (4) It was through the story of Sri Hari, 
narrated by the sage Narada, that Dhruva (the son of king Uttanapada), even as a child, set 
his foot on the head* of Death and ascended to the abode of Sri Hari. (5) Now in this 
connection | have heard the following anecdote, which was told of yore by Brahma, the god 
of gods, in response to a query by the gods. (6) Once Diti, a daughter of Daksa, who was 
eager to obtain a son, sought the company of her husband, Kasyapa, son of Marici, while 
it was only dusk, stung as she was by (the darts of) love, O Vidura. (7) Having just finished 
offering oblations of rice boiled in milk to the Supreme Person, the lord of sacrifices, who has 
the flames of fire for His tongues, the sage sat absorbed in deep meditation in the shrine of 
fire, knowing that the sun was about to set. (8) 


felieara 
Wa A aend fast aM sian: leata dat fame wuita ade: |e | 
asaregarma  adadmat ages: i setadat ws a AetaemmMate 120! 
ViaSat  GlMifasd aa: 1 afadafeet arat seta Aq saad 1221 
qa fiat a wtareat gleqade: | quid at aul gaged A: GAH 1221 
a fafeaissamiat al ad AaAalas: | AalegeeMtal «= AAS AAA: 1231 
AI A HS HAUT HH Halas sida 9 waar fe vga ex 


Diti said : O sage, just as a wild elephant crushes a banana tree, this god of love, bow in 
hand, displays his valour against me, a helpless woman, andis tormenting me on your account. 
(9) Therefore, God bless you, show your grace to me, burning as | am (with jealousy) to see 
the happiness and prosperity of my co-wives, who are already blessed with children. (10) Those 
wives alone are held in great esteem by their husband and enjoy world-wide fame, whose 





* It is mentioned in Book IV that when the attendants of Lord Visnu, Sunanda and others, brought an aerial car to pick 
up Dhruva and escort him to the Lord's divine Abode, Mrtyu (the god of death) also appeared on the scene, thinking that his 
services might be required before the soul of Dhruva could be translated to the divine Abode. Dhruva, however, in utter defiance 
of the god of death, refused to cast off his body (which was supremely dear to him because it had been blessed by the Lord 
with His divine touch) and, actually setting his foot on the head of Death as on the rung of a ladder, boarded the car and bodily 


ascended to the divine Abode. 





| 
; 








196 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14 


BRR RRR RE RRR LR RRR RRR RR RB R RE BERER BEBERE BEER Br BERT Be RE Be BE RE Br Be HE Be Be BY HE BEBE Be Hr Be Hr Br He Hr Br Hr Hr Be Hr Br Hr Hr Hr Br Hr Br Br Br Br Br Br Fr Br hr Hy 
———— ee. ."_. TTI oe 


husband like you is reproduced through them in the shape of a son. (11) Our father, the 
worshipful Daksa, who was fond of his daughters, severally asked us long ago (when we were 
still unmarried): "Whom are you going to choose for your match, dear ones ?" (12) When he 
came to know our mind (through other sources, since we made no reply out of bashfulness), 
he gave away to you those thirteen of us who conformed to your nature, since he was keen 
to multiply his race. (13) Therefore, O blessed lord with lotus-eyes, be pleased to grant my wish: 
for the afflicted never resort to the great in vain, O perfect one. (14) 


Sia ai ak ata: Huot aguiiaviq AeA, ATM Ag GeHaAeTrT 12 u | 
wa ase faerenta fa sie afeoie 1 cen: arta: pathatseafiant aa: 1261 
aaa 8a 8 hear! Saavianafa WOAAAM IaH | V9 | 
ae wt sama asia wae yRianta facat: 12d 
araistea ant rasta: lag waa = denfdepertufacier ee 
a ad saat ade Weal Aer a area A as WUIAa: 1Ro! 
saa aaa A ee ae ae at athtarata aed ofa 1221 
Wal ada aor aot aregariata aeat wat wdenqeait 21221 
Urea Bea Gea WIA yAMaa: atta «= a eonefa |= TATINSN 123 | 
Washoe lorem lUlicleltsteten ead: 
WVATa Vo eateet catheatts: URatet CATE 12¥ | 
1 ai Oe Gr: wt at ated aa apfarfand: | 
aa Adda UNA aes AaaAeSaAt ad WPA 124 | 
Wanda  Adieor worefaaues  fatcaa: | 
Prerarantasaista acaa  fagneaaiaacda: aarzirei 
tad aed fe gum: wie wenfags: ater 
Va aAICA ATs: suis aaa eaferady_ 1 29 | 
Seem  aepdaddiet aan faae ai atl 
Stet dea fear set faynsia fasarieci 
Seeing her miserable and pleading much in the aforesaid manner, and finding that her 
reason had been clouded by intense passion, O heroic Vidura, KaSyapa (the son of Marici) 
replied to herin a conciliatory tone as follows :—(15) "I shall presently gratify you by granting 
your wish, O timid one. Who would not grant the desire of one’s own wife, through whom one 
is able to achieve the threefold object of human pursuit, (viz., worldly possessions, 
gratification of the senses and religious merit)? (16) Even as one is able to cross the ocean 
by means of vessels, so does a married man (a householder) cross the ocean of woe (by 
conquering the senses) through married life, taking with him the other three Asramas (viz.. 
the student community, the anchorite class and the order of recluses, all of whom depend 
on the householder) as well. (17) The scriptures speak of a wife as the other half of the body 
of a man seeking the three objects of human pursuit, O proud lady. For, shifting his whole 
burden (of maintaining the household) to her, a man moves about (in the world) free from 
anxiety. (18) Just as the governor of a fortress easily conquers a host of maranders, SO by 


falling back upon her we (householders) are able to subdue without any difficulty enemies 
in the shape of our senses, which people belonging to the other Asramas find hard to 


Dis.- 14 ] BOOK THREE 197 


Be Br Br Be Hr Gr Br Ge Ke Ke He Be Be He Be Be HE HCE Kee Ke Hee Ke re Ke KEKE Be He He HH Ke He Ke Be Be BEE Be Be Ke He KEE BBE Be BEE Be BEEBE Be BEBE ERE BE BE BEBE BEBE BEBE BEBE GE BE BE BEBE BE BEBE 


conquer. (19) We cannot get absolutely square with you, O queen of the house, in a whole 
lifetime, nay, not even in lives to come, nor can others who have a bias. for virtues. (20) 
Nonetheless | shall do my best to grant this desire of yours for offspring. But please wait for 
an hour or so, in order that the world may not reproach me. (21) The present is a most 
ominous hour, favourable to frightful creatures (the demons etc.) and fearful to look at. At 
this hour the ghosts and spirits, forming the retinue of Sri Rudra (the Ruler of the spirits), 
move about. (22) At this juncture of day and night, O virtuous lady, Lord Rudra, the protector 
of all beings, goes about on the back of His (favourite) bull (Nandi), accompanied by His 
entourage of ghosts. (23) With His glittering mass of matted hair thrown into disorder and 
soiled on account of the dust raised by whirlwinds sweeping the cremation grounds, and His 
silver-white body covered with a coat of ashes, Lord Sankara, your sister's husband’, is 
watching all with His three eyes (in the form of the sun, the moon and the fire). (24) (Really 
speaking, however,) no one in this world is akin or alien to Him, and no one is highly 
esteemed or most despised in His eyes. Yet the pity of it is that we for our part covet as a 

reward for our religious observances that very Maya (supernatural power and prosperity) 

which He has enjoyed and spurned. (25) Those wise men who are keen to pierce the veil- 
of ignorance recount His spotless doings. Although there is none equal to Him, much less 

greater, and He is the goal of the virtuous, yet He conducts Himself in the manner of fiends 

(moving about all naked, besmeared with ashes and adorned with a wreath of skulls and so 

on). (26) Those unfortunate people alone who adorn their person—which (really speaking) 

is the food of dogs—with wearing apparel, garlands of flowers, ornaments and pigments, 

treating it as their very self, laugh at the conduct of Lord Siva—who ever delights in His own 

Self—ignorant of His purpose (in leading this sort of life, which is to teach the world how to 

develop indifference to the world as well as to one's own body). (27) Even Brahma and the 

other gods (to say nothing of us) respect the bounds set by Him. Nay, He alone is the cause 

of this universe, Maya being His handmaid ! How strange that He should conduct Himself 
in the manner of fiends ! Inscrutable indeed are the doings of the almighty Lord. (28) 

HAT Sara 


Qa daa sot aneisafenissme art seddacta aaa ieei 
a fafa srafardt fede faediitiaear fesra wefa aanetafada = 1301 
sate ales MUNA area: | areas fat ae alia: Aas 1321 
fet osifear aa wales wd | Sage fasinenreraared 1321 


Maitreya continued : In spite of her husband's remonstrances Diti, whose mind had 
been completely shaken by love, seized the holy Brahmana by his garment, casting all 
modesty to the winds like a common woman. (29) When he saw his wife's unusual insistence 
on that prohibited act, KaSyapa bowed to Providence and then sought seclusion with her. (30) 
Thereafter he bathed in water, controlled his breath and speech and began to mutter the holy 
syllable OM, fixing his thought on its meaning, the immutable, self-effulgent eternal 
Brahma. (31) Diti too felt ashamed on account of the sin that attached to her conduct, O 
Vidura (a descendant of Bharata). She, therefore, approached the holy Brahmana and, with 


her face cast down, spoke (to him as follows). (82) 


fekieara 
wa mea ge GaN atties: ufafe wart aenecaieadi33! 


* Sati (Lord Siva's Spouse) was a real sister of Diti (both being daughters of Daksa). 














198 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [| Dis. 14 


BERR RR RE RRR RRR RR RRR RRR REE RR RE BEB RT BE RE BY BEB BEB BER BY Be BR BAH BR BA RB i 
Soepeeiae enti eienetie eee canannennn ante  SSSSSSSS  S ctnn cena ante gtetaeatT a eect aar tt Sos. 


aM wld wea cara aedtifirara ~wRausa Yyaquera UAT 13x) 
Q a: wWeledt wal Wealddaze: | reaeeaqaaami aon ea: adiafa: 13&1 
Diti said : Let not Lord Rudra, O hloy sage, who is the foremost of all beings as well as 
the Ruler of spirits, destroy the seed in my womb because | have committed an offence 
against Him. (33) Obeisance to the great god Siva, whois irresistible in power and who drives 
away the agony of His devotees and bestows the desired blessings (on those who approach 
him with a prayer), who is all-blissful (to His disinterested worshippers), who, though 
perfectly non-violent by nature, yet wields the rod (for the wicked), and who is anger 
personified (at the time of universal destruction). (84) May the almighty Lord Siva (the 
Spouse of Sati), my brother-in-law who is extremely compassionate by nature, be gracious 
unto us, women, who deserve the mercy even of the (hard-hearted) hunter. (35) 


WAY Sarg 
aaa aleaaenrart saad fade wraiare sonata: 36) 


Maitreya went on : Kasyapa, who had just finished his evening devotions, saw his wife 
(Diti) shaking violently (with fear) and soliciting for her progeny the blessings of this as well 
as of the other world, and spoke to her (as follows). (36) 

ALAT SATA 
STHAATaI ART aeraleticnted | Afseanfrantor «earat | arfteerte 1391 
VASA TAT STAM, STEM | lear Ate shs qetenaserd: 1321 
—_ ee a + ae 1381 
dal fager: wel wWidietaiiad: | eeeradae aml aWdadeyey ivot 

Kasyapa said: Since your mind was impure (tainted with lust), the hour was unfavour- 
able (for conception), you transgressed my command and (lastly) because you disregarded 
the gods (Lord Rudra and His attendants), O impious woman, a pair of wicked and unworthy 
sons will be born of you—sons that will make all the three worlds as well as their protectors 
cry again and again, O irascible lady ! (37-38) When they proceed to kill helpless and 
innocent creatures, violate the chastity of women and anger exalted souls, the Lord, who is 
the Ruler of the universe and the Delighter of all the worlds, will be enraged and, coming 
down to this world (from His divine Abode) will slay them even as Indra (the wielder of the 
thunderbolt) struck down the mountains. (39-40) 


ag Wad 8  AaAAMeNaed | Sara Gaara Al Halaselonfast xe | 
4 sever A HANES AI ARNE Al at atfat Aa: 1x2! 

Diti said : | too would rather have my sons die at the hands of the Lord Himself, whose 
long and mighty arm is adorned with the discus Sudarsana. Let them not die under the curse 
of an angered Brahmana, my lord. (41) Even the denizens of hell refuse to show any favour 
to him who is consumed by the curse of a Brahmana, as well as to him who has been a terror 
to living beings, no matter to whatever species of life he may be consigned after death. (42) 


ALAT Sava 
Paielddet I: AAAI Mae Wa wa Aad 1s3l 
yaaa qd UA fade: Adi Ad: | Welt Ae: Ws Waa AAT Ise! 








Dis. 14] BOOK THREE 199 


Be Br Se Hr Gr Be Hr Sr Ke He He Hr He Hr Ke Gr He Ke Ke Ke Ge Hr Ke x Me He Ke He Ke Be He Ke He Hr He Ke Gr Ke He Hr Hr Ke Be Ke He He Mr Be He Hr He Kr Ke Hr Ke Hr Ge Gr He Be He Be Br Br Ke He Ke Hr Be Be Br Be Ke He Br He Ke He Ge HHH 


angaa gi water wea: fdaetredt  asloaqaia iva 
aeraeg fas seleft aa © Mea Gal asa FAT SEI 
a oa veered aan aeaweal wedi Ales: | 
wqgvea wdquifadea asa auefad faereafa ixel 
seme: eet Wet ws: weal afd |e:fadgt 
AYMAASA TT: ened “atfetea aaa: 1¥C1 
STAs AIM ota RISA Tatar | 
une 86sec «= EBT « ss WpepUSetfveaTaaT xe | 


Kasyapa said : Since you feel sorry and are full of remorse for what you have done and 
right judgment has soon reverted to you, and since you cherish extreme reverence for Lord 
Visnu and deep regard for Lord Bhava (Siva) and myself too, one of the four sons of your 
elder son will prove worthy of esteem even for holy men; nay, people will sing his fair renown 
along with the Lord's own glory. (43-44) Even as gold of inferior quality is purified by being 
heated in fire, pious souls will cleanse their heart through disciplines (of various kinds) such 
as freedom from animosity in order to emulate his noble disposition and character. (45) The 
Lord, who is the witness of His own Self and whose grace alone brings happiness to this 
universe, consisting of Himself, will be gratified with his exclusive view (that the Lord alone 
is true). (46) He will be a great devotee of the Lord, magnanimous, high-souled and the 
noblest of the noble. Installing Lord Visnu in his heart, purified through intense Devotion, he 
will give up his (false) identification with the body. (47) A mine of good qualities, he will have 
no attachment to the pleasures of sense, and will be steadfast in virtue. He will feel delighted 
at the prosperity of others and will be grieved to see others in trouble. Regarding none as his 
enemy, he will rid the world of its sorrows even as the moon relieves the heat of summer. (48) 
Nay, your grandson will behold, in his heart (through meditation) as well as outside, the lotus- 
eyed Lord, who is immaculate (by nature), who assumes forms according to the wishes of 
His own devotees, whose countenance is adorned with brilliant ear-rings and who is the 
Ornament of Goddess Sri, the embodiment of womanly charms. (49) 

WAY SaraI 


seal Wad daanted § fafasfari gaalar ae qpomfslecissdtterm: thot 
sfa serrad AEM URAee Gece ddan feftrsarrdare AdeaSeaRA: 121 


Maitreya continued : Diti felt much delighted to hear that her grandson would be a 
(great) devotee of the Lord, and was proud to learn that her sons would meet their death at 


the hands of Sri Krsna (Lord Visnu) Himself. (50) 





Thus ends the fourteenth discourse in Book Three, comprising among : 
other things the dialogue between Diti and Kasyapa, of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


ISSN Sauce: Say 








200 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15 


LEKHLRLLLHASL AKL LEN L HHH HH HHH HH KM BeBe Hr Mr Hr We Hee Mer Br Be HHL MY My Me Sr He Hr Hr Ar He Br Br We We We Se he Me Me Ay Be Ke Ar We We Be He we Re Hy He Hr Hee, 
nn EEE EEE EEE ee OS Oe 


SIA USS Seales: 


Discourse XV 


Sanaka and his three brothers pronounce a curse against Jaya and Vijaya 
WAY Sara 
wea «Godda: Used fafa: ice asiftt ad asa queda et 
ole A Oilele GleHdien wdlere: | Wace faaga earderttent fear 2 | 
Maitreya resumed : Apprehending trouble to the gods (at the hands of her expected 
sons), Diti retained (in her womb) for a hundred years the aforesaid seed of KaSyapa (a lord 
of created beings), which was powerful enough to put down the enemy's strength. (1) (The 
brilliance of that) seed (though cabined in the womb) dimmed the light (of all the luminaries) 
in the world and the guardians of the various spheres too lost their splendour. They, 


therefore, complained to Brahma (the creator of the universe) about the spread of darkness 
in all directions. (2) 


Ga Hy: 
qq ude ae daa agi wyamia wer Wad: aseargpaeds: | 3 
eaead Wrgidtmlcntaeraay | waa a yaaa «etfaclt x 


vat faararata Aaaaqay | Welter AARMSSIHAAT | & | 
Q aM Wed Waaemei sia swayed ut decedent! « | 
qa qa haar oeaqeerert A sedlsramsa: i © | 
Wa Area Is: Wal Maeraa Bat: iad Alone Wea a aac t 
a a faa A YAR GAHAN! seueuat = gsa soardatfaay| < | 
we ea feats sit: mreauatiadi feakaeeey aal aedsfitaefa io! 


The gods said : You must be knowing, O Jord, about this gloom, of which we are very 
much afraid. We are sure nothing is hidden from You inasmuch as the range of Your 
knowledge is unaffected by time. (3) O god of gods, O Maker of the universe, O crest-jewel 
of the guardians of all spheres, You know the mind of all living beings, big and small. (4) Hail, 
hailto You, whose strength is knowledge, and who have assumed this (four-faced) form as well 
as the quality of Rajas by Your own Maya (playful nature), Your cause being unknown. (5) 
All the worlds are woven into You: nay, the whole of this universe, consisting of both cause 
and effect, is Your body. Really speaking, however, You are beyond all this. They who 
contemplate on You, the Creator of all Jivas, with exclusive devotion, having controlled their 
breath, senses and mind, and whose Yoga (effort at Self-Realization) has ripened cannot 
meet with discomfiture from any quarter since they have secured Your grace. (6-7) 
Governed by Your word (the Vedas), even as oxen are controlled by a rope, all created 
beings bear offerings to You (by performing their respective duties) subject to Your control. 
Therefore, hail to You, the Chief Controller of all (even as the vital breath controls all the other 
organs of the body). (8) People have failed to perform their duties because of this darkness 
(which has rendered it impossible for them to distinguish between night and day). Kindly do 
that which is good to them. And be pleased to regard us, who are in great affliction, with an 
eye expressing abundant compassion, O infinite Lord ! (9) Enveloping all the quarters In 
darkness, the seed of KaSyapa placed in Diti's womb is developing as fire thrown in a pile 


of firewood. (10) 


Dis. 15 ] BOOK THREE 201 
Br Be Be Ke Ber Be Ke Be Ke Ke Hr Br Ke Kr Ge Hr Ge He By Ge Hr Ke He Ke Ge Ke Ke Sr He Ke He He He He Ke Be Ge He Be He Ke BECHER, Be He Ke Be Hee We He BeBe EERE BEBE Be BEBE BEE BEBE Se Bs BORE BEBE BEEBE RE 
WAT Jara 
a Tea Aleta War Beaten: | VerawTeayeaM Wor Seat fr 122! 


Maitreya went on: Lord Brahma (the self-born), O mighty-armed Vidura, to whom 
the above prayer was addressed, laughed (at their rank ignorance in praying to him as 
if he were the Supreme Deity), and replied in sweet words to the great delight of the 


gods. (11) 
STENATA 
aaa A aa asgdet: «acres: | defderran Glenlewteng fartdegel: 1221 
a Whe wat AGUS: | AAatqpva hres Ad stenazaAH 123 | 
cart aa yeu: ad agueqda: astitatitaa efor skeiex 
aA Ud: GAM Wa egret: | aed fase fast eri a qeaq ga: 124 
a 4: AM at ameuga: | addeitfafisnmchacatra «© -_ a2 
oaittet: Pots gt Mara slammer sd: | 
srsissanrayada we wftedteasare faa: 1201 
Brahma Said : My mind-born sons, Sanaka and his three brothers, who are the eldest 
of you all, went about the various worlds by air, free from attachment to them. (12) Once upon 
a time they went to the realm, called Vaikuntha, of Lord Visnu (of irresistible might), whose 
mind and body are purely divine (free from the taint of Maya) in substance—a realm which 
is adored by (stands at the top of) all other realms. (13) All the people living there are 
endowed with a form similar to that of Lord Vaikuntha (Visnu) Himself; and it is attained by 
those alone who have worshipped Sri Hari through the disinterested performance of their 
duty. (14) There the most ancient Person (Lord Narayana), who can be known only through 
the Upanisads and who is righteousness personified, (eternally) dwells, having assumed a 
form which is made of Sattva unmixed with Rajas (i.e., Sattva which is purely immaterial or 
divine) and delighting us, His devotees. (15) In that realm there is an orchard called 
Naihsreyasa, which is beatitude incarnate as it were, and which is resplendent with trees that 
yield all that is desired and are laden with fruits and flowers in every season. (16) Seated in 
aerial cars with their consorts, the Gandharvas (of that realm) sing the stories of their Master 
(Lord Visnu), that are capable of wiping out the sins of the whole world. Even though their 


mind is distracted by the fragrance of Madhavi flowers (spring-flowers) laden with honey and 
blossoming in water, they (refuse to be led away by it and) censure* the breeze (carrying 


the fragrance). (17) 


UNIaa Ayah achal eee eictiaeateot a: | 
aioe  famastrangedeiea  eteenita aman ie! 


Twasia defend dea area: qt ae AMaha ee! 
ARH Shaaiaaesacancndeataart: | 


* Even though everything in that realm is divine in essence and the fragrance of the Madhavi flowers, which is akin to 
the fragrance of the Lord's own person, only reminds them of the latter instead of diverting their mind towards anything foreign, 
the Gandharvas are so deeply attached to the Lord's stories that they are reluctant to exchange the joy of singing them for 








any other joy, even though it may be equally divine. 


[564] B. M. 9— 








5 


202 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA HBTS. as 


ceca a a seqeemh i201 
siafaunt mud awmiad clerasa east aqmerer | 

Weed hlespsa Wad AMidla aaqueviszaa: 1221 

amy fagieranenarg sertaa fat quetfiitery | 

addi Goyal aaa wads aes: 1221 

qa asraaeel Tagaerpuard Asafawea: sere afeeh: | 

Te at Satire, araNry qa: Bad 1231 
asafiaatt ai at qaft scat art a mata weet aa | 

A Wad fare alfa fadtat ad ar a 1x1 


ag: Ut yengaqda almaaer Arse fave ire! 

When the king of bees hums ina high pitch, singing the story of Sri Hari as it were, there 
is a temporary lull in the noise of the pigeon, the cuckoo, the crane, the Cakravaka, the 
Cataka, the swan, the parrot, the partridge and the peacock (who are all ears as it were to 
drink in the bee's song). (18) Seeing that the Lord adorns His person with wreaths etc., made 
of the leaves of Tulasi (the basil plant, which is so sacred and dear to Him) and also holds 
its fragrance in great esteem, the flowers of the Mandara, Kunda and Kurabaka, the lily, the 
Campaka, Arna (Karavira), Punnaga, Nagakesara and Bakula, the lotus and the Parijata in 
that realm, though all fragrant, recognize that Tulasi did greater penance (in her previous 
existence) than any of them.* (19) That realm (of Lord Visnu) is crowded with aerial cars made 
of lapis lazuli, emerald and gold, which are secured there as a result of mere obeisance at 
the feet of Sri Hari (and not through Karmayoga, Jhanayoga, Vairagya or penance etc.). The 
mind of those who occupy these cars are so full of Sri Krsna (Lord Visnu) that their spouses 
with large hips and smiling faces are unable to stimulate their passion by their mirth and other 
charms. (20) Sri (the Spouse of Lord Visnu and the goddess of fortune), who is possessed 
of a most lovely form and whose favour is sought after by others (including the greatest gods 
like Brahma and so on), lives in the abode of Sri Hari free from the fault of capriciousnesstt. 
Moving about in that palace with the anklets on Her feet making a tinkling sound, and with 
a lotus-flower held in Her hand as a plaything, She is seen (reflected) in the crystal walls (of 
that palace), inlaid with gold here and there, as if engaged in dusting the house (although, 
really speaking, the abode of the Lord is ever free from dust). (21) While engaged !n_ 
worshipping the Lord with Tulasi leaves in Her own pleasure-garden in the midst of Her 
attendants, Sri (Laksmi) happens to see Her face with beautiful tresses and a prominent . 
i meneeiae uals ce pie era et ric ee ee 


* This shows that, to say nothing of living beings such as birds, bees and so on, even inanimate beings in that realm, such 
as plants and trees, are not only endowed with consciousness but are ever engaged in conscious service of the Lord, and are . 
constituted of the same essence as the Lord. In this way everything in that realm is divinely blissful in essence. 

+ The goddess of fortune has been charged with fickleness only in Her material form. In Her divine form She is an 
embodiment of all feminine virtues and the most constant and devoted of all wives. Although the most beloved of the Lord's . 
consorts, and the undisputed queen of His divine household, She is a model of modesty and, like an ideal wife, ever looks upon 
Herself as an humble servant-maid of the Lord. That is why She has been represented here by poetic imagination as engaged * 
in a menial service of the Lord’s household. : 


Dis. 15 ] : ‘' BOOK THREE 203 


*ee0aeee#** * 





nose (reflected) in ponds containing limpid waters and provided with stairs of corals, and 
deems it fortunate in having been kissed by the Lord, O beloved gods. (22) They can never 
attain to that Realm, who hear undesirable talks, that pervert Reason, centring round topics 
other than the exploits of the Lord who shatters the sin of His devotees—talks which, when 
heard by those unfortunate men rob them of their merit and throw them alas ! into the dark 
regions of hell, where they find no shelter. (23) Alas ! they who do not offer worship to the 
Lord even after attaining human birth, which is solicited even by us (gods) and where one 
can acquire the knowledge of truth as well as religious merit, are deluded by His Maya, which 
is projected everywhere. (24) On the other hand, they alone attain to that realm—which is 
located even higher than our abode (the Satyaloka)—who have reached beyond the 
jurisdiction of Yama (the god of retribution) by virtue of their devotion to Lord Visnu (the 
foremost of the gods), who are possessed of an enviable character, and whose eyes stream 

with tears and whose body is thrilled allover when they are beside themselves with love while 

talking to one another about the glories of their lord. (25) The sages (Sanaka and his three 

brothers) felt supremely delighted when they reached by dint of their Yogamaya (wonderful 

power of Yoga) the divine and unique realm of Vaikuntha, presided over by Lord Visnu (the 

Father of the whole universe), which is the sole object of reverence for all the worlds, and 

shone resplendent with the wonderful aerial cars of the foremost gods. (26) 

Wa: Asasala: HA: AAMaAdaayA AAA | 


caraa ara TeterTet UTTeAlchatuswieniietaesaat 129 | 
Tiignaiien feattt  facernfaraqeaaene | 
ae Yal Hliesa Bheftanal wav A WAM seat 1221 
gdcatitatastiedrgs! gal am geanenufenr at: | 
ada astawsa waa: wepal a aaieellaad faraisarst: 1291 
aM Aad ACMI: HAN qeramaarer fateadart | 
aan aeaeaamdecuedt ast faee wmactaqeaitet 1301 
anat fracafaag Fieeaar: Meda aia et: WheteRarary | 
wa: dedalegiaddg saeHMistd eal A sUgdiaM: 1381 


Having passed through six entrances to the Lord's residence without feeling attached to 
anything, they saw at the seventh gate two shining beings of the same age, armed with a 
mace and adorned with most valuable armlets, ear-rings and diadems. (27) With a garland 
of sylvan flowers, which attracted to ita swarm of intoxicated bees, placed round their neck 
and between their four swarthy arms, they wore a countenance which looked somewhat 
agitated from their arched eyebrows, distended nostrils and reddish eyes. (28) Even while 
they looked on with their eyes wide open, the sages, who move about everywhere knowing 
no obstruction or fear, since they indiscriminately regard everyone as their own Self, entered 
the gate in the charge of these porters just as they had passed through the former gates, 
which were furnished with doors of gold and diamond, without asking their permission. (29) 
The four boy-sages, who had nothing to cover their bodies with except the atmosphere, 
looked (from their appearance) only five years of age, even though they were the eldest (of 
Brahma's creation) and had realized the truth of the Self. But when the porters, who 
happened to possess a disposition which was quite unpalatable to the Lord, saw the sages 
(passing through the gate guarded by them without taking any notice of their presence), they 
blocked the sages' way with their staff, despising their glory, although the sages did not 
deserve such treatment at their hands. (30) Being thus forbidden by the two chief porters of 











204 SRIMAD' BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15 


PRAKLAKLALAAALAAAA AAAS HALA LALLA EAL LL LEE BRR RE EE ERR BE BE GER BB BH HRB ARH He Heo 


Sri Hari while the other divinities (of that realm) looked on, even though they were by far the 
fittest persons (to be admitted into the Lord's presence), their eyes turned slightly red all of 
a sudden on account of anger (that which follows in the wake of desire) at their longing to 
see their most beloved Friend (Sri Hari) being thwarted, and they spoke (as follows). (31) 


IA Hg: 
Al afea waaadadergtiot faaat fara: wee: | 
dea TAAGEN diate at al alssmacpemal: afergdta: 1321 
I Ott Wade wearers amt adda eft: | 
Usaha at gad: atlefen: fe aenfed Garsig wa adlser 1331 
wera ume fapuedd: ad speihe eats waeihar | 
lait aida use gt ftudise aa lax! 


The sages said : Of those who attain to and dwellin this realm as a result of their devoted 
worship to the Lord and (naturally) imbibe the qualities (such as even-mindedness and so 


on) of their Master, how is it that you two should have developed such a discordant’ 
disposition ? When the Lord is extremely pacific and has no quarrel with anybody, there can | 


be none deserving to be suspected by you here on your own analogy, who happen to be the 
only impostors in this realm. (Since you are impostors yourselves, you scent foul play in 
others.) (82) The enlightened inhabitants of this realm do not perceive their none-identity 
with the Lord, who contains the whole universe in the cavity of His abdomen; on the other 
hand, they find themselves comprised in the Lord even as the space in a jar is included in 
the infinite space. What, then, has happened to you, who are invested with a divine body, 
which has filled you with fear, caused by diversity, on His account ? (33) Therefore, we are 
contemplating what should be a meet punishment for your sin, in order that good may be 
eventually done to you, the two dull-witted servants of the Supreme Being, the Lord of 
Vaikuntha. Since you smell diversity even here, go you hence to those spheres where the 
three vicious propensities (lust, anger and greed) are one's (deadly) enemies. (34) 


wadikaqnaawa «= at dad  wseeuentanumeg: | 

elt RITMIAS faded Weatelaaddafaenrator 134 | 

qaqa waaeat cet at at wma weaned 

MW aisqdmeneea wana Bel vafee q al sordeelse: 131 ; 


Hearing this utterance of the sages and knowing it to be a curse from the Brahmanas;, 
which could not be counteracted even by multitudes of missiles, the two attendants of Sr 
Hari, who is afraid of the Brahmanas even more than they, immediately prostrated 
themselves on the ground, clasping the sages’ feet with great humility. (35) “You have meted 
out to us a punishment which is but meet for an offender; let it, therefore, take effect, so that 
it may purge us in toto of the sin of showing disrespect to the Lord (by insulting you, who are 
worthy of His respect). Butif you feel the least compunction (in your heart) due to compassion 
for us, let us not fall a prey to infatuation that may efface from our mind the memory of the 
Lord when we descend into the lower regions." (36) 


Wd ded Waa: ami faqeq deltmanreded: | 
der dal Uteaneamdailaaot asa aes: 1301 
aq ard sfdedufah wufieisaaatasa wanted | 
sasraeistazan: Rraaleaeters WIdaAalialhataitcn gy 132 | 


4a 


Dis. 15 ] - ~*BOOK THREE’ ~~ 205 


Br Br Br Br Br Be Br Ke Be Be Sr Ke Br Br Be Br Br Ke Ke We Ke Kee Gr He Ge Ke Kr Ke we Ke Ke We BeBe Ke He Kr Ke Ke He He Be Be Be BeBe Hr He Be Ke Ky He He He Ke Be Be Be Be Ge Be Be Be CBr Ke Be Be BeBe GE Be Be BeBe Bt BEM “BEBE Be 
PUMICE Wert Celdelmaca ea Aged! 
za asa atfada fre wgeraftt quran 138 | 
Udi yaaa fap wreanfatitteda qaqa a | 
ampangaed  faqagaa  faaeeetator warded ixot 
TereqhreratrentqpusenuSre SICA aforaientter, | 
adusnugiaat Cee TSC IVT XQ 
saagemata aera: wrt faa farfad agetsaret | 
Wd Waa Madi U semmag AzAgeiier afaquest deal &: 1x2! 

That very moment the Lord, whose navel is the seat of a lotus, and who is the delight ofthe 
righteous, learnt about the insult thus offered by His own servants to saints (like Sanaka and his 
three brothers), and wentto the spot (where the sages had been heldup) on those very feet which 
were sought after by recluses and great sages, accompanied by Sri (His beloved Spouse). (37) 
The Sages saw that the Lord, who was the goal of their Samadhi (profound meditation), had 
arrived before their very eyes, accompanied by His own attendants, who carried articles suited 
to the visit (such as the umbrella, chowries and so on). The white umbrella (which was held over 
His head) looked like the moon; (while the strings of pearls hanging from its edge) and dancing 
in the cool breeze coming from the pair of chowries that (were being waved on both His sides 
and) shone like swans looked like drops of nectar falling from its rays. (88) The Lord, who Is the 
repository of all thatis worth coveting, was graciously disposed towards all and touched the heart 
(of His devotees) by His affectionate glances. With Goddess Laksmi, who shone on His swarthy 
and broad chest (in the form of a golden streak), He enhanced the beauty as it were of His own 
abode (Vaikuntha) the crest-jewel of all heavenly worlds. (39) He was adorned with a girdle that 
shone brightly on the yellow cloth covering His large hips and with a garland of syivan flowers, 
which was distinguished by the humming of bees; His lovely wrists were graced with bracelets, 
and He had rested one of His hands on the shoulder of Garuda (the son of Vinata) and was 
revolving a lotus with another. (40) His countenance was distinguished by cheeks—which 
enhanced the beauty of the alligator-shaped pendants, that outshone lightning—and a prominent 
nose; and His head was covered with a crown studded with gems. A charming and superb 
necklace was hanging between His stout arms, while His neck was adorned with the gem known 
by the name of Kaustubha. (41) The sages regarded with unsated eyes,and joyously bowed their 
heads to, the Lord who (says Brahma to the gods) had assumed a personality for his (Brahma’'s) 
own sake as well as for the sake of Bhava (Lord Siva) and yourselves (the other gods)—a 
personality which was full of abundant charm and about which His devotees thought within 
themselves that Indira's (Laksmi's) excessive pride (of beauty) disappeared (at its very sight). (42) 


qantas Uenfadihaicch tadedtatcantaar: | 
seria: aiaat dark asi ageaaaaenmi fanaa: 1x3! 
qa al aqer 4 aadifadadinaagiet ead | 
wale: URdat ddianetes aareuratusrur raeq: isx 
Gat out quate arma ag ad aan 
Wet audsandieantatic: PAT Yds: 1x41 


The breeze laden with the honey of the Tulasi blossoms, mixed with the dust of the lotus- 
feet of that lotus-eyed Lord, entered the interior of those sages through the nose (the door for its 
passage) and not only thrilled their body but caused a flutter in their mind too, (ever) immersed 














206 SRIMADBHAGAVATA == =  ——s_....... eek Dia ae 


Se SERRSRARAAEREREREO SARA ARE RRESERHREERHRAMRNAHRRAEAAAAT RRR RRERANAHeE EER EEE TL 
ee wr 
—- 


as they were in the joy of oneness with the Absolute (and thus above all excitation causeq by 
sense-contacts*). (43) Having their heart's desire fulfilled by the sight of His face, which 
resembled a blue lotus, and the beauty of which was enhanced by His still lovelier lips anda 
smile which shone as a (full-blown) jasmine flower, they then looked lower down at His feet— 
which were inlaid as it were with rubies in the shape of ruddy nails—and fixed their mind on the 
same. (44) They (now) proceeded to extol the Lord—who is endowed with the eight supernatural 
powers, which are eternally present in Him and cannot be acquired by anyone else—and who 
reveals a personality fit to be meditated upon by men seeking to attain their goal through paths 
of Yoga, and which is highly esteemed by them and is the delight of their eyes. (45) 


PART Hq: 
asda de waist ara a asda A AaAG@aAT We: | 
ada apuifaator wet wd a: farqaftiata waasea xa 
aq al fac anaq amma aaa ania ta wrrae 
aiaiiidieddeukpaniecramn ee  fagiva farm: iver 
Athi fanorrat a sae fexasefiawd ya sade 
ASS GCE 9 Wad: HME: cHiteadieagra: Helesl CARI: Xo 
@m Wa: warty a: eedsfade 4 a wet Wal 
amas aAdefaade asafeana: gaa a queria cules: ixe 
wigsed ag veg wt ata dima gn 7: | 
Ta sé Wad AA sea alsa gecal War Wild: 140! 


AA WaeaSA: 1241 

The Kumaras said: It is only today, O infinite Lord, that You have appeared before our 
eyes—You, who are hidden from the view of the evil-minded, though present in their heart 
(as the Inner Controller)—although You had entered our mind through the passage of the 
ears when our father (Brahma), who owes his existence to You, told us Your secret. (46) O 
Lord, we know You—who bring delight every moment to these (devotees) by Your 
personality, which is constituted of pure Sattva—to be the highest spiritual Truth, which 
sages free from egotism and passion realize in their heart through the practice of unflinching 
Devotion learnt by Your grace. (47) O Lord, Your glories are worth recounting and capable 
of taking men across the ocean of worldly existence. Hence those wise men who have 
sought the protection of Your feet and know how sweet Your stories are prize not even Your 
imperishable boon (in the shape of final beatitude), much less other blessings (such as the 
position of Indra and so on), which are ever exposed to fear from Your frowns. (48) Let us 
by all means be born in the infernal regions as a result of our sins, only if our mind takes 
(constant) delight in Your (lotus-like) feet, if our speech just like Tulasi leaves derives its 
grace from Your feet and if the cavity of our ears is filled with the accounts of Your manifold 
virtues. (49) O Lord of wide renown, our eyes have derived excessive joy from the form You 


have revealed (to us). We, therefore, make obeisance to You, the almighty Lord, who have 
I ae 


* This shows that the form of the Lord is purely divine in substance and has no mixture of Prakrti or Matter in it. Had it 
been a product of Matter like our bodies, the fragrance of any part of His body or of anything connected with it could not have 
disturbed the serenity of sages like Sanaka and others, who are the masters of Jianis and Yogis of all ages. 





Dis. 16 ] BOOK THREE 207 
Be Br Be Be Be BeBe Br Br Br Hr Sr Br Br Br Br Hr Hr Be Be Be Be Be Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke He He Re Re Be Be Be Re Re Be Ree A A ee AAeAAKAAAARAKAAAKAAARAAAKAAAAARAAA 
ta a La a tt a 


thus appeared before us, even though You remain hidden from the view of those who have 
not yet conquered their mind. (50) 


Thus ends the fifteenth discourse entitled " The Curse of Sanaka and his three 
brothers against Jaya and Vijaya", in Book Three of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samnhita. 


FSR SOT 


31 eee 


Discourse XVI 
The fall of Jaya and Vijaya from Vaikuntha 


gia aa Jura aet at armetiom stra see fagustieat faa: 1 2 1 
Brahma continued : The Lord who has His abode in Vaikuntha joyfully received the 
foregoing words of those sages—who had taken a vow of devotion (to Sri Hari) and extolled 
Him (in the aforesaid manner)—and spoke the following words (in reply). (1) 


uit at onal ag wet fas wa ai weep at aa aemremfe 2 | 
aad eet wafeaiagad: 1a warqadsenfindaat agen! 2 | 
We: Wee wa eat ut fe Aiaglented al anaufien: | x | 
was a yea olel yet Hara asadalextentia ea afar: | & | 

FAVA ASA: Aas: Al: GAlit <wtaraqearisqpue: | 

Mise Was SHedattkRee Bae a: whipeahry | & | 

aaa 4 auf 8 de:emhaens  sfaeersiter | 

aq sitfaenata at faster ae: Senoart sat faa aera i 9 | 

ae amt aramefattart zeldqydgted EHeTes | 

Ugieral« WMadSISqaTa «RS eafectitstenctoeh: 1 < 1 

Jat faueiencusiaquearmrantayinmerets: finde: | 

fas al a fased acest: Fel: Ut Aeasmormetenry | F | 

a A anesargedtidin yee a Age | 

FAIA MAAK YET SA AA HPAfsqvStd: 1201 

2 sonata fear faordistaneerage: fergqetfarasraaa: | 

aa Heassaa «Ud: «9 AaNeteretetrarenaredet: 1221 

Tal BUMS AHeettaantt wer Aer: t 

qa Unban aaqwel A aenctaafardt yoatietara: 1¢21 








208 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16 


RRL LR LLL ER ERE ER BE REST RE MEBEE BERE BE HESEE BE SSE SESE ESSE ESE ESTE Se ERE SE RESO Be Me RR He Be BR Re Re BEM Re He og 


The Lord said : These attendants of Mine, Jaya and Vijaya by name, have committed 
a great offence against you, ignoring Me (at the same time). (2) The punishment that has 
been meted out to them by you, who are so devoted to Me, is approved of by Me, O good 
sages, inasmuch as the offence against you constitutes an affront to Me. (3) The Brahmana 
is My highest deity and the disrespect that has been shown to you by My own people, | take 
it as an offence committed by Myself; hence | crave your forgiveness for the same on this 
occasion. (4) On a servant doing a wrong the world (generally) blames his master (for the 
Same) and the disrepute thus brought to him tarnishes his fair name even as white leprosy 
disfigures the skin. (5) (You know) the whole world down to the pariah (who cooks and lives 
by the flesh of a dog) is immediately purified by a dip taken through the ear into the nectar 
of My unsullied glory. But it is from you (the Brahmanas) that | have derived this highly 
sanctifying renown. Therefore, irresistible as | am, | will not hesitate to lop off My own arm 
if its conduct is found hostile to you. (6) Because of My services to you the dust of My lotus- 
feethas become so sacred thatit immediately wipes outall sin and | have acquired a disposition 
on account of which Sri (the goddess of fortune) leaves Me not, even though | have no 
attachment to Her, while others (including the highest gods such as Brahma and so on) 
observe sacred vows for securing even a sidelong glance from Her. (7) | do not enjoy the 
oblations offered by the sacrificer in a sacrifice through the sacrificial fire, which is one of My 
own mouths, with the same relish as | eat the delicacies overflowing with ghee through the 
mouth of the Brahmana who, having dedicated the consequences of his actions to Me, is ever 
satisfied (with his lot) and relishes every morsel he takes. (8) The power of My Yogamaya 
(wonderful divine energy) is infinite and unobstructed, and the water in which My feet have 
been washed (viz., the holy Ganga) quickly sanctifies all the three worlds along with Lord 
Siva (who bears her on His head). Yet even | bear on My crown the holy dust of the 
Brahmanas’ feet ! Who would not, under the circumstances, bear with them ? (9) The 
Brahmanas, the cows (that yield materials for sacrificial offerings) and defenceless crea- 
tures are My own bodies. The vulture-like messengers of Yama, the god of punishment 
appointed by Me, who are furious as serpents, angrily tear with their bills those who look upon 
these (My bodies) as distinct from Me, their faculty of judgment having been impaired by that 
sin. (10) On the other hand, they captivate My heart, who with a gladdened heart and with 
their lotus face enlivened by a nectar-like smile respect the Brahmanas—even though they 
utter harsh words—looking upon them as My own selves, and pacify them by praising them 
in loving words even ag a son would appease an angry father or as | am pacifying you. (11) 
These servants of Mine thus trespassed against you without knowing the mind of their 
master (Myself). | shall, therefore, deem it a favour done to Me if you so ordain that, reaping 
the fruit of their transgression they may return to My presence soon—that the. term of their 
exile from My abode may expire before long. (12) 


3A dead cdaigepra Badia Ages 4 aAsMTTeaqen 123! 

ad Sela Want oat adedtem famarnenmikt a fagefaentfias 12% 

a ARTISTS RA SAA | Mra: Meera fat: West: afrdera: 1Aul 
Brahma continued : Even though the sages had been bitten by the serpent of ange, 
their soul was not sated with hearing the Lord's lovely and illuminating speech, which was 
like a series of Mantras (sacred texts). (13) Though brief, the Lord's excellent speech was 


difficult to comprehend because of its momentous import and was most profound in 
significance. The sages heard it with wide open (attentive) ears and pondered it as well; yet 





Dis. 16 ] BOOK THREE 209 


er fr Br 
Br Br BeBe He He HEBER Be BRE BE He Be He He BEBE He Re Be He Be Ke Bee He Hee Re Re He Be KER BE RE R RRR eR RE REAR He RR RR RE CRE BER RE BE RE BEBE RE BEBE RE RE BEBE RE PERE BEBE RE CRERE 





they could not understand what He intended doing. (14) The Brahmanas were all the same 
extremely delighted to behold Him and experienced a thrill all over their body. They then 
spoke (as follows) to the Lord, who had revealed the mighty glory of His supreme divinity 
through His Yogamaya (wonderful divine potency). (15) 


ATT Hq: 
aA aa wre, faereta ea fant act Asqvesia aaa: wee 1261 
WI UW ca aM: fas aA wati fast eacami wtariedady 1201 
oad: Cat af wad aqfeai ater aat aen fafded ware: 12¢! 
ahd Gan ye Mem waqeri aif: a vam fHacayea aa: 129! 
a a fayfaerneaqaeaiife: waiter gaareta: | 
qutidetieaaaaneaa eh Asada AMAA 1201 
aeat fafamakteadari AAALAC: | 
a a ferquaqueas: Gila: silacean fam ware 1221 
ma a waeadwan fife: a: uafsarette fareaaret i 
Ti Wd aateana wens aea at ave agar rez iRe 
aoa fairness afegremd cm as: edt aga | 
daa agate Rraea ta Gan arentsaetearensrer fe ASAIN 123 1 
mstsma waa: aa ware Frater teagan: | 
Adaat sfaadda faaradest: ad dada a a fate: 12x! 
a anadania war fae ahi 3 at deprate freien | 
STATA Al a Bhat feraat a aust Asana aangqeante feafeasor 1241 
The sages said: O self-effulgent Lord, we are unable to know what You contemplate doing; 
for, even though the Ruler of all, You speak of favour done to You (by us)! (16) A friend and well- 
wisher of the Brahmanas as You are, itis but natural for You to believe that the Brahmana is Your 
supreme deity. The fact, however, is that the Lord (Yourself) is the Self and the Deity of not only 
the Brahmanas but even of the gods of gods (Brahma, Siva andothers). (17) The EternalReligion 
(Sanatana Dharma) has proceeded from You and the same is protected (from time to time) by 
Your manifestations (Avataras). Nay, You alone are recognized (by the Sastras) as the 
immutable goalas wellas the secretof Dharma (Religion). (18) By Your grace the Yogis (mystics) 
treading the path of Nivrtti (indifference to the world) are easily able to cross the ocean of birth 
and death. How, then, can Yoube favoured by others? (19) Laksmi (the goddess of fortune)—the 
dust of whose feet is borne by others, viz., seekers of wealth, on their head—waits upon You at 
the appointed hours, as though anxious to secure a place in the abode (in the shape of Your lotus- 
feet) of the king of bees, who hovers on the fresh wreath of Tulasi leaves offered at Your feet by 
some blessed devotee. (20) Excessively fond as You are of Your greatest devotees, You have 
no great regard for Laksmi, even though She offers You Her faultless services. Adorned as You 
are by a number of adorable virtues, how can the dust of the roads trodden and hallowed by the 
feet of the Brahmanas or the mark of Srivatsa (a curl of hair) on Your breast lend sanctity to You 
or how could You accept them as ornaments? (21) O Lord, in the form of Dharma (virtue) You 
are manifest in all the three ages (viz., Satya, Treta and Dwapara, the fourth, i.e., Kali being 


notorious forits marked absence of Dharma) andas such Youprotectwith Your three feet (viz., 
purity of mind and body, austere penance and compassion, which severally characterize the 








210 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Disa 


eee an nena sas iesssictanentavanenseneebenreeseseansesdcasiae ey | 
er 


three ages, the fourth viz., truthfulness, being present even in Kali, though in an attenuateg 
form,) this universe, consisting of animate and inanimate beings, for the sake of the gods ang 
the Brahmanas. Kindly drive away by Your (divine) personality, which consists of pure 
(immaterial) Sattva and is the bestower of all blessings, the elements of Rajas and Tamas in us 
inimical as they are to virtue. (22) If You, who are Dharma personified, cease to protect the 
Brahmana race, (with is the foremost of all the twice-born classes and) which deserves to be 
protected by You, through loving worship and polite words, the blessed path (of the Vedas) 
chalked out by You, O Lord, will forthwith disappear from the world; for the people would accept 
as their standard that conduct (viz., ceasing to worship and speak polite words to the Brahmanas) 
of Yours, who are the Supreme Person. (23) This can never be to Your liking; for You, being the 
storehouse of Sattva (goodness), are ever intent on doing what is good to the people and uproot 
the enemies of virtue through the agency of kings that represent Your power. Since Yoy 
are the suzerain lord of all the three worlds (the entire creation) and the protector of the whole 
universe, Your glory is not at all diminished by Your mere stooping down (before the 
Brahmanas); for that is a mere sporton Your part. (24) Nay, we accord our hearty approval 
to any other punishment that You may choose to inflict on them, O universal Lord, or to any 
(additional) subsistence You may be pleased to confer on them (allowing them to continue 
in Your service). Or You may mete out to us any punishment that may be suitable for us, since 
we have pronounced a curse against Your innocent servants. (25) 


MATA 
Udit Ade war aa: aerated | 
Ya: UH Sie at a: sna vada fafaaeteda fas: 1261 
The Lord replied : Know that the imprecation uttered by you was ordained by Myself, 
O holy Brahmanas! Therefore, being born before long into the demoniac species, and firmly 


united in thought with Me through concentration of mind intensified by anger (hatred), they 
will return to My presence shortly afterwards. (26) 


aa ad Wat sel aan! agus acer fagus a AAI 1201 
Wed UR wae dl wfasry: salen: stad awrat Bre 12c 
Waratae ad wa Wad Wisdeast: anais sq AS Ad gq A1Re! 
Wide Fes wa wen aatiqwoait ait faa awequNa igo! 
aa desta fed weer sated fet A aweacdiaar Gai: 132! 
Swatieea Wa faarasforsyeory | Palisa Hal Bs a fersaartagid, 132 | 
at ¢ ‘ators geueitelend: | earl werreyat — ferraterat 1321 
del faquofaurmanradaral: | geen AeMratsaAses arent: 12% 
waa gat wet wderat wR: ifedsiataias area Ast scaqUNT 124 
cana aster ana a:ieanfa ast uwafé wnatafeferafa 136! 
faza a: feftoareaeduet arta § gieaarmn: | 
an fama a al wmareaiardrerctatagar fatter: 1391 
Sf AEs AE URASeN Bisa Gd GSaMSeTA: 126 | 
Brahma continued : Having seen Lord Visnu, who was so delightful to the eyes, and HIs 
self-effulgent Abode, Vaikuntha, the sages now went round the Lord (as a mark of respect) and 





Dis. VA .. BOOK THREE 211 
BRB SS RGR LR RA ARR AAA LEER RRR ARIAL LEE EAT 


prostrated themselves before Him; and then, taking leave of Him, they returned extremely 
delighted, applauding His divine splendour. (27-28) The Lord then said to His attendants 
(Jaya and Vijaya), “Depart (from this place) but fear not; may all be well (with you). Though 
capable of nullifying the Brahmanas' curse, | would not do so; on the contrary, it has My 
approval. (29) It had already been pronounced by Rama (Laksmi), who was angry with 
you when you on a previous occasion stopped Her entry at the door while | was buried 
in My Yoganidra (deep Samadhi or trance). (30) Absolved from the sin of insulting the 
Brahmanas by concentrating your thought on Me through anger, you shall return to My 
presence not long afterwards." (31) Having thus instructed His gate-keepers, the Lord 
entered His Abode, adorned with rows of palaces and possessed of an all-surpassing 
splendour. (32) As a result of the Brahmanas' curse, which was not easy to escape, 
the two attendants of the Lord, the foremost of the gods (inhabitants of Vaikuntha) 
lost their splendour and their pride too was gone even as they were about to fall from 
the realm of Sri Hari. (33) When they actually began to fall from the realm of Lord Visnu, 
a loud outcry was raised by the occupants of the principal aerial cars, O dear sons. (34) 
It is those two principal attendants of Sri Hari that have now entered the powerful seed 
of KaSyapa deposited in the womb of Diti. (35) It is by the glory of these twin Asuras 
(demons) that your glory has been eclipsed; and (there is no remedy because) it is the 
Lord Himself who is keen to do all this at this juncture. (86) The Lord, whois the controller 
of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), nay, who is responsible for the creation, 
preservation and dissolution of the universe, and whose Yogamaya (wonderful creative 
power) cannot be easily understood even by Masters of Yoga—that most ancient Person 
alone will come to our rescue. What purpose can be served in this behalf by our 
deliberation on the subject ? (37) 


Thus ends the sixteenth discourse in Book Three of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita. 


PRR SRSA 


BIA AASaSeaTA: 


Discourse XVII 
Birth of HiranyakaSipu and Hiranyaksa and the latter's 


conquest of the four quarters 


WAY sara 
freraayar wht art wgathgen: iat: we sada Pear facta: 1g t 
fefereg exiuamaraanaiget | qut aad edt wat SETA Tat! 2 | 
Sarat aeawa faqsiana: | fea yordhat a wlnwtovaiae: | 3 1 
aeraen yadefea: wal: satsag: | AlccnaeIa: Ud: chdasiniteda: | ¥ | 
adt ag: agent: wenrkagqe i sqeareradtarearitet atleast: 1 4 
Seesaeaear APUG | AA Aasaaal A W SAllazad Ga! & | 








212 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17 


RLEEKKKKAKK KH KHKK HA KLAN LAL HH RR HH RH BH BM BEE Be BEM BE eH He Be Hee He HTH Hr He Be Me He Ke Re He Br Ke He Re He He He He Ke Be HR He He oe gw, 
nN ee oe fi 


ania faa arfifecti: afer: i dears 9 aftagery: Benassi: 10 | 
Ye: ukerisyat auel: wergdat: 1 fatat «wahreiat faater: softs c | 
Saag Aad at afeqraumi gielemesR: wWiea fra: e 1 
Usitasletagarea Rien aasr fafaen arat arafteradea: 1201 
GUI Heat: Ad: Weed ide! Glniave Ad: wade ART: 1221 
tel Waa «Aisles GT: FST CRT: )«- eHAaHda 1221 
Wal saAMAG cea aT: qaafior: |aecediogi gat: Ugfdaierie3t 
Ten Wadaaa wisn dita: i sticdtedmie Fsqas aATNIex! 
Creasy Meldidddteafae: «= ST: Ie Set APR famergarieu 


Maitreya continued: The gods (the denizens of heaven) were rid of fear on hearing the 
cause (of the darkness) as explained by Brahma (the self-born); and then they all returned 
to heaven. (1) As for Diti, that virtuous lady had been very apprehensive of trouble to the gods 
from the children (in her womb) ever since her husband predicted the same, and brought 
forth two twin sons after full one hundred years. (2) Even at the hour of their birth in that 
hermitage, many an evil portent, which foreboded a great calamity to the world, occurred in 
heaven and on earth as well as in the space between these two regions (in mid air). (3) Parts 
of the globe shook along with the mountains; all the quarters appeared to be on fire, meteors 
and thunderbolts descended on earth and comets portending grief appeared. (4) There blew 
winds which were most uninviting to the touch, hissing again and again and uprooting 
gigantic trees. They had storm for their army and clouds of dust for their ensigns. (5) The 
luminaries in the heavens having been screened by masses of clouds in which lightnings 
sometimes flashed as though laughing, darkness reigned everywhere, so that nothing could 
be seen anywhere. (6) The ocean with its high waves wailed aloud as if stricken with sorrow, 
and there was commotion among the creatures inhabiting its bowels. The rivers and lakes 


etc., were also agitated and their lotuses withered. (7) Misty halos appeared round the sun . 


and the moon during solar and lunar eclipses again and again. Claps of thunder were heard 
(even without clouds) and sounds like that of rattling chariots emerged from mountain 
caves.(8) In the interior of villages she-jackals yelled portentously, vomiting a strong fire from 
their mouth; and jackals and owls also joined them with their cries. (9) Raising their necks, 
dogs uttered here and there various cries in the manner now of singing and now of wailing. 
(10) And donkeys in rut ran hither and thither in herds, striking the earth, O Vidura, with their 
hard hoofs and wildly braying. (11) Frightened with the (braying of the) donkeys, birds flew 
shrieking out of their nests, while cattle in the cow-pens as well as in the woods passed dung 
and urinated. (12) Cows yielded blood in place of milk from terror, clouds rained pus, the 
images of gods shed tears and trees fell down without a blast. (13) Ominous planets (such 
as-Mars and Saturn) shone brighter and surpassed the auspicious ones (such as Mercury, 
Jupiter and Venus) as well as a number of lunar mansions and, taking a seemingly 
retrograde course, came into conflict with one another. (14) Noticing these and other such 
mighty portents of an evil type, people other than the sons of Brahma (Sanaka and others, 
who were aware of the fall of Jaya and Vijaya and their birth as Diti's sons) were seized with 
fear inasmuch as they did not know the secret of these portents, and thought that the 
dissolution of the universe was at hand. (15) 


qateeeht deal aeaamieuiea i agqendssrancr capeafsadt sa ie 
fefarezant aafentleantetareaenret CRRA | 


Dis. 17 ] BOOK THREE ~ 213 


Br Be Be Be Be Br Br Be Ke Be Be Br Hr He Be Ke Ke Be Ke Ke Ke Ge Ke Hr Ge Ke Ke Ke Ke Kee Ke Ke He He He Ke Be Ke Ke He He Ke He Ke Kr Ke He He Ke Ke Ke Me Ke Ke Be Be BeBe Be Be Hee Be Re Be Be He Be HEBe Be Ke Be Be Ke Be Me Me We Be He 


TH HUG AW: Ue Ue Meal PHachAdha ARI: 1! 
saTafata «= aaentife, «a: eT, TAIT I 
a oa fewaniy fae: som a a faweremga arad: 1¢¢! 

The two earliest Daityas (sons of Diti) soon revealed their (former) prowess and with their 
steel-like frames grew to the size of two huge mountains. (16) Kissing the sky with the crests 
of their gold crowns, screening the quarters (with their bodies) and shaking the earth with 
their footfall at every Step, and theirarms adorned with brilliant bracelets, they stood eclipsing 
the sun by their waist, which was surrounded with an excellent girdle. (17) Kasyapa (one of 
the lords of created beings) gave them names. (Accordingly) of the two twin brothers, the 
people came to know the one who descended from his loins (and entered the womb) first, 


by the name of Hiranyakasipu; while he whom Diti brought forth first was known as 
Hiranyaksa*. (18) 


as fevankgchat aga dial waielealnteitadiqaead: 1281 
faunas «ra: 9 siftmcaeinemiiéa at gqaadraq wmiRol 
aq det gta Wesqamiane Se wWedaedHere 1221 
Tate atic agqueanegadt a. lste Tfmicat carediedaed sated: 1221 
a fertfear, Set ASAT AA AUS SHAAN afte SAAS FATA 123 | 
ad fad: wiser wait ata fasrme vera af aa sa fea: 12x 

dea. sfas aso after aren: Galea: Waleaan: | 

seat «atte ae etTCsheTT. «SC RECs SIT: RU 

a adqrqaen AAG ATA RATATAT: | 

Teaitiea wer fawatarmearna Gi sada: 1261 

AAA IATA eee Sen roranyast TaATAA | 

Sa seay sf dase A eae Aq 1201 

a creureisfafidessat diataet gqdediear 

fafa ceSiaectenan aanmgat = Wasa 121 

@ wanker fafa gq seat wart fa: | 

wa wa we wa feat aAatacgued Ad 4471291 

Usa AR Geeta a: dat al wrariatfacy | 

snafeaaaae od | Aaa «= BUI §«6Aalgat: 1301 








* Inhis commentary on the above verse, Sridhara Swami, the earliest known commentator of Srimad Bhagavata, quotes 
the following verse from a work entitled "Pindasiddhi":— 

Fel farte fee atsi yer aed! St dal Taal WH Piaamawasad |! 

"A mother develops two embryos in her womb when the male generative fluid enters the menstrual flux in the uterus in 
two successive drops. And the mother brings forth the twins in an order reverse to that in which she conceives them. That is 
to say, the child which was conceived before is brought forth later, while the one conceived later is brought forth first.” 











} 


214 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA -[ Dis. 17 


Be Rr Br Ke Br We Me We Br Ke Br Hr Br Br We Mr Mr Kr Br Br Ke Be Be Br Be Re Br Ke Br Kee Br Me Be Me Hr Br Br Mr By Hr Kr Mr Kr Hr Kr Kr HI Br Kr Be Be Be Be Br Ree Re Re Re Be eRe Re Re Re BR Re Ke Re Be Be Re HBT A HER Rr Hr oy 
a a EI EIniaanIEtnAaSSSASISSESan tet eiaamatetnendiadaSeias tinea aan ceeaae ne eee an adatom aceeaaaeeieea tee eee arama eae mia 


a amano fama: aed dra  afeda: | 
aaa aa GC (Gs TTR. 1 32 
ofa strerad FE RAS Seca Gas fermeaeass aareaiseaa: 1291 


Fearing death at the hands of none by virtue of a boon got from Brahma, Hiranyakasipu 
was puffed up with pride and brought under his sway by (the strength of) his arms all the three 
spheres (the earth, heaven and the subterranean region) along with their guardian deities. (19) 
His beloved younger brother, Hiranyaksa, who always tried to please him and was very fond 
of war, once went up to heaven, mace in hand, seeking (an adversary in) combat. (20) His 
tempo was difficult to resist. He had anklets of gold tinkling about his feet. Adorned with a 
Vaijayanti garland, he rested his huge mace on one of his shoulders. (21) His strength of 
mind and body as well as the boon conferred on him (by Brahma) had puffed him up. He 
feared death at the hands of none and there was no check on him. The gods, therefore, were 
seized with fear at his very sight and hid themselves even as snakes hide themselves for 
fear of Garuda. (22) The chief of the Daityas saw that they had vanished before his might, 
and roared aloud on not finding Indra and the other gods that had been intoxicated with 
power. (23) Having returned therefrom, the mighty Daitya, like an elephantin rut, dived into 
the deep ocean—which was terribly roaring—just for the sake of sport. (24) On his entering 
the ocean the aquatic creatures forming the host of Varuna (the god presiding over the 
waters) were distracted with fear and ran away too far, scared by his very splendour without 
his dealing a blow. (25) Moving about in the ocean for very many years, the mighty 
Hiranyaksa smote the gigantic waves tossed by the winds with his iron mace again and again 
and reached Vibhavari, the capital of Varuna, O dear Vidura. (26) Seeing Praceta (Varuna), 
the guardian of Patala (the abode of the demons) and the lord of the aquatic creatures, there, 
he fell at the latter's feet like a low man to make fun of him, and said with a smile, "Give me 
battle, O supreme lord! (27) You are the guardian of a whole sphere and a ruler of wide fame, 
and have crushed the might of arrogant and conceited warriors. Nay, having conquered all 
the Daityas and Danavas in the world, you once performed a Rajasuya sacrifice, my 
lord.” (28) Thus wantonly mocked by an enemy whose vanity knew no bounds, the 
worshipful lord of waters waxed angry : but he managed to curb the anger that had sprung 
in him by dint of his reason and replied, "O dear one, we have (now) desisted from warfare 
(have grown too old for a combat). (29) | do notsee anyone else than the most ancient Person 
(Lord Visnu), who will give satisfaction in battle to you, who are so skilled in the ways of war. 
Therefore, O chief of the Asuras, approach Him, whom even heroes like you mention with 
praise. (30) On reaching Him you will be rid of your pride at once and will lie down on the field 
of battle (in eternal sleep), surrounded by dogs. It is in order to exterminate wicked fellows 
like you and to show His grace to the virtuous that He assumes various forms (from time to 
time).” (31) 


Thus ends the seventeenth discourse, forming part of the story of Hiranyaksa's 
conquest of the four quarters, in Book Three of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


DGGE ROADS 


Dis. 18 ] BOOK THREE 215 


Br Br Be Be Be Be He Ke Ke Be Ke Be Ge He He We Ke Ke Ke Be Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke He He Be Ke Ke Ke Be Ke Ke Ke Ke Be Be Be He He Be KCB. KE He He He Ge Be Be Ke Be Re Be He Ge Ke Be Be Be Be Be Ge Me BBE HE BeBe LER. Be Be Be Hi He Ke 


STATS RN SEAT: 


Discourse XVIII 





Encounter of the Divine Boar with Hiranyaksa 
Haq sara 


deaqmepud = eared «= eTaedfesoret «Satta: 1 
widen ouimg aree was ffdfas waa: 12 
aeal caterer TTA Tetarraraaesat | 
Warden +4 aeaiseusrea wera cael adie yn: 121 
Teme wt faqs a wine faagqaanfia 


1 wit oaeera asad: quemrenfeqgedead | 3 | 

a a: wuewwaad fe yd at maa eee wath! 

a armenaencaied dem YS wt ee 1 x | 

af afd ve wWMuiikitvaergreda A@ a qa 

ae wyat a2 a ca: wa ad a wfaeregen: 1 4 | 

a SIG IRIEC EIR ECA EEL TAA at wary | 

ale Waray, Oeled: Aargsaay: 1 & | 

ad fisacd afeoredent fewwahet fee am aa: 

RICA esse wdigat fe aad fanferqs © | 

Maitreya continued : Hearing the foregoing words of Varuna (the lord of waters), the 

proud and vainglorious Daitya paid little heed to them. And having learnt from Narada the 
whereabouts of Sri Hari, O dear Vidura, he hurriedly betook himself to the depths of the 
ocean. (1) He saw there the all-victorious divine Boar bearing the earth upwards on the ends 
of His tusks and robbing the demon of his splendour by His reddish eyes, and laughed. “Oh! an 
amphibious beast !" (2) (Turning to the Lord) he said, "Come on, fool; leave the earth. The 
Maker of the universe has entrusted her to us, the dwellers in Rasatala. You cannot escape 
unscathed with her before my very eyes, O vile god disguised as a boar! (3) Have you been 
reared by our enemies (the gods) for our extermination, as you kill the Asuras by deceptive 
methods and conquer them while remaining invisible yourself ? You possess little prowess, 
Yogamaya (deception) being your only strength. Therefore, by killing you, O fool, I shall wipe 
the tears of my kith and kin. (4) When you fall dead with your skull smashed by the mace 
hurled by our arms, the gods and sages who bear offerings to you will cease to be like trees | 
without roots." (5) Though being pierced by the shaft-like abusive words of the enemy, the . 
Lord bore the pain, perceiving the Earth on the ends of His tusks affrighted, and emerged 
Out of the water like an elephant with his female companion assailed by an alligator. (6) The 
Daitya, who had golden hair (on his head) and fearful tusks, gave a chase to the Lord while 
He was rising out of the water, even as an alligator would chase an elephant, and, roaring like 
thunder, said, "(Are you not ashamed of running away before a challenging adversary ?) Or 
there is nothing reproachful for shameless wretches.’ (7) 


a Teneo Wet fame demeiadady | 











216 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 18 


BeBe BeBe Re BR Ree RR Re ER RE REE RE RE RR E RE REREE BERERERERE RE BERR REE BE Be REM Be RE BEBE BEBE BEBE Be BEBE He Be Me Hr Be He Kee BeBe CCE ee BE BEB HER Be He Ke Pe He wy 





afi 9 frags) setae feral: URaitst: 1 ¢ 1 

UII GPE IPL To5) Hert HISAR | 

quivadiest Sded gem: SaUSdy: sede TMTA! < | 

The Lord placed the earth on the surface of the water within His sight and transferred to 

her His own energy in the form of capacity to support herself on the water, while the enemy 
stood looking on and while Brahma (the creator of the universe) extolled Him and the (other) 
gods rained flowers on Him. (8) The Lord now displayed a terrible rage and spoke laughing 
to the demon, who was now close upon Him, armed with a mighty mace, nay, who was 
adorned with gold ornaments and protected by a queer armour of gold, and had all along 
been cutting Him to the quick by his abusive words. (9) 


ai ad wm amr ym ges safer 
qa yeu: sige att famed da Were igo! 
TW ad weet wise «wage vam atta 
fasrsata aust Wa wm at afer am 1eel 
a usu fea gaofeol wea Alseeta see: | 
TUN A TST Ba a: Si sheet affairs: 1921 
The Lord said : Indeed we are wild brutes, O wretch, looking about for dogs like you. 
Heroes take no notice of your braggadocio, bound as you are with the cords of Death: (10) 
Scared away by your mace, we, who have stolen the charge of the dwellers in Rasatala, 
stand here, casting all shame to the winds. Yet willy-nilly we must take our stand on the battle- 
field; for, having brought about enmity with a powerful adversary, where can we go ? (11) 
A leader of leaders of foot soldiers as you are, take prompt steps to overthrow us, giving up 


all hitch, and wipe the tears of your kith and kin by slaying us; for he does not deserve a seat 
in an assembly (of good people), who fails to redeem his plighted word. (12) 


Jara 
AISA Wiad ASA SAI YS! BiteNieaul mle mleuaristeaisa 123! 
garaatad: MarAIAeodeaa: | SAAT «SALTS SN MeTSaeteSIeL 1 OX I 
war weat fags fauna sagas aries sardniieul 
Gtiet are 9  wMmedasitet: | stank: pe: awnepassar 126! 
WAG Wea claorat wa wy: 1 Sas a _ at aba Tea Hilaelseac 1201 
Wa Tera Waa edat ea aifieiea  qatenaxiteafianmd: ic 
aa: Weteraeladgar: AcaraaMUaaqega<zal: | 
fafarartianatistnaranr SAMs BfeaonNsa: 1291 


aaa aMaaaea TaNeldtantedaerca: | 
area vet ferdidudt  fecenrmefifida:  wueiror 
sTraaralvehaadeeaet HasidionaeettamAy | 


facet ea Ta eeisime «= aauTeTfegqeney 1221 


Maitreya continued : Severely taunted and ridiculed by the Lord in an angry mood, he 


Dis. 18 BOOK THREE 217 


Be Br Be Ke Be We Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Sr Ke Ke Ke We Ke Ke Kee We Ke Ke He Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Se Wee Re ee He ee He ee He Kee Be Ree He Be eee He He He He He He Wee He Be He We Ke Be Ke He He Ge Bi He Be He Bee Fs He Bee He 





(the demon) waxed violently angry like a serpent which is being played with. (13) Hissing 
indignantly with all his senses shaken by wrath, the Daitya quickly sprang upon Sri Hari and 
dealt Him a blow with his mace. (14) The Lord, however, dodged the violent blow of the mace 
aimed at His breast by the enemy by moving aside a little, just as an accomplished Yogi 
would elude death. (15) Sri Hari now waxed angry and rushed to meet the demon, who, 

taking up his mace again, began repeatedly to brandish it, biting his lips in rage. (16) And 
then with His mace the Lord struck the enemy on his right eyebrow; but skilled as he was 
(ina fight with maces), O gentle Vidura, he intercepted it with his own mace. (17) In this way 
Haryaksa (a synonym of Hiranyaksa) and Sri Hari struck eachother with their huge maces 
in great rage, each seeking his own victory. (18) There was a keen rivalry between the two 
combatants, both of whom had sustained injuries on their body from the blows of each other's 
pointed mace and grew more and more enraged at the smell of blood on their person. In their 
eagerness to win, they were performing manoeuvres of various kinds; and their contest 
presented the sight of an encounter between a pair of bulls for the sake of a cow. (19) 

Brahma, surrounded by sages (Marici and others), came (there) to witness the combat, O 
Vidura (a descendant of Kuru), of Hiranyaksa (son of Diti) and the Supreme Spirit—who had 

assumed the semblance of a boar by dint of His Maya (deluding potency) and who 

represents the various Yajnas (sacrifices) on His person—both of whom bore enmity to each 

other for Earth's sake. (20) When the worshipful Brahma, who was followed by thousands 

of sages and seers, saw that Hiranyaksa (son of Diti) was full of manliness and devoid of fear, 

had returned the blows of the Lord and possessed irresistible prowess, he spoke to Lord 

Narayana, the earliest Boar (as follows): (21) 


w a ta tanmefeqeqhaem! fant ata warmers 122! 


WNT Psachespaciagausyr: lsraaasfarat  ctendeft cave: 1231 

wt onrfat «ocd Pregame siels seaea aenssaitaraierdy 12% | 

qa waaay ald i aetl Weal qe: ial ea Aaa Masigatad 124! 

WaT GAA BAA Slwawtaemd wai saad dale Aa Waarag 126! 

agaist art aleftet em! Rar aed Weer em eee 1201 

fest wat fafed qamaarefed: wan fame ga gar clerafe adifir ic 

sft started AS UAE eda IdiaeHs fewaraaesereanstare: 1221 

Brahma said: Having secured a boon from me, my lord, this demon is proving a constant 
annoyance (to the universe) and is not only trespassing against but causing fear and doing 
injury to the gods, that have sought protection in Your feet, as well as to the Brahmanas, the 
cows and other innocent beings and, having no rival to contend with him, goes about the 
spheres in search of one. (22-23) Play not with him, as a child may with an enraged 
serpent—him who is skilled in conjuring tricks, arrogant, self-willed and most wicked. (24) 
Presiding over Your own Maya (wonderful divine energy), slay this sinful demon, O immortal 
Lord, before he grows formidable with the approach of an hour which is favourable to 
him. (25) The most dreadful hour of twilight, which is ruinous to the worla, my lord, is fast 
approaching, O Soul of the universe. Be pleased, therefore, to bring victory to the gods (by 
getting rid of this pestilence). (26) The auspicious period, known by the name of Abhijit (so 
opportune for victory), which commenced at midday, has now all but passed. Therefore, in 


the interest of us, Your friends, pray, dispose of this formidable foe quickly. (27) This fellow has, 
luckily enough for us, come of his own accord to You, his death, ordained (by Yourself). 











; 


218 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 19 


Be Ree Re BeBe Ree Re Re Re eR RE RE RE RE RE RE RE RE RE BERET RE RE RERE TRE R RT RE Be RRE RE RERE Ree RERE RE M MeEBe BEE Ke Kee Se Be We Mr ee Kee Me He Ree Hr Hr He Be Se Br Sr Hr Hr Wr He Hr ky 





Therefore, exhibiting Your prowess, kill him in this duel and establish the worlds in 
peace. (28) 


Thus ends the eighteenth discourse, forming part of the story relating to Hiranyaksa's 
death in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SARTRE 
PII SENSES OP 


ST Nohlataat Sela: 


Discourse XIX 


Death of Hiranyaksa 
WAq Sarg 

saan «faker freictergd aa:isee Samer aqua atsadid! @ | 
dd: aa HSA TATA PATA: | 2 
a adit aa wea faeat wach faafoiaodsst degreased | 3 
@ dal wandiais a aaa fara ama a Wa et fagaed sentaas x | 
Teqeufagrat «= sCleleetSCsCédfefe  aaraTa sSNA Tera: 1 & | 

qd aah ferent iweueeqem fags 

faal araisdeet Gaui amend af asd welfa & | 

a oa farang cafe wma | 

faced areauftydisat = eT A ICHTGRTEAL | 0 | 
Ices «= awa ef sy Mea eciiseleetSie | ¢ | 
Udl Ga ai MeN Ware Arde: i cleat feed: Wal: Bete! < | 
ae wmgqeataed dea a fiitefai sam: a dal Yass Sad YR 120! 
at A studdi dled wa AAA: | sae Sloat sal Tectlta Gari 12e! 
waaiet «86 Sided «= AAT Cs eT: tect crema wftomS ferrets: 1221 
sae fier ae waerrdemiem aaa «gare «fasrenfirary, ae 1231 

deistar «40 Gemeiderfdd 498oadnided: wa  sdlutdtferfa 

an fase fanaa ekde caedademPsra ex 

qa wae agnor wt: saa faaiviqn fay 

Tae: a PSAs Acq Wee eATge: 1241 
aerated: AAdIaiageht: | Ahad AAleh wHlla et ed sa fea: 1261 
saaeergeaaa «= arTeaat | eat at fate oeeren Asada 1291 
Jaqaaa suse: Gaara! feat faatqatart: suv: sfeat sa ec 


Dis. 19)] BOOK THREE 219 


We Br Be Be Be He He Ke Hr Wr Vr Ke Ke BEBE M RB BeBe eH He He He Re Ke AER Re OR Re Re Re BEE AER RRR Re RRR RR Re Re Ree Re Re REECE Re RRR Re Re ERE ERE Be We Ke Be Rr Be Be He He Ke Be Hr 


attpsrrorste alegrrtaaiy: | adhe: qacarghavqarenit ardaad 1221 
Pre: TARA = - ATA a SAS | ferareaat Brae: Blot AAs: 1201 
ae eretercantar: UMAR: | stdaaheRge fer aranshrasrar: 1221 


7 Maitreya continued : Hearing the words of Brahma (the creator), which were free from 
guile and sweet as nectar, the Lord heartily laughed and accepted his prayer with a glance 
laden with love. (1) Thereupon the divine Boar (who had appeared from Brahma's nose) 
sprang and aimed His mace at the chin of His enemy in the form of that demon, who was 
stalking fearlessly before Him. (2) Struck by the demon with his own mace, however, it 
slipped from the Lord's hand and looked splendid as it fell down whirling. This was something 
miraculous as it were. (3) Even though he had an (excellent) opportunity (to hit the Lord), the 
demon refused to strike his unarmed foe and respected the law of a single combat, thereby 
kindling the fury of the Universal Lord. (4) As His mace fell (on the ground) andacry of alarm 
rose (from the witnessing crowd of gods and Rsis), the almighty Lord acknowledged the 
demon's love of righteousness (fair play) and invoked His discus Sudargana. (5) As the 
discus (presently) began to revolve (in the Lord's hand) andthe Lord was contending at close 
quarters with the chief of His attendants, who had now been born as Hiranyaksa (a vile son 
of Diti), there issued from every direction strange expressions uttered by those who were 
witnessing the scene from their aerial cars and had no knowledge of the Lord's real reality, 
saying : “May victory attend You. Pray, despatch him (play no more with him)!" (6) When he 
beheld the Lord, who had eyes as big and lovely as the petals of a lotus, standing in position 
before him, and further saw Him armed with a discus, his senses were overpowered with 
indignation and, hissing (as a serpent) he bit his lips in great resentment. (7) The demon, who 
had fearful tusks, stared at Sri Hari, as though he would burn Him and, springing into the air, 
aimed his mace at Him, exclaiming at the same time: "You are slain." (8) The Lord, who had 
assumed the form of a boar, that represented all the sacrifices, playfully knocked it down with 
His left foot, O saintly Vidura, even as it came upon Him with the force of a tempest, while 
the enemy was still looking on. (9) The Lord then said, “Take up your weapon and try again, 
eager as you are to conquer Me." Challenged in these words, the demon aimed His mace 
(at the Lord) once more and loudly roared. (10) When the Lord saw it flying towards Him, He 
stood firm (where He was) and caught it, even as it came, with the same ease as Garuda 
(the king of the birds) would seize a serpent. (11) The great demon felt humiliated and was - 
put out of countenance when his valour was thus frustrated; and he was reluctant to take 
back the mace which was being offered by Sri Hari. (12) He now took a trident, which was 
rapacious as a flaming fire, for hurling it against the Lord, who was Yajna personified, even 
as one would use spells for a malevolent purpose against a holy Brahmana. (13) Hurled with 
all his strength by the mighty Daitya, the glowing trident shone all the brighter in the sky. Sri 
Hari, however, tore it to pieces with His discus (Sudarsana)—which had a sharp-edged 
rim—even as Indra cut down a wing of Garuda dropped by the latter.” (14) The demon got 
enraged when his trident was cut to pieces by the discus of Sri Hari. He, therefore, advanced 
towards the Lord and, roaring aloud, smote Him with his hard fist on His broad chest, which 
bore the mark of Srivatsa (a curl of white hair), and then went out of sight. (15) Hit in this 
manner by the demon, O Vidura, the Lord, who appeared as the First Boar, did not feel the 
least quaking in any part of His body, any more than an elephant would when struck with a 








y nectar from the gods in heaven, in order to liberate his mother (Vinata) from 


: 7 . Thereupon Indra (the lord of paradise) hurled his 
the thral his stepmother Kadru (the mother of the serpent race) 3) hur 
thindeiieit aan Gana With a view to respecting the infallibility of Indra's weapon, Garuda (who was otherwise invincible, f 


being the Lord's own mount) dropped one of his wings, which was shattered to pieces by the thunderbolt. 


* Once upon a time Garuda snatched awa 








I 
b 
i 
t 
4 


220 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [. Dis. 19 


BERR BRR RRR RR RRR RRR EERE RE REE LER RE RR RR RT AER REBT BE RRR Re Re ROE Re BeBe Re Re Ree Re Be Re Re Be Bee Ke Re Hr Ke kr 


wreath of flowers. (16) He now employed many a conjuring trick against Sri Hari, the Lord 
of Yogamaya (the source of all Mayas), at the sight of which the people were filled with alarm 
and thought the dissolution of the universe was near. (17) Fierce winds began to blow, which 
spread darkness occasioned by dust. And stones came in volleys from every quarter as if 
thrown from slings. (18) The luminaries in the heaven disappeared due to the sky being 
overcast with masses of clouds, which were accompanied by lightning and thunder, and 
frequently rained pus, hair, blood, faeces, urine and bones. (19) Mountains discharging 
weapons of various kinds appeared, O sinless Vidura, as also naked demonesses armed 
with tridents, their hair hanging loose. (20) Most cruel and savage slogans where uttered by 
hosts of Yaksas and Raksasas who were all of a ruffian type and either marched on foot or 
rode on horses or elephants or in chariots. (21) 


Meepdat = Aeaareent «= faarera | GealtRa Wa Meh eft Prat 1 221 
aa fea: aananmee ge any: 1 Ae Aue EAH waa 1231 
faqs SA Wasa ani ealayeaMisy «= agaisafeerd = af: 121 
4 wetiidterd  aneietlen: 1 ator auiqesed GM AIS AEcia: 1241 

a sted faahi gage uftewrqa sae: | 

faaiviargethfarteeisade. Gat Ast fed «| AAT 1261 

fadt Wa  deveadd pieces  utapanay | 

Sse Aled BATA «Stet Sat al A SAA Pfeil 

a afr area wt erata fegmeadt Wye | 

qs «sReM: «Udedl Wa wodeaeet = €1RC! 

at UMetaeT SNGTeNaaa aL OA: Sela: WI Wo & TAH: 1291 


The Lord, who represented all the sacrifices in His person, now discharged His beloved 
discus, Sudarsana, which was capable of dispersing the Mayas (magical forces) displayed 
by the demon. (22) That very moment, all of a sudden, a shudder ran through the heart of 
Diti (Hiranyaksa's mother) as she recalled the words of her lord (the sage KaSyapa); and 
blood flowed from her breasts. (23) When he saw his magic forces dispelled, he went into 
the presence of Lord Kesava once more and, full of rage, encompassed Him within his arms 
(in order to crush Him; but to his great amazement and chagrin) he found the Lord standing 
outside the circle of his arms.(24) As he (now) began to strike the Lord with his fists, which 
were harder than adamant, Lord Adhoksaja (who is beyond sense-perception) slapped him 
in the root of his ear, even as Indra (the lord of the Maruts or gods of winds) hit the demon 
Vrtra (son of Twasta, the architect of the gods). (25) Though struck indifferently by the Lord, 
the conqueror of all, the demon's body began to wheel, the eye-balls bulged out of their 
sockets, and he fell down dead like a gigantic tree uprooted by the wind, his arms, legs and 
hair on the head broken and scattered. (26) Brahma and others, who had now arrived (on 
the spot) saw the demon with fearful tusks lying on the ground, biting his lips, the glow on 
his face yet unfaded, and admiringly said, “Oh, who could meet such a (blessed) death! (27) 
Struck by a fore-foot of the Lord—whom Yogis meditate upon in seclusion through Yoga in 
the form of abstract meditation, seeking freedom from their limitation, which is unreal—and 
gazing on His countenance, this crest-jewel of Diti's sons has shuffled off his mortal coil ! (28) 
These two demons (Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa) are no other than the Lord's own 
attendants, who have attained to this accursed state (have been born as demons) through 
a curse (pronounced by the sage Sanaka and his three brothers). After going through some 


Dis. 19] BOOK THREE 221 


Br Be Be Be Be Ge Be Be Ke Ke Ke Ke He Ge Be Ke He Ke Ke re Be Ke He Ke Be Ke Ke He Ke Ke Ke He Be Ke He Ke He Bee Ke He Be Ke He HE He Ke BEE BeBe Bee eM Be Ke Be Bee Bee E LE BLE LEE LEE REE EEE BE BBR 





more births they will return to their (divine) Abode." (29) 
Ca Hq: 
TH wRsfaeara  fert deneaada! 
et aise SIMedecaena «6 aaitet «frie: 1301 


The gods addressed the Lord: Hail, hail to You, the source of all sacrifices; who have 
assumed a form consisting of pure Sattva (goodness) for the purpose of maintaining this 
world. Fortunately for us this demon, who was a torment to the worlds, has been slain (by 
You) and we too, O Lord, are at ease (now) through devotion to Your feet. (30) 


«HAT Soa 
wT fecnenaaiart a aefaar  afeafeqenc | 
wT Is) ated «= aif: «= encferpafefe: 1321 
wa aarpenaie a oR: pada faa Aiea 
wet fewer santaemett «= wert aiteatfartrene: 1321 
Maitreya continued: Having thus killed Hiranyaksa of irresistible prowess, SriHari, who 
had appeared in the form of the First Boar, retired to His own (divine) realm, which is the 
abode of uninterrupted joy; while Brahma (who has his seat on a lotus) and others extolled 
him. (31) | have narrated to you, as | was told (by my preceptor), O good friend, the exploits 
of Sri Hari, who came down to the material plane (in the form of the divine Boar), and how 
that Hiranyaksa of mighty valour was knocked down by Him like a plaything in that great 
encounter. (32) 
Ud sald 
sft HISNARSNATATA «| Wah atAISSTS UL GH AeuPtadt fest 1331 
SAA WUaRlAMyeaea 9 AA! Saye Uetite: sacaiget fee Ga: 13¥1 
ay = ° e e 4 1 ° > ° 7 7 13Gl 
a FERRARI: | ds: aH A Bad aUmeqrarefy: 1361 
a a faamaad verad famifed aurea: | 
suit Wades  faqead saan fem: 1301 
Uarnerquaness «6 fa a TRC GTR | 
mibsaront «afr aida) aRreausa Tite aT 1321 
sft SRRMTAaa HSI TRA Seca qty fewraaraset aAAsraeaeMseaa: 12 | 
Sita continued : Hearing the narrative of the Lord as it was told by the sage Maitreya 
(son of Kusaru), Vidura, who was a great devotee of the Lord, derived supreme delight, O 
holy sage. (33) One rejoices to hear the life-account even of virtuous souls of sacred renown 
and extensive fame; there will be no limit, then, to one’s joy on hearing the story of the Lord 
who bears the mark of Srivatsa. (34) The Lord quickly delivered from a difficult situation the 
lordly elephant who, when seized by an alligator, fixed his mind on His lotus-feet in the midst 
of his female companions, who all shrieked (in distress). (85) What grateful soul is there, who 
would not devote oneself to such a master, who can be easily pleased by guileless men 
resorting exclusively to Him for protection, though the unrighteous find it difficult to propitiate 
Him. (36) He, O holy Brahmanas, is speedily and completely absolved even from the sin 


attaching to the murder of a Brahmana, who listens to, sings or even applauds the story of 
the most wonderful pastime, viz., the destruction of Hiranyaksa at the hands of the Lord, who 











LPR ee, 
De OE LENE": 


222 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


PRR RRR RRL RL RR RR RR RR RE RRR BB BT Ee Re RR Re RE REM Re Be He Re Re Re BER BeBe BERE BE Re KER Re Re He Be 


assumed the form ofa boar for the sake of rescuing the earth. (37) This most sacred narrative 
confers extraordinary merit, wealth, fame, longevity and all the objects of one’s desire. On 
the field of battle it promotes the strength of one's vital organs and organs of action. Those 
who listen to it at the last moment of their life find their asylum in Lord Narayana, O dear 
Saunaka ! (38) 


Thus ends the nineteenth discourse entitled the "Death of Hiranyaksa" 
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SSSR 


HAA faariseara: 


Discourse XX 


The various species of living beings created by Brahma 
Sad 


Tel simmer ala Glasal aq: 1 wrediase gifs amar 2 | 

Si AMNtad: HIN: Giada Peal aoaneataa i 2 | 

gaddietant «feat C(t: | PTT sa: HOT aise: | 3 | 

fer-agesaat fawienidaaa | sama patad «strata «= aafaaa X | 

aah: Uda: YA Wad WAI: HAM: | Sat Wet salaelet: Weraqensra: | & | 

ma: aida ag a caidettenedu: | tae: al q gad ecleoryd far! & | 
Saunaka Said : “Having secured a foothold in the shape of the earth, O son of Suta 

(Romaharsana), what means did Swayambhuva Manu adopt for evolving the other crea- 
tures that were yet to see the light ? (1) Vidura was a great devotee of the Lordand adevoted 
friend of Sri Krsna. He abandoned his own elder brother (Dhrtarastra) along with the latter's 
sons (Duryodhana and others) because they had offended against Sri Krsna (by turning a 
deaf ear to His counsel and behaving inimically towards His beloved Pandavas). (2) Sprung 
from the loins of the sage Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa), he was in no way inferior to him in glory. 
Nay, he was devoted to Sri Krsna with all his being and attached to His devotees. (3) Further 
cleansed of all his sins by resorting to sacred places, what else did he enquire of the sage 
Maitreya, the foremost among the knowers of Truth, on meeting him at Kusavarta 
(Haridwara), where he was living ?(4) In the course of their conversation, O Sita, there must 
have proceeded sacred stories centring round the lotus-feet of Sri Hari, and hence capable 
of wiping out all sins like the waters of the holy Ganga, that have their source in those very 
feet. (5) May God bless you, please narrate to us those very stories of the Lord, whose 
noble deeds are the only achievements worth glorifying. What man who has his aesthetic 
sense developed would feel sated with drinking in the nectar-like stories of Sri Hari's 
pastimes?” (6) 

wags: 8 9S 9 ANee: | aaa «= erat i 9 | 
. Questioned thus by the sages staying in Naimisa, Ugrasrava, with his mind fixed on the 
Lord, said to them, “Listen!” (7) 


Dis. 20 ] BOOK THREE 223 


Be Wr Be Be Se Ke We Ke Ge Ke We Se Be We We Be Ke We Ge Ke Kr He We He Ke Kee He Ke Me Ke He Ke Ge Ke Ke Ke Ke We Me Ke Ke Br Ke Be Ke Kee Ke Be He Ke Ke Be Gee Ke Bee Be Be Be Be Vi Be Ke Be Be Be Be Fe Me Be Ve Ht He We Be Bt Br He Ke 
Ud sald 
adder: waa fara Weg Wider! 
elet fRumenmaqa et wuanaest fame Rd: 121 
Sita continued - Vidura (a descendant of king Bharata) was delighted to hear the story 
of the Lord who, having assumed by His own divine will the semblance of a boar, had enacted 
the sport of lifting up the earth from the bottom of the ocean and indifferently killed the demon 


Hiranyaksa. He then spoke to the sage as follows. (8) 
fagt sara 
serait: GET seieet sera fears A saa sagrermartiad! ¢ | 
a ataent fam aq aes Aid a we sneaeHMtaeaag 120! 
Gigi: faags wat sat mdi onethadedt: ad sé MI aneHcds 122! 
Vidura Said : Knowing as you do things unperceived by us, tell me, O holy sage, what 
Brahma (the lord of Prajapatis) did for the purpose of creating living beings after evolving the 
Prajapatis (lords of created beings). (9) How did the sage Marici and the other Brahmanas as 
well as Swayambhuva Manu evolve the creation in obedience to Brahma's command ? (10) 
Did they evolve it in conjunction with their wives or remaining independent in their action or 
did they all jointly produce it ? (11) 
WAY sara 


cea | ofdaeeinr 9 oonafeor «a aatlsetad «Aerie Wo 1221 
WIA Hed kafost caalicdiL| Aidt: Past wdefdaadtA ust: 1231 
alfa denen: apranaits atten | Gea eda AAUSAaTYSI 1 2X1 
Asaapferaioe suena fuaH: 1a 4 a adaeeacdancdhala: 1241 
wa oa «= aeerrenfedifaia.1 adsitafiratel «aa Manya]e 1261 
Maitreya replied: When the equilibrium of the three Gunas (constituting Prakrti or 
Primordial Matter) got disturbed through the agency of Prarabdha (the destiny of the 
Jivas)—the working of which is difficult to comprehend—the Supreme Spirit presiding over 
Prakrti and Kala (the Time-Spirit), as well as through mere proximity to the Lord, the Mahat- 
tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence) was evolved therefrom. (12) From the Mahat- 
tattva—in which the element of Rajas predominates—as impelled by the destiny of the Jivas, 
was evolved the Ego (the source of the five elements), which is of three kinds (according as 
it is predominated by Sattva, Rajas or Tamas); and the Ego in its turn evolved many a group 
of five principles such as the five gross elements* (ether and so on). (13) Severally unable 
to produce the material universe, they combined with the help of the divine energy and were 
(now) able to evolve a shining egg. (14) For over one thousand years the egg lay on the 
waters of the causal ocean in a lifeless state. After that the Lord entered it (as its presiding 
Deity). (15) From the navel of the Lord (as presiding over the egg) sprang a lotus that 
possessed the dazzling splendour of a thousand suns and was intended to be the abode of 
all living beings. Brahma himself emanated from this very lotus.(16) 


Asast wradt a: Wa Aloo aaa amg fda dear ar iz! 


* The other groups of five principles besides the five gross elements are : the five subtle elements, the five senses of 
perception, the five organs of action and the two groups of five deities severally presiding over the five senses and the five 





organs. 











P 
‘ 
ee 
he 
4 
i 
} 


224 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


Sake T TAREE RARER SRR AR READER ARGRA TA EEAEREREREORERENE RRR ER RAR eR eee 
Gases fat  ugaalumaa:iafaneaita ast Atel aeraa: ie 
facasiem: ama afwadesmeisyedenaifa «uh ageaqsar eel 
aqqeagera od seafigag: ar tad saat: atqeiddt: 1201 
Saale «Ua Al Al Wad adistel A senate wm ga ayia ire 


When the Lord who sleeps on the waters forming the support of the cosmos entered his 
heart (as the Inner Controller), Brahma (the creator) started creating hierarchy of the various 
worlds according to the plan evolved by him in the preceding Kalpas. (17) At the very outset 
he evolved out of his shadow (ignorance) the five varieties of Avidya (Nescience), viz.., 
Tamisra, Andhatamisra, Tamas, Moha and Mahamoha* (18) Brahma threw off that body of 
his (in the form of a shadow); for he did not like it, made up as it was of darkness (ignorance). 
The Yaksas and Raksasas (who had sprung therefrom) took possession of that body, which 
continued in the form of night and is the source of hunger and thirst. (19) Overpowered by 
hunger and thirst, they ran to devour him from all sides. "Spare him not (out of compassion, 
thinking that he is ourfather); eat him up!"t they all cried, oppressed as they were with hunger 
and thirst. (20) The god (Brahma) grew nervous (at this unexpected turn) and pleaded with 
them, "Pray, eat me not; but spare me. For you have all-been born as sons to me, O Yaksas 
and Raksasas!" (21) 

tad: WW a at dem wadisgerei a steidaadt fagst at wae: 1221 
TARAS: Bat wlasleaia wi sleuda Agararfwafet 1231 
at 4 a  wWamattwua: | sduanena Hal Ut: aA I Rx! 
a Wat ate wallet efi sea WMATA AMAA aaa | 2G I 
Ue At Gade SAUTE Ge: | at sat ated UT sareHMara Al sa 1261 
aac: fo cle fest sae: | aan: sae aq iri 
shining with glory he created, before all others, the divinities that had the element of 
sativa or goodness predominant in them. When Brahma dropped (even) that effulgent 
form (out of which he had evolved those divinities, and) which now figured as daytime, the 
gods sportfully took possession of it. (22) The glorious Brahma (next) evolved from his 
hinder partt the demons, who are excessively fond of women. Being very lustful they came 
up to him for copulation. (23) The worshipful Brahma first laughed (at their stupidity); but 
finding the shameless Asuras close upon him, he grew indignant and ran out of fear in great 
haste. (24) He approached Sri Hari, the Bestower of boons, who dispels the agony of those 
running up to Him for succour, and who in order to show His grace to His devotees 
reveals Himself in a form answering their conception. (25) "Protect me, O Supreme 
Spirit! | created these beings as directed by You, but these sinful creatures are out 
to copulate with me, my Lord. (26) You are the only one capable of ending the affliction 
of distressed people as also the one inflicting agony on those who never resort to Your feet 
(for protection).” (27) 





* For the meaning of these terms see verse 2 of Discourse XII above. 

+ Of these two species of living beings those who said "Eat him up! (™114)" were classed as Yaksa; while they who said 
“Spare him ... (z47a)" came to be known as Raksasas. 

+ This is corroborated by the Sruti text: ‘a s7nequagaa’. 





Dis. 20 BOOK THREE 225 


Br Br br br Sr Br Br Br Gr Br Br Kr Ke Ke Hr Br Kr We Br Ke Kr Kr Be Hr He Ke Ke Ke He He He He Be He Be Be Be Ke Be Ke Be Ke He Ke Ke He Hr Be Be Be Ke He Ke Ke We Ke Be Be Ke Be Ke Ke Be He Ke Ke BRAC Kee Ke Gr Be Ge Be He Be He Ke Bee 


asa acd fafamennesta: | faqs arifreet faqurr @ 122! 

The Lord who can distinctly see the mind of others, perceived Brahma's distress 
and said to him, “Cast off this impure body of yours (impure because it has produced 
the libidinous Asuras and excited their passion)!" Thus commanded by the Lord, he 
dropped it. (28) 

a | RURRUTSS «© AafagEcren| aisle A aA 1221 
SAAR S AAA ERTL \Oarat aes feragracierasterary | 30 | 
Tedi sisaissam aterenaaiiiq sae et aa aagg: fara 132! 
Set wel eeinel sen Ad aa:inel amanmammeama  faadh 132! 

(The body thus shuffled off by Brahma took the form of the evening twilight, when the 
day and night meet, and which kindles passion. The Asuras, who are passionate by nature, 
dominated as they are by the element of Rajas, took it for a damsel) whose lotus-feet 
resounded with the tinkling of anklets, whose eyes were wild with intoxication and whose 
hips were covered by a fine cloth, over which shone a girdle. (29) Her breasts were 
projecting upwards because of their clinging to each other, and were too contiguous to 
admit of any intervening space. She had a shapely nose and beautiful rows of teeth; nay, 
a lovely smile played on her lips and she cast a sportful glance (at the Asuras). (30) 
Adorned with dark tresses, she was hiding herself as it were out of shyness. Perceiving 
that girl, O Vidura (an incarnation of Dharma, the god of virtue), the Asuras were all 
infatuated with love. (31) "Oh ! what a beauty ! what a rare self-control! what a budding 
youth ! In the midst of us all, who are passionately longing for her, she is moving about 

like one absolutely free from passion !" (32) 
father age at aeat smal! staan faery prea: 1331 
calfa meta waite at areisa wife i easfavrvasy «= aimat «Ss farareTat 131 
a a aifaanas fesar aasld dala meniscal Ad: 1341 
vea a wala anfett weds wen Wg: Sided Ud | 
ney favielt geemundid warda deme aferaraqe: 136! 
St Wea wea: wad seta sede Yelea: ra 1301 
Indulging in speculations of various kinds about the evening twilight, that appeared to 
them as endowed with the form of a young woman, the Asuras of wicked mind treated her 
with respect and fondly asked her:—(33) "Who are you (by birth)? Whose daughter may you 
be, O pretty one (lit., having thighs smooth and tapering like the stem of a plantain tree)? And 
what can be the object of your coming over here, O proud damsel? Why do you tantalize us, 
luckless as we are, with the priceless commodity of your beauty ? (84) Whosoever you may 
be, O tender girl, we are fortunate in having been able to see you. While playing with a ball 
you agitate the mind of the lookers-on. (35) When you strike the bouncing ball against the 
ground with your hand again and again, O praiseworthy woman, your lotus-feet Stay not at 
one place; oppressed by the weight of your full breasts, your waist gets fatigued and your 
clear vision grows dull as it were. Pray, braid your comely hair.” (36) Thus the Asuras of 
clouded understanding took the evening twilight, that showed itself in the form of a young 
woman, for an alluring damsel and seized her. (37) 


TE MTS | FRUIT | HRT AAS WTA Aaa OTT 1321 








a - 
+ ———— eo ene ae 
r "9 'rP aa gene: on 








226 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


Re Re eRe Re Re Re Re Be Re Re Re RRR RR RE RRR RE RRR RE REE RRR RE RE ERE BE RE RE REE ERE BER BEBE RE BER BEBE EBB BEBE BEBE BE BEBE BEBE BEBE BE Be Be BeBe He Be Br Be Rr Fr 


facest ad at a Sacett ahaa Hrarqia wa aleg: set fagaqgwrTar: 13° | 
With a laugh full of deep significance the worshipful Brahma evolved by his own 
loveliness, which seemed to enjoy itself by itself, hosts of Gandharvas (celestial musicians) 
and Apsaras (dancing girls of heaven). (38) (After that) he gave up that shining and beloved 
form made of moon-light. Viswavasu and the other Gandharvas themselves gladly took 
possession of it. (39) 


Bet yataaraisy §« warerahsur | ferareel Geechee lea ar wag FM 1¥o | 
SEReget at FSU a wat: Pokies sar wey gad | 
AASersaha AAS Waa 1S | 
The glorious Brahma (next) evolved out of his sloth the Bhutas (ghosts) and Pisacas 
(fiends); but he closed his eyes when he saw them stand naked with their hair 
dishevelled. (40) The Bhittas and PisSacas themselves took possession of the body, 
in the form of yawn, thrown off by Brahma, the lord of beings. It is also known as 
sleep, which causes the mouth etc., of living beings to eject running saliva. And 
these very Bhitas and Pisacas attack men who are rendered impure in this way 
and such attack of theirs is spoken of as insanity. (41) 


Se A HII AT ast: | STAT TO faq aetongsay: 12 I 
a snarl a aia faa: sfadieti armas faqs maa afgaad 1x31 
Recognizing himself as full of vigour and energy, the worshipful Brahma, the lord of 

beings, evolved out of his invisible form the hosts of the Sadhyas and the Pitrs (manes). (42) 
The Pitrs themselves took possession of that invisible body, the source of their existence. 
It is through the medium of this invisible body (of the Pitrs) that those well-versed in the ritual 
offer oblations to the Sadhyas and the Pitrs (in the form of their departed ancestors on the 
occasion of Sraddhaetc,). (43) 


far, frarniga friars disged! Mascara ISI 
@ far fauear, SaReTgaaly: | AAAS fala su | 
a ¢ dye et am aamiaifaiya medemansfa adie: ive! 

By his faculty of remaining hidden from view Brahma evolved the species of living 
beings called the Siddhas and the Vidyadharas, and gave them that marvellous form of 
his, known by the name of Antardhana (the faculty of remaining hidden from view). (44) 
One day Brahma (the lord of beings) beheld his own reflection (in water) and, admiring 
himself through that, evolved the Kimpurusas as well as Kinnaras out of that very 
reflection. (45) They took possession of that (shadowy) form, which was left by Brahma. 


That is why they sing his praises by recounting his exploits at daybreak (every morning) 
with their spouses. (46) 


eet aA Aad Wart agai aisqafd meget ge EU: Ixl 
Aseladidd: chan seaeiss Shti al: sada: Ha AMT siieHeN: 1X1 
Once Brahma lay with his body stretched at full length, much concerned overthe fact that 
the work of creation had not proceeded apace, and in a sullen mood shed that body too. (47) 
The hair that dropped from that body (as he apparently pulled them in a fit of excitement) were 
transformed into snakes, dear Vidura; while, even as the body crawled along (with its hands 
and feet contracted), there sprang from it ferocious serpents and Nagas with their necks 








Dis: 21']. “BOOK THREE ~ 227 


DIS. 21-1. 2s awwnandnbabababbeaae hese yee 
dilated in the form of hood. (48) 

Q@ AAA WIA: HapadMaray: | del A Aastha Ata HlHAlaar 1X8 | 

wa: AMisagsicda YL GReAaarl| a SBI A UU BwT: Waar: Seah 1 4o! 

Sel UWSTkas: Und ad aA Haistaten: fear afer alHandale 142! 

are facet gmt atm gamer saitgeddiees: aasifiraat: 36M: 1421 

wage: «= ARTS AR MATAIMaTes: | Gcaferathegaaliaenfackoae 1431 

Sit SAS Tad ASI URASSM Seca FataeHal faaiseara: 120} 

One day, Brahma (the self-born creator) felt as if the object of his life had been 
accomplished; at that time he evolved out of his mind, last of all, the Manus, who promote 
the welfare of the world. (49) To them the self-possessed creator gave his own human form. 
On seeing them (the Manus) those who had been created earlier (viz., the gods, the 
Gandharvas and so on) applauded Brahma (the lord of created beings). (50) "Oh,.creator 
of the universe ! we are glad what you have produced is well done. Since (all) ritual acts (such 
as pouring oblations into the sacred fire) have been placed on a sound footing in this human 
form, we shall all share the sacrificial oblations with it." (51) Having equipped himself with 
austere penance, adoration, Yoga (concentration of mind) and Samadhi (deep meditation) 
accompanied by dispassion etc., and having controlled his senses, Brahma (the first seer) 
evolved the Rsis, his beloved sons. (52) To each one of these the unborn creator gave a part 
of his own body, which was characterized by deep meditation, concentration of mind, 
supernatural power, austerity, adoration and dispassion. (53) 


Thus ends the twentieth discourse in Book Three of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


GIRS OS 


31cm faanseara: 


Discourse XXI 
The sage Kardama practises austere penance and the 
Lord confers a boon on him 
fagt sara 
eeryaet AC: | a: |e Aa aA AePat TT: 1 8 I 
fraaaraet 4 aat «arayaet aiameri aya: aaslad? et! 2 | 
awa a een wercaaif fagqatiuat ssiademt aenel Aaa! 2 | 
qa @ a earn awat areal: | gat aie aki aA ayaa aq x | 
Saal WAR Agraal Al ACU: Ya: | AM Past Ye Geta Wai a Ala |G I 


Vidura said : The line of Swayambhuva Manu was the one most esteemed (by all): Pray, 
give me, Oworshipful sage, an account of that race, the progeny of which multiplied through 
sexual union. (1) (You have already told us that) the two sons of Swayambhuva, Priyavrata — 








228 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis..214 


BERR Re RR RRR Re RAR RR RE RE RE BER RR BER RRR Be BEBE RB BER ROBE RE RE B BE RE Br BE BY Be Br Be BeBe Ke Br Be Hr Hr Br He Hr Sr Br Br Gt Hr Br Be Br Sr Be Br Sr Br Br Sr Ke Br Be Hr Hr Hr 


and Uttanapada, piously ruled over the entire globe with its seven divisions (Dwipas as they 
are called). (2) His daughter, known by the name of Devahiuti, O holy Brahmana, has been 
spoken of by you as the spouse of the sage Kardama, a lord of created beings, O sinless 
one! (3) How many issues did that great Yogi beget through that princess, who was endowed 
with the eight limbs of Yoga (such as the five Yamas and so on)? Pray, tell me all this, keen 
as | am to hear it. (4) Similarly, O holy sage, tell me how the worshipful Ruci (another lord 
of created beings) and Daksa, a son of Brahma (and also a lord of created beings), 
procreated children after securing as their wife the other two daughters of Swayambhuva 
Manu (Akdti and Prastti respectively). (5) 
Sa 
Tat: Ga War wen aauNea: aaa a Ae AAT ari & | 
qa: walter feat wd: iwate ge Yael WAAR! wt 
Wacaal Wear Gena: Ha @liagamra a ad: Weg Ha aelsy: | ¢ | 
Maitreya replied : Commanded by Brahma in the words “Beget children !" the 
worshipful Kardama: practised penance on the bank of the river Saraswati for a period 
of ten thousand years. (6) During that penance the sage Kardama devoutly waited upon 
Sri Hari-the Bestower of blessings on those who flee to Him for protection—through 
various modes of worship accompanied by deep meditation. (7) Pleased (with his 
austerities), O Vidura, the lotus-eyed Lord showed Himself to him at the beginning of 
Satyayuga in a form consisting of His own divine essence, which is ordinarily known only 
through the divine Word (the Vedas). (8) 


a oda fawmeata faquiacesm faericienaacient fawisar ¢ | 
fettet gusiet Warten Adlets AAr-erstferdtaory igo 
faretenumsaistiaest Tedd: | EBT Wsaherdt aaa requ 122 | 
Steaisaayet «9 fatal §«=—|- SATAAIN: | AifSaaunaiticasraren Galeties: 1221 


Kardama beheld the Lord in His purely divine form, effulgent like the sun, wearing 
a garland of white lotuses and water-lilies and clad in spotless (yellow) silk, His lotus 
face fringed with sleek dark locks of curly hair. Adorned with a crown and ear-rings, 
He held His (characteristic) conch, discus (SudarSana) and mace (in three of His hands) 
and a white lily to play with (in His fourth); while His smiling look captivated the heart. 
Having set His lotus-feet on the shoulders of Garuda He stood in the air with a golden 
streak (symbol of Goddess Laksmi) on His breast and the famous Kaustubha gem 
Suspended from His neck. (9Q—11) Having realized the ambition (of his life) and full of 
joy, the sage fell prostrate with his head touching the ground and (rising) began to extol 


the Lord in the following words with a mind naturally full of love and his palms joined 
(in prayer). (12) 





FLSA 
We adethaoaam: walaeameteaa asta: | 
qed | raftiss «= teeta © aT: 1231 
a man ¢ etedead mend  vaferyctay 
Set wmode ast wit arnfrast a Gl: 12x 


Dis. 21 ] ~-BOOK THREE -° 229 


Br Br Be Br Br Sr Be Sr Hr Ke Hr Sr Hr Br He Be Hr Hr Kr Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr Br Br Br Br Be Kr Kr Br Br Kr Ke He He He Hr He He Be Be Ke He He Kr Ke Ke Be He He Be Ke Ke GE EBC He BCA Be BT EER Be BEBE RE BB RR BR Re Be HE 


wat @ we ufalenm: waareiet wed 
SATA Suea: CRAGUTLATST 12% | 
Tae «aerate ae olen: «finer «= Hrmedisqera: | 
we AU wlan adh af a qe qaies! 
wits clea ws fe fra ana 
UREA A MaeMeasarratadasxat: 12191 
1 oo assarfrret  oxaeemt == rad Ss fred | 





ae Aaa sade aga faefera: 1201 

The sage said : Ah! the fruit of our eyes has been fully attained today by beholding 
You, the repository of all goodness, whose sight, O praiseworthy Lord, is coveted even by 
Yogis established in Yoga (deep meditation) after going through higher and still higher 
births. (13) Your lotus-feet are a veritable vessel to take one across the ocean of mundane 
existence. Only they who have been deprived of their senses by Your Maya (deluding 
potency) worship those feet with a view to attaining the trivial and momentary pleasures of 
sense, that can be had even in hell. You, however, O Lord, bestow on them such pleasures 
of sense too. (14) You are a wish-yielding tree, while my heart is impure (tainted by carnality). 
Therefore, desirous of marrying a girl of like disposition, that may prove a veritable cow of 
plenty (yield all the three objects of human pursuit) in my married life, | too have likewise 
sought the shelter of Your feet, which are the source of all blessings. (15) (Constantly) 
smitten by desire, this world, O Lord of the universe, is bound (like a beast) by the cord of 
the word (Veda) uttered by You, the lord of created beings. Following the ways of the world, 
| too, O Embodiment of unalloyed virtue, bear offerings (in the shape of dutiful obedience) 
to You, who appear as Time. (16) Turning their back on worldly-minded men as well as on 
the (human) beasts (like me) who follow them, Your devotees seek (the protection of) Your 
feet, that afford shelter like an umbrella (against the sun of metempsychosis), and meet the 
requirements of the body (in the shape of hunger, thirst and so on) by drinking the inebriating 
nectar of Your praises uttered before one another. (17) Your wheel (in the shape of Time), 
which has three navels (in the shape of three divisions of the year, consisting of four months 
each) rotates round the axle of the imperishable Brahma; it has thirteen spokes (representing 
thirteen months, including the additional month intercalated every third year), three hundred 
and sixty joints (corresponding to the same number of days comprised in a year), six rims 
(in the shape of the six seasons) and numberless leaves (in the shape of moments) carved 
On it. Though cutting short the span of life of the entire creation by its revolution, this wheel 
of tremendous velocity cannot touch the life-span of these (Your devotees). (18) O Lord, 
though one (without a second), You assume in Yourself the Yogamaya (Your wonderful 
creative energy), which is no other than You, with a view to creating the universe, and with 
the help of potencies like Sattva etc., (emanating from the said Yogamaya), bring forth and 
preserve and will then reabsorb the universe into Yourself, even as the spider SPS a 





- —— 








230 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 24: 


BOR Br Be Be RR Re Re Re Re BRE RE BEE RE RRB BRE BRE BR BOR Re RE Re Re BE Ae ERE Re HL Br Br He Be BY Re Hr Hr Be Br Br He Kr Br Hr Br Br Be Br Br SR RR RRR AR RR RAH Re 
LL EEE EEE se, 


cobweb, maintains it and then swallows it up. (19) Although (we know) it is not liked by You, 
O Supreme Lord, that You should provide us (Your devotees) by dint of Your Maya (deluding 
potency), with the pleasures of sense, let them come to us for our ultimate good (final 
beatitude), when You have appeared before us in a form adorned with a splendid wreath of 
Tulasi (basil) leaves—a form which looks finite through Maya. (20) 


Although by virtue of Your Self-Realization You have ever ignored the consequences of 
Your activity, You have conducted the affairs of the world by Your own Maya (sportive will) 
and shower the desired blessings even on those who adore You with some interested 
motive. | repeatedly bow to You, whose lotus-feet are worthy of reverence to all. (21) 


CATA 
saeieilch SOA SSAA A ATATA VTS aaa | 
qauiaanrae Waar: Jahadidiaurawrey: 1221 
Maitreya resumed: Sincerely extolled in the aforesaid words, Lord Visnu, (whose navel 


is distinguished by a lotus and) who shone on the shoulders of Garuda, replied in accents 
sweet as nectar, His eyebrows gracefully moving as He regarded the sage with a smile full 


of affection. (22) 
SPT AT TATA 
fafeat da Aa A Gta anal adi aedarmaneadad Afeld: 1231 
Ia Wq yaa Besmeaa nado vafetgiad af ayfareriex! 
seated: AMAT ACA Se: | Aallad ASS Met AA Mtat AE, 124 | 
a de fax weiftdiger eaaecar! srareta feqareat ual afefae: 1261 
Tee 8 aaserpIbad Ta uit cTeeaEaTa A wit 121 
Gated ad gad aM Uae a al aelquay: ara vreata 12cl 
a ad sneyd did aan safaeta i did ada maa snereraaraissara: 1221 
a ad aes feet a sara: iat diefmantaraeat at soa 130! 
Pal CA A slay cel AAA | AAA Ae Sel SAAMI Ala AMT 132 | 
Ue Mo agleil AEMida at eaeai sore aaefear 32 
The Lord said : Having come to know what was in your mind, | have already arranged that 
for which you have worshipped Me well through discipline of the mind and senses etc. (23) 
Worship offered to Me by those who have solely fixed their mind on Me, particularly by people 
like you, O lord of created beings, can never goin vain. (24) (You know) Emperor Swayambhuva 
Manu (son of Brahma), who is celebrated for his righteous acts, rules over the earth bounded 


by the seven oceans, having his seat in Brahmavarta.* (25) Accompanied by his spouse, Queen 
Satarupa, that royal sage, who knows the secret of Dharma (right conduct), will come to see you, 





* The ternitorial limits of Brahmavarta (the modern Kuruksetra) have been specified as below :— 
Meadigieciesttanteacy 1d catidd esi wenad wae 1 
“The tract lying between the two heavenly rivers, Saraswati and Drsadvati, and owing its existence to the gods, is called 
Brahmavarta.” 


Dis. 21 ] BOOK THREE _.-. 231 


SSB R BB Be BeBe Be Be Be ee BB ee fe et tf eS i ei fb etre tte tet 
O holy Brahmana, the day after tomorrow and will give away his dark-eyed daughter—who has 
attained the marriageable age, is possessed of anoble character and commendable virtues and 
is on the look-out for a match—to you, who are (in everyway) worthy of her, O lord of created 
beings. (26-27) Being Just the type on which you have set your heart all these long years, that 
princess, O holy Sage, will soon be yours and will serve you to your heart's content. (28) She will 
bring forth nine daughters out of the seed sown in her by you, and through the daughters sprung 
from your loins sages (like Marici) will duly beget children. (29) And, with your heart cleansed by 
properly carrying out My command and having resigned to Me the fruit of all your acts, you will 
finally attain to Me. (30) Showing compassion to living beings (in your married life), you will attain 
Self-Realization; and, giving assurance of Safety to all (as a recluse), you will perceive your own 
selfas well as the universe identified in Me and Myself in you. (31) Manifesting a part of My divine 
Being through your wife Devahtti, along with your nine daughnters, O great sage, | shall instruct 
her in the system of philosophy (known by the name of sankhya) that deals with the ultimate 
principles or categories (such as Prakrti, Purusa, ISwara and so on). (32) 


WAY Saray 

Wa AANA Wa SeMast: sma frgara: eran offre 1331 

Prttarcterer Aaa aA: 
Tenuta UALS earrqetoranrs 13% | 
Maitreya went on : Having thus spoken to him (the sage Kardama), the Lord, who 
reveals Himself only when the senses are turned inward, departed (for His own Abode, 
Vaikuntha) from (his hermitage on the strand of) the lake called Bindusarovara, which was 
encircled by the river Saraswati. (83) While the sage stood looking on, the Lord left by the 
path leading to Vaikuntha—a path which is extolled by all great Siddhas—listening to the 
hymns forming the basis of the Samaveda and uttered by the wings” of Garuda (the lord of 

the feathered kingdom). (34) 


aq wafer Base wea wage: | set a fagata a oles Sita 1341 
Tq: Qe wWansaisar ema «ai geat aed: udewdt 1361 
Ter erase War aaa! sues YA: WredaAts ALIZVl 
aRaq oo unadt «96 Aaeaaferea: | poet Tie SHaT RT 1321 


——e , AMAA | AeaeteTearTS a atch ee, ISI 
Malach allcnch lsHonat: | HENGE IATA ALA ISQI 


Even after the departure of the Lordthe worshipful sage Kardama stayed (in his hermitage) 


On the strand of the Bindusarovara, awaiting the time (predicted by the Lord). (35) (On this 


Side), Swayambhuva Manu with his spouse (Satarpa) mounted his goldplated chariot and, 
d Rathantara, the two metrical divisions of Samaveda, form the two wings of 


* : ~{ ° rhad an 
The Sruti says :“qexeat sat" (BE ata itself that the hymns of the Samaveda proceed from the 


Garuda). Itis mentioned at more than one places in the Bhagav 
wings of Garuda whenever he takes a flight. 








232 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 21 


BeBe Re Re RR Re eRe RR RR RR RRR RRR Ree Re Re RE RE Re RY Re RT Re eee Re eee eee Be Re We Ke Me Ke We Se We Se He Fe Hr He Ke Be Ke We We Ke Be Ke Ge Ke Re Ke Ke Ke He He wy, 





taking his daughter (Devahtti) along with him and journeying all over the globe, reached 
the aforementioned hermitage of the sage (Kardama)—who had just completed his vow 
(of austerity)—on the very day foretold by the Lord, O Vidura. (36-37) The holy 
Bindusarovara—which overflowed with the water of the river Saraswati and was resorted 
to by hosts of eminent sages, and whose water was not only wholesome but also sweet 
as nectar—was so-called because drops of tears had fallen thereon from the eyes of the 
Lord, overwhelmed as he was by extreme compassion directed towards the sage, who had 
sought His protection. (88-39) The lake was rich in fruits and flowers of all seasons inasmuch 
as it was surrounded by clusters of sacred trees and creepers affording shelter to holy beasts 
and birds that uttered various cries, and was adorned with rows of forest trees. (40) It 
resounded with the notes of overjoyed birds and was the scene of the humming of intoxicated 
bees; merry, peacocks proudly danced (in the forest surrounding the lake) and merry 
cuckoos called one another (by their sweet notes).(41) The lake was hemmed round by 
Kadamba, Campaka, Asoka, Karafija, Bakula, Asana, Kunda, Mandara, Kutaja and young 
mango trees, and echoed with the pleasing notes of Karandavas (a species of duck), Plavas, 
swans, ospreys, water-fowls, cranes, Cakrawakas and Cakoras. (42-43) And it was infested 
with deer, boars, porcupines, Gayals (a species of wild animals closely resembling the cow), 
elephants, baboons, lions, monkeys, mongooses and musk-deer.(44) 


Slasaiitefaeiers: «= eles: Ieeet WaT ae RTIRIAIS4 | 
faa ager quem fami ataad wad: fereraretactenare, | 
ACAIAT AHA A SEI 
Mal Usenet wes dkaraismdira  afed aereomeendy ive! 
aMestquand qed Wr Wt: 1 arden VAT SIA AAMT 1 SS 1 
Entering that most sacred spot with his daughter (Devahtuti) and going near the sage, the 
first monarch (Swayambhuva Manu) saw him sitting there (in his hermitage), having 
propitiated the sacred fire (by pouring oblations into it). He shone most brilliant with his body, 
which, though engaged in austere penance for a long time, was not much emaciated 
because the Lord had cast His affectionate glance at him and he had also quaffed with his 
ears the nectar flowing from the moon-like words of the Lord. The sage was of high stature, 
had eyes big as the petals of a lotus, wore matted locks (on his head), was clad in rags and 
looked untidy like an unpolished gem. (45—47) Seeing the monarch come to his hermitage 


and bowing before him the sage greeted him (with benedictions) and received him with due 
honour. (48) 


Jeera 89a 89 Ma: | Ae WTaalesidee Boater Fre 1x8! 
qi denn ea adi Bao a! ana aad aed et: afmle ulead 1uol 
aisch-gataaresal AMM TATA | SOG AMAT STAC AS Baa A AA: 1421 
a adel waren sat aformonitad frepstaventeust WA ATAAASTL 1421 
wera «86aaees )6=— a: fad 4ogedi at adeeqifia 143 
dead Oda: Wa avismaern: | wash wer, fe aa aeiy: 14x! 
sada eT wigueseriia: | aM aia cleniss SEERA fergattea 144 
saa ged al ak aad afeermd:idga feictha safagemme eet i4e 
ft Arrerad ASM RAs Sieaa qian wepferanseara: 122 | 


When the king had sat down calm and collected after receiving the sage's attentions, the 


a 


Dis. 22 ] BOOK THREE 233 


ge Be We Be He Re BEBE He Ne HEHE BEE PEW Me He He He He Re Ke He Re RE Me He Ke REE HE RERE RE ME MORERE RE RE HERE ME HERE HERE RE ME Re Re Re He eRe Re Re RCRA RERCRE RE REM REREBEBEREBERE REAP HERE BE RE 


latter, who recalled the instructions of the Lord, spoke to him (as follows), delighting him with 
his soft accents : (49) "The tour undertaken by you, O lord, is surely intended to protect the 
virtuous and kill the wicked, embodying as you do the protecting energy of Sri Hari. (50) It 
is yOu who assume the forms of the sun-god, the moon-god, the god of fire, Indra (the lord 
of paradise), the wind-god, Yama (the god of punishment), Dharma (the god of piety) and 
Varuna (the god presiding over the waters), as and when necessary. Hail to you, who are 
no other than Lord Visnu. (51) If you do not go about (the world), like the sun, in your 
bejewelled chariot—that ever leads you to victory—twanging your fierce bow, inspiring 
terrorin the heart of the wicked by (the presence of) your very chariot, taking a huge army 
(behind you) and shaking the terrestrial globe by the tread of your hosts, ali the moral laws 
governing the various Varnas (grades of society) and Asramas (stages in life) and made by 
the Lord Himself, O king, will be broken that very moment by impious men, which will be a 
deplorable State of things. (52—54) Nay, unrighteousness will flourish on account of 
grasping and unruly men. If you give up all thought of the world, it will fall into the clutches 
of impious men and perish. (55) Nevertheless | ask you, O valiant king, the purpose for which 
you have come here; with a glad heart we shall meet your wishes." (56) 


Thus ends the twenty-first discourse in Book Three of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


st Fret Ft F5 
0DOYD RII OS 


SID gifaanseara: 


Discourse XXII 


The sage Kardama accepts the hand of Devahtti 
TAT Sara 


WanifatpdrarerpoTeHatear Qaaiadis sa a aneundqa 2121 
Maitreya continued : The emperor felt abashed as it were to hear his exalted virtues 
and exploits thus extolled and replied to the sage, who was leading a retired life (as 


follows): (1) 
sake hota Beh 
Wergsinadyaat GUAT | Sala ae Teh eS, 12 
ACURA: Aeaaea,—«(<é‘éi:*C COC IS Stara 1 3 | 
ial DANA Hel aa A Wald: | Talat Seta ea: A a: Patel: | xX | 
qa wesiteakeat A adden: | anad wa Seat adare fear: 1 & | 
fasan A sar sel seal alse | Epa Ula: TIS Viet A vara: ree | & t 
fom wanheisé pase dei smgqd: auieestsr fesarerdifiz: 1 © | 
The Manu said : The Cosmic Being, who is Veda personified, evolved you (the 
Brahmanas), rich in austere penance, learning and Yoga (concentration of mind), and 
averse to the pleasures of sense, from his mouth for the protection (continuance) of his own 
self in the form of the Vedas. (2) And for the protection of the Brahmanas the same 
thousand-footed Being evolved us (the Ksatriyas) from His thousand arms. Hence they 
speak of the Brahmana race as His heart and the Ksatriya race as His outer limbs (arms). (3) 
That is why the Brahmana and the Ksatriya protect each other as well as their own self; 
while, as a matter of fact, the Lord Himself, who is both the cause and the effect and yet 
immutable, protects them (through each other). (4) All my doubts have been resolved by 
your very sight inasmuch as your holiness has of your own accord lovingly pointed out the 


[564] B. M. 10— 





234 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


Be Fr We Pr Ke We Ke Pe Ke Be He Hee Se Ge We Gee We Be Ve Ve Ke We Fe We We He Wer He Wows we Se We Se Me Me We He ee eee Meee Mee Me Be ee Be Be Me Me Be Vee We ee We We He Be He Be We Be We Be We He We We Hr dre, 
wee eee SSS ee a ae ee 


duties of a king who is anxious to protect his subjects. (5) It is my good fortune that | have 
been able to see you; for you cannot be easily perceived by those who have not subdued 
their mind. And | am all the more fortunate in that | have touched with my head the blessed 
dust of your feet. (6) Luckily enough | have been instructed by you (in the duties of kings) 
and thus a great favour has been bestowed on me; and thank God | have listened with open 
(eager) ears to your charming words. (7) 


a wareqacukfeerert  wnistqada dae sift wom qi | 
faadead: Wad dem awaistawta alt am aa: atequnief: 1 et 
al dq Wad: eMeyqaraaure saya  waeatdlepdisyar igo 
vents fReaa sgavedt wi aaieadect a Teng wig ie 
saat fe we sfaaet a aeMdisit fomage ames fe WG: 1221 
qa saan alammivarads ailad dae: eatd AMsaqa a: 1231 
ae wayua fag faa aqua sacaqupain: sat siya Aiexi 


Be graciously pleased to listen, O sage, to the prayer of my humble self, troubled in mind 
due to affection for my daughter (Devahtuti). (8) This daughter of mine, a sister to Priyavrata 
and Uttanapada, is on the look-out for a match worthy of her in point of age, character and 
good qualities etc. (9) The moment she heard from the sage Narada of your noble character, 
learning, comely appearance, young age and other virtues, she fixed her mind on you. (10) 
Therefore, accept her (as your wife), O chief of the Brahmanas, since | offer her with 
reverence (to you) and because she is in everyway fit to be your helpmate in (the discharge 
of) your household duties. (11) It is not commendable—even on the part of one who is 
absolutely free from attachment, much less of him who is addicted to the pleasures of 
sense—to spurn an object of desire that has come of itself. (12) He who rejects an object 
offered to him and begs it of a miser loses his widespread reputation and his pride is humbled 
by the disrespectful behaviour of others. (13) | heard of you, O wise man, that you were 
prepared to marry. Iherefore, accept her hand, which is being offered by me, since you have 
not taken a vow of perpetual celibacy. (14) 


FATEATA 
Tedgleniseirm aA  dalesiti staaqedisararn aarfent fafa: 194! 
aa: a Waratea ASEM: Aq: aararafaant  sdte: | 
@ Wa a ada aia waa aren fede feramiest 
a wags aurea fanisdi agafageraiiq 





fanraqdiodcatigamitenta aMigayeeal: 12191 
ai sear MoM MeaMAAatAALTNEST, | 


aa Waledue: Gat aml Aneta getsttanieci 
3 «UT «6a at Css fayeneraratt 9 
at rat UE ae AAisfafeery 188 | 
adisuatgaiae «6 fafa «SC eed SC s—Cislté oT I 
wsrader «|= COfae i TOT AMAA: NRO! 
The sage replied : Certainly | have a desire to marry and your daughter too has not yet 


been affianced (to anyone else). Hence our marriage according to (what is known as) the 
Brahma* method (the best of all methods) will be quite in the fitness of things. (15) That desire 
rere e ee een ee ee 


* The Brahma form of marriage is that in which a girl is given away, duly adorned according to one's means, to a 


Dis. 22 | | BOOK THREE 235 


of mine, which has been duly recognized in the procedure laid down in your scriptures (for 
conducting the nuptials), may be realized through this daughter of yours. Who would not 
accept with honour (the hand of) your daughter (Devahtiti), who overshadows as it were by 
her artless splendour the very lustre of her ornaments? (16) (The other day), when she was 
sporting on the top of her royal mansion, following her ball with bewildered eyes, the elegance 
of her person heightened by the tinkling of ornaments on her feet, Viswavasu (a Gandharva 
well-known for his comeliness) was stupefied with infatuation to see her and fell down from 
his aerial car. (17) What wise man would not welcome her, the very ornament of woman- 
hood, the beloved daughter of Swayambhuva Manu (yourself) and sister of Uttanapada, who 
cannot even be perceived by those that have not adored the gracious feet of the Lord, and 
who has come of her own accord, seeking my hand ? (18) Therefore, | shall take to wife this 
noble girl on condition that | shall remain with her till she bears (in her womb) through me a 
ray of the Supreme Spirit. Thereafter | am thinking of mostly devoting myself to practices (like 
self-control) which do not involve destruction of life and characterize the life of a Sarnnyasi 
(recluse), and which have been directly taught* (to me) by the Lord Himself. (19) To me the 
highest authority in this behalf is the immortal Lord Sri Hari, the Ruler even of all Prajapatis 
(lords of created beings), from whom this wonderful universe has emanated, in whom it rests 
and in whom again, it will disappear. (20) 


WAY Sara 
a SAe-araaeara va STs Gaara | 
faye feat get adl GaN saat: 1221 

sq Wheat aafad afeen eed: Mper asl Wrens act deat vafea: 1221 
aea «8a 8 8©6okagimeeari quel: wdelstien werara-ahsert 123 | 

wat deat Wwe Aes Ades: 1 SYM A sewaMichvcalafeenaa: 12v1 
sapaetie WS staal ye: i sifasaa adie Aatedfeq: fra: 1241 
sass is I: «9 Pea: 1s Tee Ta: aE J: 12E 1 
Sapa: «Aa: Waa: | ANAM «= WRT: 1291 
THAR «| Aeladionm: «Ufa adedidtarfed: 9 egg: «= Nefat: 1221 
afd am ut wadearantad| aa aa watt ages faepad: 121 
al: HRM Wale wWeashidadde: 1 sews BA: TMM AA Agathe 1301 
Samad «896 aida |= Aa: | STERN VM Act Yar 13g 
Maitreya went on: The sage, O Vidura (the wielder of a fierce bow), said only this much 
and became silent, clinging with his mind to the Lord whose navel is adorned by a lotus. His 
countenance, which was graced with a smile, captivated the heart of Devahuti. (21) Having 
further unmistakably known the mind of the queen as well as of Devahtti, the emperor most 
gladly gave away to the sage, who was endowed with hosts of virtues, his daughter, who 
matched him well. (22) Empress Satarupa lovingly bestowed on the bride and the bride- 
groom most valuable presents, suited to the occasion in the form of jewellery, raiment and 


other articles intended for household use. (23) Relieved of all agony, the emperor enclosed 
within his arms his daughter—who had been bestowed on a suitable person—with a heart 





bridegroom invited for the purpose— 
We HAAHaANea Aa Walad | A Ale ~ | : 
It is this form of marriage which is mostly prevalent among the twice-born classes in the Hindu society today and is 
declared in the Sastras as conferring great religious merit on the bride's father. Seven more forms of marriages have been 
mentioned in our scriptures; but they are all more or less prohibited in the Kali age. (Vide Manusmrti, Chap. Ill.) 


“ Vide verse 31 of Discourse XXI above. 








236 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


Be BeBe Re Be Ke Pe Re Re Re ERE Re ER BER RRR Re BRR Re ROR Re ST He Ree ERE Re Me Re BeBe Be Be Ge Fe He He He Be Hr He He Be Hr Fe Be We He We He Fe Se Be Bre Be Be He He Re He We Petree wg 
OW Satta ot te et en eae es vrvr‘’wrek—v=gpv» lll TT ae ame een a aie nat. | 


agitated with extreme fondness for her. (24) Unable to bear separation from her, he sheq 
tears again and again, and drenched with them his daughter's looks, crying, “My daughter 
my darling!" (25) Bidding adieu to the great sage and obtaining his leave, the monarch 
mounted his chariot along with his spouse and drove to his capital, followed by his retinue 
and witnessing the beauty of the hermitages of the tranquil-minded seers on both the 
charming banks of the Saraswati, a river so agreeable to sages. (26-27) Overjoyed to know 
of his arrival (beforehand), his subjects sallied forth from Brahmavarta to greet their lord with 
songs, panegyrics and instrumental music. (28) The city of Barhismati (the capital of 
Swayambhuva Manu), which was rich in all kinds of wealth, was so-called because it was 
here that the hair of Lord Visnu (manifested in the form of the divine Boar) dropped from His 
body as He shook it and it was these very hair that turned into blades of the ever-green Kuga 
grass (also known by the name of Barhis) and Kasas (another species of grass used for 
mats, roofs, etc.), by means of which the sages got rid of those (demons etc.) who interfered 
with the performance of their sacrifices, and worshipped Lord Visnu (through those 
sacrifices). (29-30) It was here, again, that the worshipful Manu spread a seat of KuSas and 
KaSas and propitiated the Lord presiding over sacrifices, from whom he had secured a 
footing in the shape of the terrestrial globe. (31) 


atest am fayai fifdea anraadiden sfast sad aranafear 132! 

aur: PI: BMA asisalentad: | agtaaMeaentit: welt: Wess: | 
TAAGAAS al YOST RW: HA: 133 1 

fond apm aa area aia waa sr a eteptac 13x 

SAMRAT: MAPALATOT: | YUaat eataat fan: Haat qa: Hat: 1341 


a Wa art Fa qramwagin agers UheyrTiaara: 1361 

ak Aa feet aad A A Aas: | Ulta Her Ba aed Brass 1301 

a: Ost aia: we anatase! qo avis a adydied: al 13c! 

Ud mene wmAlgshargai atid avidtrea aera yu 3c! 
Sat SAMTad ARM VASA Alea Thaw Saanseara: 1221 


Having arrived at the city of Barhismati, where the Manu resided, he entered his palace 
there, which drove away the three types of agony (1. that which proceeds from bodily and 
mental causes within one's self, 2. that which proceeds from divine or natural causes, and 
3. that which is caused by other beings). (32) (There) in the company of his wife and children 
he enjoyed the pleasures of sense that did not interfere with the pursuit of other objects of 
human aspiration (viz., Dharma, Artha and Moksa). At daybreak (everyday) celestial 
musicians along with their wives sang in chorus his fair renown; but with a loving heart he 
listened to the stories of Sri Hari alone. (33) Although Swayambhuva Manu was a past master 
in the art of creating objects of sense-enjoyment, the latter could notin the least drag him down 
(from his exalted mood), devoted as he was to the Lord and given to contemplation. (34) 
Consequenily his hours, that gradually brought to an end his long life consisting of a whole 
_ Manvantara, were not spent in vain, engaged as he ever was in listening to, contemplating 

on, composing and narrating the stories of Lord Visnu. (35) Having transcended the threefold 
destinies* (brought about by the preponderance of any one of the three Gunas—Sattva, 
* The threefold destiny referred to above is the same as has been mentioned by the Lordin the following verse of Srimad 
Bhagavadgita— 
od Tesi Geren WA foul Us: | TEN St esha aI: 1 (XIV. 18) 
“Those who abide in the quality of Sattva (harmony) rise upwards (to heaven and other spheres); while those of 4 





Dis. 23 ] BOOK THREE 237 
BAS SS A RR GR BB Be RG AR BR BAR A BR RR RARE RAE BER RARE RRR LEAL REALE AEA BAL 


Rajas and Tamas), he thus spent the whole of his Manvantara consisting of seventy-one 
rounds of the four Yugas (Satya, Tretaé, Dwapara and Kali) in pursuits connected with Lord 
Vasudeva (such as meditation on His divine Form, chanting His names and virtues etc., and 
worshipping His images and so on). (86) How can bodily and mental troubles and those 
attributable to some divine or human agency or to other living beings, O Vidura (son of 
Vyasa), afflict him who has sought refuge with Sri Hari? (37) | have thus narrated to you the 
wondertul story of the first king, Swayambhuva Manu, who deserved all praise and who in 
reply to the questions asked by certain sages taught the diverse sacred duties of men 
in general as well as of the different Varnas (grades of society) and Agramas (stages in 
life) in particular, friendly disposed as he was to all living beings. Now hear of the glory 
of his daughter (Devahiti). (38-39) 


Thus ends the twenty-second discourse in Book Three of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


Pet TT SS 
PII 


HY warfaanseara: 


Discourse XXilll 
Amorous pastimes of Kardama and Devahtti 


HAY Sara 

faqeat sft oredt ufaffecatiad | fat wdercite warta Ya TY! g | 

farses Wao aa Ways deed areal AB A a: 1 2 | 

fager ar asi a ae oluad aeqismameam Ma asiatandeads 2 | 

a a taffade amd anqaamdicarataa: uq@enamt Feller: | x | 

wed wet amt afta adadeari sera areat Uifed: Haas! & | 
Maitreya continued : When the parents of Devahuti had left (for their capital), that 
virtuous girl, who could easily read the mind of her lord, daily attended to his comforts 
with the same delight as Goddess Parvati looks after Her Consort, Lord Siva. (1) 
Forswearing lust deceit,malice, covetousness, vanity and forbidden acts (of every kind), 
nay, ever vigilant and active, she won the pleasure of her glorious husband through 
fidelity, purity of mind and body, reverence, control of the senses, service and love,as 
well as by her affable speech, O Vidura! (2-3) That daughter of Manu, who looked upon 
her lord as greater even than Providence and was fully devoted to him, expected great 
blessings from him. Nay, having served him for a long time, she had grown weak and 
@maciated on account of her religious observances. Kardama (the foremost of celestial 
Sages) was, therefore, oppressed with a feeling of commiseration for her and spoke to her 


in accents faltering with love. (4-5) 


rs 
: 
: 
| 
‘ 
i 
‘ 
f 
i : 
4 
; 


Rajasika disposition stay in the middle (in the terrestrial region). And those of a Tamasika temperament, enveloped as they 


are in the Tamoguna (dullness), sink down to the abysmal depths of hell." 





238 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23 


BeBe Bee Re Be Ree BEER RE RE RR REBT REE RE EREBE BELEE BEBT BE REE Re BEAT Be RE BEE Ke Ree Be He Ke Be He Ke Be Ke BeBe BeBe Be Be He He Ke Be Be Hr Be He He Hr Hr Br He Se Kr Be Ke Be Ke Ne Hr He rw, 
De 


AG SAAT 
qsiseta da AMfa AMM: BWA WHAT WA A Ase | 


at afearqandia Wecacel araferd: wafea: afag nati «1 
JR waiteaa ar-auiiaacaamatta swracatel: | 
STS cece te RT Samer | 


fuga yeaa fanaseniden, ffenatdemgatatrants: 1 ¢ 1 

Kardama said : O daughter of Manu, you have shown great respect to me and | am 
pleased today with your most faithful service and supreme devotion. You ungrudgingly 
wasted your body for my sake (in my service)—body which is extremely dear to all living 
beings and deserves every attention. (6) I, therefore, confer on you supernatural vision : 
thereby see for yourself the divine blessings (in the shape of unearthly enjoyments) that were 
secured by me through concentrated application to austere penance, Samadhi (abstract or 
deep meditation) and worship of God, and through devotion to my own duty—blessings which 
are free from fear and grief and to which you have also won a title through services rendered 
to me. (7) Of what account (in comparison to these) are other enjoyments (including those 
obtained in heaven), aspirations in regard to which are frustrated by the mere contraction of 
a brow on the part of the Lord, who possesses infinite power ? You have now attained your 
object (through fidelity to me); therefore, enjoy the extensive unearthly pleasures earned 
through devotion to your (wifely) duties, and which can be had with difficulty by human beings 
due to false notions of their royal dignity etc. (8) 


Wa gqauMmachaearmetaataagumae adler | 
ATAOTaaeear Praadisamtnlasetegaaasse | | 


When the sage spoke thus, Devahituti felt relieved to discover that he was the master of 


all Yogic powers and an adept in all forms of worship. Her face brightening with a smile and 
bashful glances, she spoke in voice choked with modesty and love. (9) 


We aa fesiquaenarmrarea «afa fast aca ad: | 
AISAM AAA: Upagael YAratlaa WO: Waa: AA 1201 
Atha agtaest aaa A apfalatstatecaaissat | 
fed aA Hparivaeiiarn deed vat wast faced ee 
Devahtti said : | know it, my lord: all that you have said, O chief of the Brahmanas, is 
something natural to you, a master of unfailing Yogic powers that you are, O great one. Now 
let the promise you made (in the presence of my father) about allowing me the contact of your 
body but once be redeemed; for itis a rare boon for virtuous wives to have a progeny through 
a highly venerable husband. (10) Kindly instruct me what arrangements have to be made and 
what requisites to be got together (in the shape of unguents, scents, wearing apparel and 
nourishing food etc.) according to the injunctions of the scriptures (works on erotics), Dy 
resorting to which my poor body, emaciated through intense passion, may be rendered fit 


for union, smitten as | am with darts of love excited by you. And also think of (getting) 4 
suitable house (for the purpose), my lord. (11) 


WAq sara 
for: Greatest want armen: i fear art ametetarferettenet 1221 





Dis. 23 ] BOOK THREE 239 


Sr br BeBe BeBe Be Be Br BeBe BEBCRE BEG BERE BEB RE RE Re BEB Bee He Be He HOGER RRR RE REE BEBE REE RERERE RE RE R Re Be Be Re Bee Be Be Re Be Re Be Be Re RRA RA RE RERERERERER BEACRE 


aaa? fest achaefa adegoeieh § «© aftrenstereper 123 1 
fecatrenconadt adereperaeH | aise: cavenfiafelferonferecrnel 124 
aruitiemenintighiatsattt: | aamaitnentsaataraatharpra, gu 
orga = fereteatg = qeraqerg | fii: anfergtt: aed ceigeasares: 126! 
a owt ftatiagamnieduniaa cera «ys 6 fagnafefa: 1201 
ag fags oad 9 anemtead Rretigaiog SAAS LSI 





AMAA TFA RAG fafia: 1 a fafanaarteieeadaeat: 1291 
Seanad at (BTA Ga ARIAT: wafereanfereel BT 1201 
faeremiasmmdagmorguntsiz: | arose tradideaattanrctt: 1221 


Maitreya went on: Seeking to oblige his beloved spouse, the sage Kardama, O Vidura, 
exercised his wonderful Yogic power and instantly produced an aerial mansion which could 
range at will. (12) It was a wonderful structure, containing all sorts of jewels, adorned with 
pillars of precious stones and capable of yielding whatever one desired, and was equipped 
with every form of wealth, which tended to multiply in course of time (instead of diminishing 
by use). (13) It was provided with supernatural articles of domestic use, was comfortable in 
all seasons and was decorated with buntings and flags of variegated colours. (14) It was 
further embellished with wreaths of charming flowers, that attracted the sweet humming of 
bees, as well as with tapestries of linen, silk and other fabrics of various kinds. (+5) The house 
looked charming with cushions, beds, fans and seats separately arranged in the several 
storeys rising one above another. (16) Its beauty was enhanced by (engravings and other) 
works of art (on the walls etc.) here and there; and it was provided with pavements of emerald 
and coral daises. (17) Its entrances shone with coral thresholds and had doors of diamond. 
Its domes of sapphire were crowned with gold pinnacles. (18) With the choicest of rubies set 
in its diamond walls it appeared as though possessed of eyes; and it was furnished with 
wonderful canopies and highly valuable festoons of gold. (19) It resounded with the cries of 
swans and pigeons, which flew up to their likenesses (set up there), thinking them to be their 
own kind. (20) With its pleasure-grounds, resting-chambers, bed-rooms and inner and outer 
yards, designed with an eye to the comfort (of the occupant), it caused astonishment as it 
were to the sage himself (who had produced it). (21) 


day 0 aereeit | afesida «0 eT | aren: Meletench: A122 
Pama, ec we fanmfientee | Sa Bend dttaereat ame FMI 1231 


The sage Kardama, who could read the mind of all living beings, perceived that Devahtuti 
did not regard even such a house with a much delighted heart, and said to her of his own | 
accord :— (22) "Bathe in the yonder lake, O timid one, and ascend this aerial mansion. Having 
been consecrated by Lord Visnu Himself (who dropped His tears in it), this sacred lake is 
Capable of granting all the desires of human beings (who resort to it).” (23) 


OM aad: ane aa: Hacdaon at frat areal avis Asi 12s! 

We WP uousA ded WaoMIA | Miata Aaa: AT RrasieraA 124! 

Sarah Asner: sath eal wets: | aal: «= feeetaerat §« aaqaiferetera: 1261 

at aor Wedrera sta: Meter: Raa: | aa pdenthegel Ve a: para fen 1201 
Bowing to that command of her lord, the lotus-eyed princess—who had a soiled cloth (on 


her person) and wore matted locks (on her head), and whose frame was coated with a thick 
layer of dirt and breasts discoloured—dived into the lake, which contained the sacred waters 





E 
at 
Ps 





240 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23 


BeBe Bee eRe Re We Re Re Re BY BER Re RR Be TE RE Be BY Re Be Re RE Bee ee We Be HE BE Re Ke We We We Ke Ve We Ke Re We We He Ke We We We Ke Be We We We We we BeBe Me Kr Hey, 


of the Saraswati. (24-25) Inside the lake she saw in a house one thousand maids, all in the 
prime of youth and emitting the fragrance of a lotus. (26) Seeing her, the damsels sudden| 
rose and said to her with joined palms : "We are your maid-servants; tell us what shall we 
do for you." (27) 

art at werdor erafret afer gee AAG Tt eg AMET: IRC 

quo una aaa gah aia aay us canqaraay 12¢1 

amet waa ara fanmemifast aaa aaitegataq 1301 

Qa @dacean  watryeqifentia aed paisa 32 

MUA ASAT HAM ARAM I ET A Agel welchaA A AML IIRX 

Get Gyal saewiereaaisa ast cae Aersns TATA 1331 

Teal Wa wITAe afad ofLiaa ad de Sifted a sala: 131 

aq: Ue ~aleeaad daarifema admit Geet yeaeld 1341 

The girls, who showed every respect to the princess, bathed the proud lady with costly 

oil, perfumed powder etc., and gave her a pair of new stainless pieces of fine cloth (to cover 
her body with), superb, most agreeable and brilliant jewels, food containing all good qualities 
and sweet inebriating drinks (other than spirituous liquor). (28-29) Then in a mirror she 
beheld (the reflection of) her person rid of dirt, adorned with a garland, clad in unsullied robes, 
decorated with auspicious marks and made much of by the maids. (30) Her body had not only 
been washed up to the neck* but bathed from head to foot and decked with all kinds of 
ornaments, particularly with a gold ornament about her neck, bangles about her wrists and 
tinkling anklets of gold (about her ankles). (81) She had a girdle of gold, set with numerous 
jewels, about her hips and was further adorned with a precious pearl necklace and 
auspicious materials (such as saffron-paste and so on). (82) Her countenance shone with 
beautiful rows of teeth, charming eyebrows, eyes distinguished by lovely and soft corners 
and vying with lotus-buds, and dark tresses. (33) The moment she thought of her beloved 
spouse, the foremost of sages, she found herself along with those damsels just where that 
lord of created beings was. (34) She was amazed to find herself surrounded by a thousand 
maids in the presence of her husband and to witness his Yogic power. (35) 


aoa qateert fasaemdingdadi sre faudi ea ddidefacedt 136! 
faaetiaeeant Herat «= Gqareaatisnamea «=6fand = deateaaltreq 1391 
tage Sarge faeeitfeactotagiefers | 
Ss sea WaMaesad galguiada:e: 1321 
AAEM Aceh oreler sa Ol aaa Ae SET | 
fait gato tt ft wacarsoaaaet 13e1 


The sage perceived that Devahiti had washed herself clean and shone forth as though 
she was no longer her former self. She had regained her original beauty, was clad in 
excellent robes, her charming breasts duly wrapped round, and was waited upon by a 
thousand Vidyachara girls. He conceived a fondness for her and helped her to ascend the 


* The Smrtis make it obligatory for ladies to wash their body up to the neck alone on ordinary days and to bathe from 
head to foot only on special days of the week and on festive occasions etc. The former type of ablution is called ‘Malasnana’ 
or ‘Snana' while the latter is known by the name of 'Sirahsnana’. The famous commentator, Vijayadhwaja, quotes the following 
Smrti-text in this connection— 


pce { Raga Aig ded: | ant a tga acheases sHusqeea | 


Dis. 23 ] BOOK THREE 241 


aerial mansion, O destroyer of enemy (in the form of passion). (86-37) Though (seemingly) 
attached to his beloved consort and with Vidyadhara damsels ministering to his bodily 
comfort (and gazing on his person), the sage did not lose his glory (mastery over his self) 
and shone in that aerial mansion as charming as the moon with his consort (the star Rohint) 
in the midst of the other lunar mansions in the vault of heavens. causing rows of lilies to 
open.(38) Waited upon by a bevy of charming damsels and extolled by hosts of Siddhas, 
he revelled in the aerial mansion like Kubera (the god of riches) for long long years over 
the valleys of Mount Meru (the prince of the leading mountains on the globe), the 
pleasure-ground of the guardians of the four quarters and the four intermediate points of 
the compass*—valleys which are rendered all the more delightful by cool, gentle and 
fragrant breezes that stimulate passion and echo the auspicious sound of the fall of the 
heavenly stream (the holy Ganga). (39) 

ara Re aa Gated aw WW wal wu: vol 

wis feast arta ude anamela aes aeantte: 1x2! 

fe Qe ast 3 damemdaar ausaaidaeson SATA: 1¥21 

Similarly, he fondly enjoyed himself with his wife in (the heavenly gardens known by 

the names of) Vaisrambhaka, Surasana, Nandana, Puspabhadra and Caitrarathya as well 
as over the Manasarovara lake. (40) Coursing through the various spheres, as the air, on 
that brilliant and great aerial mansion, that could fly at will, Kardama surpassed even the 
gods coursing through the air (whose movements are restricted to their own particular 
sphere). (41) What is difficult of achievement for those self-possessed men who have 
taken refuge in the feet of the Lord—feet that are the source of sacred rivers (like the 
Ganga) and put an end to the sorrows (of mundane life) ? (42) 


Vaal Yat Wes Ut Was MA | agisd Agari wis zAadd 1x31 
fasng AaqSSHH UAal Gea wa mma W adgaraedad ix 
dha fan sensi areal tte rari a areead a mie Gente Aga 1su | 
W armameaa aut wand: 1 ad add: We: HAMAR Ise! 
Teed Wet wMetaremissafadi Aen fara wa @ adegsealatsy: ive! 
3a: GI yA Bel aaeha: faa: sen: |aalenseaaiart olfelreTeTa: 11 
Uff Ul SaRTeEd dassmetad adi waa fast eda faqadi xe 
frame yf ual zaafnBrar sata ofeat ated Preemie BA: 1401 





* The names of the gods presiding over the four quarters and the four intermediate points of the compass are given 


below:— 
Name of god Quarter or point of the compass over which he presides 
1. Indra (the lord of paradise) East 
2. Agni (the god of fire) South-East 
3. Yama (the god of punishment) South 
4. Nirrti South-West 
5. Varuna (the god presiding over the waters) West 
6. Vayu (the wind-god) North-West 
7. Kubera (the god of riches) North 
8. iSAna (Lord Siva) North-East 


9 re eee age enenecneen eer eres @ ae eae mee = 








ith ee 
= ° 


DER a 


oO eee nes et ewes) ow 


242 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23 


BeBe Pe We We Vee We Be Wee We ee Vee Bee BL ME Re Mee He EME ME Re WERE We Re Mee Re Ke We we Be Be Be Be He We By Bee ee Bee Se we He Be He Hee Be He He He Re Be He We Be Ge He Be Be We Ke Me Kr Ke We We Hr weg, 
Sunita tee ee 


Having shown to his wife the whole extent of the terrestrial globe, which is full of many 
wonders because of its arrangement (into so many Dwipas and Varsas etc.), Kardama (the 
great Yog)) returned to his own hermitage. (43) In order to delight his spouse Devahiti (the 
daughter of Swayambhuva Manu), who longed for sexual pleasure, the sage divided his 
self into nine (assumed nine forms) and enjoyed himself (with her) for years together as 
if it was for an hour only. (44) Sharing with her most handsome lord the excellent and 
delightful bed in that aerial mansion, she did not notice (the passing away of) that (long) 
period. (45) While the couple, who eagerly longed for the pleasures of sense, were thus 
enjoying themselves by virtue of Yogic powers, a hundred autumns passed like a brief 
space of time. (46) Lovingly regarding her as a counterpart of his own self, the enlightened 
sage, who could read the thoughts of all and was also capable of granting their wishes, 
divided his self into nine and impregnated her. (47) Immediately afterwards the said 
Devahtiti bore on the same day (nine) female issues, who were all charming of every limb 
and breathed the fragrance of a red lotus. (48) Thereafter when she found her lord about 
to leave the home as a recluse (according to the understanding at the time of wedding), 
the virtuous lady, who yet longed for a male child, scratched the ground with her foot, 
radiant with the lustre of its gem-like nails, her head bent low; and, suppressing her tears, 
she spoke in slow yet winning accents with an agitated and aching heart, though wearing 


a smile on her face. (49-50) 
eaetieara 
aa detiareaqar  wayaisin A soar sa adele 14g 
Sereda faq: ude: aa: | Hiseard faster ala sated 4771421 
UWdadies sled attra A wat shania URGHATA: 143 | 
shetg Use Saget A ed: | Se Wt We ame A iexi 


Ugsi a: Wadeqraa fafedsaria wa mag pal Meas Head 144 
we and ana a fama aeadia didaedad silane qat fe a: 14a 
ae Wiad 7a afer aaa et! arat faghhe wa A qAqaa SAMI! 
sft Seriad ASM USS Beda Waa AISA AAfaanseaa: 1231 
Devahuti said : Your venerable self has redeemed all the promises made to me; yet 
be pleased to grant me immunity from fear, since | have taken refuge in you. (51) Your 
daughters, O holy sage, will have to find a suitable match for themselves; and there must 
be someone to rid me of sorrow when you have left for the woods. (52) Enough with the time 
that has so far been spent by me in enjoying the objects of senses, ignoring the Supreme 
Spirit.(63) Not knowing your transcendent glory, | have loved you, while remaining attached 
to the objects of senses. Let the affinity | have borne to you nonetheless rid me of all fear.(54) 
The same love which, when bestowed on the wicked through ignorance, is conducive to 
rebirth, rids one of all attachment when it is directed towards holy men. (55) He whose 
activity in this world neither tends to religious merit nor to dispassion, nor to the service of 
the Lord whose feet are the source of all sacred places, is verily dead, though living. (56) 
Indeed | have been badly deceived by the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) in that | failed 
to seek liberation from the bondage of mundane life even after securing you, the bestower 
of final beatitude. (57) 


Thus ends the twenty-third discourse, forming part of the narrative of Lord Kapila, 
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SAPS ESS 
PIS SOE 





pis. 24 ] BOOK THREE 243 


We We We We Se Se He Se Ve He j 
gr te Be CME we SS MOREE ME BE BEAM ME REESE REM MERE RE REMERON HEME ROR AEE EERE EERE EAA RE 


AY Addanrsea: 


Discourse XXIV 
Descent of Lord Kapila 
WAY Sara 
freeatiqitta 8 owmidfert gh: 1 aare: afediare aenftiened se 2 | | 
Maitreya resumed : When Devahiti (the daughter of Swayambhuva Manu), who was 


worthy of all praise, spoke such words, full of dispassion, the merciful sage recalled the words | 
of Lord Visnu and replied (as follows). (1) : 


FATA 
am feet wsepiemead yeaa) aarsant THAI | 2 | 
qaadifa Mk AO Ce Ca adisfaneniss «omg Cat 1 3 tt 
a cassia: Yast fata aa: sat a geaahemleat werraa: 1 x 


The sage said : Worry not about yourself, O princess of irreproachable conduct. The 
immortal Lord will enter your womb at no distant date. (2) You have undertaken sacred 
vows, God bless you. Hence do you adore the Lord with reverence through control of the 
senses and religious observances as well as through austere penance and charitable 
gifts of money. (3) Propitiated by you, Lord Visnu will be born as a son to you, thereby 
spreading my renown too, and will cut the knot of ignorance (in the form of self-identification ) 
with the material sheaths), existing in your heart, by instructing you in the knowledge of the 
Spirit. (4) | 





tae «= eat TAU STIG: 1 MTT ORR HEMMASTGeL | & | | 
wat seat we waryge: | aed diam sysfata cefori « | 
saree cata atfeafot sare: | ahd dq A Weal Feareaal AT | © | 
ta: waa fen: Wanuafsie: | sage fea: dat smenifa a aaifa ai ¢ | 
dencasmue 48060oeeSCURSIaM I ay: «= eng fafaditteniciaaar | ¢ | 
Wad ul Hal Bats WAL! dade wd fast: ETE got 
aus faaga Saat aati Tea: eH AAT 181 
Maitreya went on: Reposing full faith in the message of the sage Kardama (a lord 
Of created beings), out of great regard for him, Devahiti too betook herself to the 
Worship of the immutable Supreme Person as the Preceptor of the world. (5) After a 
Pretty long time Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) manifested Himself first 
through the generative fluid of Kardama and then through Devahuti, even as fire 
appears through firewood. (6) At the time of His descent on earth gods in the form of 
raining clouds sounded musical instruments (in the shape of thunder-claps) in the Sky; 
the Gandharvas (celestial musicians) sang praises to Him; while Apsaras (celestial 
Nymphs) danced through joy. (7) Heavenly flowers rained by the gods flying in the air 


dropped (from the heavens); and all the quarters as well as the waters (of lakes, rivers 
Ctc.) ere minds of the people too became clear. (8) Brahma (the self-born) went 








| 
} 
i 


244 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24 


Be Re Be Re Re Ree Be Re RE Re Re RR ERE RE RE RE REREEREERRERRERELERERERE REE RERERERE BERERER EEEBERERE REBE BEBE BEBE BE BE REM BEBE BEBE BEBE BEBE RE BE Be Be Be He He He Hr sr 4, 





along with Marici and the other sages to that (celebrated) hermitage of Kardama 
surrounded by the river Saraswati. (9) Brahma, who is naturally possessed of true 
wisdom, already knew that the Lord, who is no other than the supreme Brahma, had 
descended through pure Sattva for imparting the knowledge of the Sankhya system of 
philosophy (which determines the nature of the fundamental principles), O vanquisher 
of foes. (10) Welcoming with a guileless mind the intention of the Lord, the creator spoke thus 
to Kardama and Devahtti with all his senses greatly delighted. (11) 


Sanaa 

aa asufafena cafeaa Reieted: | aa Bare ale Va AMATI?! 

wiadd we wat feat wesc Aan ida: 1231 

sm dfeat: asa da am qaemiaiad sue: weefreraraen ex 

STRATA «aerate «= ae  stetem: UReger faaquitfe aan yfa ieut 

> e 7 ‘ s ; £33 a fe * ft e 7 12e 1 

Weilagdar  HeuIE el: ifaw: Gane: aayqeerge: 101 

W Mia a mi sfas: chewrda: | silanes foc m faaeta ieci 

ari fagonetiat: Aes: aad: | Stes Hes SAM Ta A aalictarela: 12< 1 
Brahma said : You have truly worshipped me, dear son, in that you reverently carried 
out my behest, O respecter (of elders)! (12) This is the service that ought to be rendered 
by the sons to their father, viz., that they should bow to the command of their father with due 
deference, saying "Very well !" (13) These slender-waisted daughters of yours, my worthy 
child, will multiply this creation manifold through their descendants. (14) Therefore, give 
away your daughters this very day to the foremost of the sages with due regard to the girls’ 
temperament and liking, and thereby spread your fame all over the globe. (15) | know the 
most ancient Person, the bestower of all boons on living beings, has descended through 
His own Maya (wonderful creative energy) in the person of Kapila, O Kardama. (16) 
(Turning to Devahtuti, he said,) with golden hair, lotus-like eyes and lotus-feet, whose soles 
bear the mark of a lotus, itis Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Kaitabha) who has been 
born of you, O Devahtti (daughter of Swayambhuva Manu), to tear up the roots of Karma 
(in the form of latent desires) through the instrumentality of Sastriya knowledge and 
realization. Having cut the knot of ignorance and misapprehension, He will roam about the 
earth. (17-18) He will be the Lord of the Siddhas, held in great esteem by the teachers of the 


Sankhya system of philosophy. He will be known all over the world by the name of Kapila and 
will spread your fame. (19) 
HAG sara 


Tea SAIAST HAN: Aen: i eat gat aa Prema sat io! 
Ma UdYtt ad: weMe fed: aetfed weleq: selerEst aa: 1221 
Mat ael 8 Meet semiesrsgema saya i221 
Yous Ait Bhi mda a fat adi wit a yndsaagapraeeed 123 | 
Aaavisearesi AAT At fetta | feiss, Setelerl, MAN, AAT AT | RX | 
ade IG: aM: pda Fat ai sfasareno: GW wursanuser 124! 


Maitreya continued - Having thus reassured the couple, Brahma, the creator of the 
universe, rode on his mount, the swan, and returned to Satyaloka (the highest of the spheres 





is, 24 ] BOOK THREE 245 


D Wr We Be Be We Ke We Be Be We We We We We He He He Hr Wr 
gro etree SERRE S WERE RBBB Me RE RE BRR MERE RE EERE REA HEREC Re He HERE EME RE REE REE REERE ERE REA ERE REE REHE EAAE 


stretching ‘beyond the three worlds) along with Sanaka and his three brothers and 
accompanied by Narada (who are all lifelong celibates, leaving behind the other sages, 
Marici and the rest, so as to enable them to espouse the hand of Kardama’'s nine 
daughters).(20) After the departure of Brahma, O Vidura, the sage Kardama immediately 

ave away his daughters to the lords of created beings (Marici and others), as directed by 
the creator, according to the injunctions of the Sastras. (21) He gave (the hand of) Kala to 
Marici and Anasuya to Atri; Sraddha he gave away to Angira, and Havirbhd to Pulastya. (22) 
He further gave Gati, who was worthy of Pulaha, to the latter and the virtuous Kriya to Kratu, 
Khyati to Bhrgu and even so Arundhati to Vasistha. (23) And to Atharva he gave (the hand 
of) Santi, through whom a sacrifice is Successfully accomplished. When they were duly 
married, Kardama propitiated these foremost Sages as well as their wives (with kind 
attentions). (24) Being thus married, the sages thereupon took leave of Kardama and 
departed, full of joy, each for his own hermitage. (25) 


a medtt fama fagedifafam sca surg aaeed 16! 
Te Wea Pa Bugs: | aed Ye wi selene ead: 1201 
aestatauert ASAT | SE AeA AM: FRITS 21 
Q@ Wa Ware eed ATA A: 1 Wee Mal APA a: wrt Gaara: 121 
aa aed adnaduista a Wei fantdsinar aa WM Aad: 1301 
aaa astra «aft wanaeaiat af a ted eermmeatan: 1391 

wat Ghtiaraaycaargl Aallwarareurarenisa, 

Daan sam eae fsa ster Te 1321 

a sad wee wad ae ala qd oleae 

STATA TAHA wesaalih calaes sae 1331 

at afagesar «oUft «seat «=6atadiuriel)«_ sarqenr: | 

ukaaaedinferdisé afet wt ede der fariten: 12¥ 


Having come to know that it was Lord Visnu Himself (who is possessed of three pairs of 
divine attributes, viz., power and affluence, piety and renown, wisdom and dispassion, in 
their entirety), the foremost of the gods, who had been born (as a son to him), the sage 
approached Him when He was all alone, and, bowing to Him, said : (26) “Alas! on those who 
are burning in this hell of transmigration as a result of their own evil deeds, the gods shower 
their grace after a long time. (27) Contrary to this, the Lord whose truth striving souls seek 
to realize in lonely places through concentrated practice of Devotion matured through many 
lives, and who promotes the cause of His devotees, has this time appeared in the house of 
Sensual men like us, not minding the ignominy incident to such a birth. (28-29) Intent on 
enhancing the dignity of His devotees, You have been born into my house just to redeem 
Your pledge and to found the Sankhya system (which leads to true Knowledge). (30) O Lord, 
Your transcendent forms alone are worthy of You; even so the human semblances that 
appeal to Your own devotees are as well liked by You, even though You are devoid of a 
material form. (31) | take refuge in You, whose footstool is always fit to be saluted by sages 


keen to know the Truth, and who are perfect in power and energy, wisdom and dispassion, 
fame and affluence. (32) I take refuge in Kapila, the supreme Lord, who has all the potencies 
at His beck and call, who appears as Primordial Matter, the Spirit, the Mahat-tattva or the 
Principle of cosmic intelligence, the Time-Spirit, the threefold (Sattvika, Rajasika and 


ee Ot 6 OF renee Be = 


| 
| 
| 





246 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24 


SERRE RE RR RR RRR A RAE EE AER ERR RERE RER RERE R Re Re RR Re Me Me EB ME RE RE ERE ME Be HERE BEBE B HE BER E BEAE RENE BER Be BR Be Re Be He Be He eH He Hw, 
aaa aaa SL Mat =<." eh - oe eos oe icc; oe 


Tamasika) Ego and the various spheres as well as their guardians, and then reabsorbs ay 
these phenomena into Himself by virtue of His energy in the form of Consciousness and who 
is the all-witnessing Seer. (83) Acquitted of the debt | owed to my father (Brahma, who hag 
commanded me to marry and beget children), and having gained all my desires through Yoy 

| now take leave of You, the Lord of all created beings. Treading the path of recluses, | would 
roam (at will), free from sorrow, contemplating on You in my heart." (34) 


Tat Uke fF lhe VA Uaetleh | aesiit wat qa gaalagd WI1341 

WH TA MST MI Tee aa 9 AMAaTaHaals 1361 

UH sTeaaiserhl AB: Hed YAaTIa ysadiad eefan faks at yar 1301 

Tes HA Hasse ufa dando hal aga AAAs Al ws 13C1 

WAI 4 Masala: AYES! sear dex faaitentsserqesa 13e 1 

Ta sneaiaad feat sedi adeno faakea aa arat wa arfaaterit ivol 
The Lord replied : Whatever | say is an authority to the world in matters secular as well 
as sacred. Therefore, it is only to redeem what | said to you (vide verse 32 of Discourse 
XXI,above) that | have been born as your son, O sage. (35) My present birth in this world is 
meant only for expounding the true nature of the categories so helpful in Self-Realization to 
those seeking release from their subtle body. (86) This mysterious path of Self-Knowledge 
had been obscured through long ages. Know that this personality has been assumed by Me 
in order to revive that path. (37) Allowed by Me, go wherever you like and, conquering death, 
which is exceedingly difficult to conquer, through actions dedicated to Me, adore Me witha 
view to attaining immortality. (88) Beholding Me—the supreme self-effulgent Spirit dwelling 
in the heart of all beings—in your own heart through your intellect, you will be freed from all 
sorrow and attain the fearless state (viz., final beatitude). (89) To My mother (Devahtti) as 
well | shall impart that spiritual Knowledge, which frees one from the bondage of all actions 
and by virtue of which she will get over the fear of transmigration and attain supreme joy. (40) 

\ 
Sa 


Wi adietet after senaft: i cfauina d svidl aqta am gIxe! 
Maitreya resumed : Thus addressed by the celebrated Kapila, Kardama (a lord of 


created beings) went round the Lord (as a mark of respect) and straightaway withdrew to the 
forest, full of joy. (41) 


ad A Sed Aaa yA: esl 89 - erceluitafaetrhaa: 12! 
Tat seit Ga aAeda: UI TTawea fa wnyaaquifad x3! 
PReniddaas eg: Ahem Bem | Neeser:  swanedihifratea: vv 
aged waft dat TMM ato UAMed Gene Ma: Ivut 
Me aad 8 Wadsahem sosaeadunia wana aes ix 
soleatadia ada AAA | Wake STAT APTA wha: vo 
ea Arad Ae Wee Medal qd satrea aaaisena: xd 
Observing a vow of non-violence, practised by hermits, and exclusively depending on Sri 
Hari (the Supreme Spirit), the sage renounced the sacrificial fire as well as a permanent 


dwelling and roamed about the globe, free from attachment. (42) He fixed his mind on 
Brahma (the Infinite), who is beyond both cause and effect, who, though devoid of the three 





| 
: 
; 
: 
: 


BP SSS RRR RRB BE BRR R RE RRR AR RRR RRR ARAL RR REI ARE 


Gunas (modes of Prakrti), yet brings them to light, and who had been realized through 
exclusive Devotion. (43) Free from egotism and the sense of mineness, indifferent to 

airs of opposites (such as heat and cold, pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, etc., etc.), 
and viewing all with the same eye, Kardama perceived his own self everywhere. His mind 
had turned inward and was perfectly composed, and the self-possessed sage looked like 
anocean without waves. (44) His mind being fixed through supreme Devotion on the all- 
knowing Lord Vasudeva, the Self (Inner Controller) of all embodied souls, he was now 
free from the bondage of ignorance. (45) He perceived the Lord, his own Self, as present 
in all living beings, and all living beings in the Lord, His own Self. (46) In this way 
Kardama, who had no desire and was free from malice, who was even-minded towards 
all, and who had developed Devotion to the Lord, attained union with Him. (47) 


Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse, forming part of the "Story 
of Lord Kapila" in Book Three of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


er Cnet 23 +4 
POSSESS ees 


IY Usfasnseara: 


Discourse XXV 
Lord Kapila expatiates on the glory of Devotion in response 
to the query of mother Devahuti 
SAA 

caliente eae WTA | Sd: Waa: AME AL! e | 

a we asin: qa afte: adam! fagat aneae YR Gad Asaa: 1 2 | 

TRA war BSCeIsaM lah A ae aldara | 2 | 
Saunaka said : Kapila, who expounded the true nature of the fundamental principles, 
was no other than the birthless Lord (Narayana), descended of his own free will and 
through His own Maya (wonderful creative energy) in order to teach humanity the truth of 
the Self. (1) Although | have often heard the stories of the Lord, my senses are not sated 
with hearing the glory of Lord Kapila, the best of all men and the foremost of all Yogis. (2) 


Having assumed by His own Maya a personality conforming to the will of His devotees, 
whatever the Lord does is all worth singing. Therefore, kindly narrate all those doings to 


me, full of reverence as | am. (3) 
qd 3sqdd 


. xe | A UTA ed fagt sta otrdifaaat sated: 1 x | 
= : ne ture of the fundamental principles, 
Sita said : Uraed in this way to expound the true na ott 
the worshipful Rsiteayet a friend of the sage Dwalpayana, (Vedavyasa) addressed Vidura 
As follows according to the spirit of his enquiry. (4) 


ee — 


—— 
. ee ee ee 


| 
| 








: 
) 
; 
: 


248 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25 


We Re BeBe Ke Ve Wr Re Ree Re Se Be RO OR RR RR RR ROR ROR He Ree Re Ree We eee eee We ee Be Re HH He wy 
a a = ae, 


aaa AAA aanMaet | Vad eae Md: Wed aa: i ¢ | 


Maitreya said : When Kardama (Lord Kapila's father) had left for the forest, Lord Kapila 
stayed (in the latter's hermitage) on the strand of the same Bindusarovara in order to please 
His mother (Devahiti). (5) (One day) when Kapila (Devahtti's son), who was capable of 
showing to her the culmination of the fundamental principles, sat atleisure, Devahuti recalleq 
the words of Brahma (vide verse 18 of the preceding discourse) and spoke to Him (as 


follows). (6) : 
fafaoon fet Ss Yafefeaadone | aa ASTI Soa aA: Tat! © | 
qa @ WAS CUR WMI ada SS AN Aad! <I 
Sen War variant a var fool sea aera aa: qd gatiea: 1 e | 
sa A ta aalenHs andl asazesenadiaatery § «arfeiteaay 1201 
qd a We Wi we ABYyAdaNM: Hor! 
fiataa sad: wes ant aeifact aferiee 
Devahiti said : | am awfully sick of the craving (for enjoyment) of my wicked senses, O 
Perfect One! It is because of my unremitting efforts to gratify this craving that | have fallen 
into the deep abyss of ignorance, O Lord. (7) In this present birth, which (Il am Sure) is going 
to be the last of a long series, | have now, by Your grace, secured in You an excellent eye 
to enable me to See through this thick veil of darkness, which is so difficult to penetrate. (8) 
You are no other than the Lord, the most ancient Person and the Ruler of all embodied souls, 
who has appeared, like the sun, as an eye to the world blinded by ignorance. (9) Now be 
pleased, my lord, to dispel my great delusion; for the feeling of I-ness with reference to the 
body and that of mine-ness in respect of all that is connected with it have been inspired by 
You. (10) For ascertaining the true nature of Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa (Spirit) | have 
sought refuge in You, who afford protection to all and are a veritable axe to the tree of 


metempsychosis in the case of Your devotees. | bow to You, the foremost of those knowing 
the secret of true religion. (11) 
HAY Saray 


sfa Mad Maer fara qarattaaar | 
faatirereadt adal wWadwe gaff: 1221 
Maitreya continued : On hearing of His mother's innocent desire, which was calculated 


to stimulate in men the longing for liberation, the Lord, whois the goal of noble souls that have 
subdued their self, mentally approved of it and spoke as follows, His countenance beaming 


with a gentle smile. (12) 
MATA TAA 
an steaks: Get adt fear A 1 sterntataada Ga aA Fam wigs! 
aa da sae wart Gel aso stgamr art watstqort ex! 
ad: Uae FMA Hw Ae AAI WY Gh aM Wi at df ama eu! 
Sena: HICNATehe: att Gel Wa: Bene aA 12a 
dal Wet Sed sae Sed: WA! eat Mawar rar fuSsa 1 219 | 
aera =| Mie IT Ufa spit a adtsrerL 2c! 


Dis. 25 ] BOOK THREE 249 


HARE REE HE BEEBE Re Be AEH Be MEA He Be He Be He He ME He Ke He Re Ke EHEC MC ME RE REMEMBER Re Re Ree ee ee RE HERE RE RE EERE RE RE REDEH EAE 
qa qaaMa Yea wanagkaerns Sita STAT 
fara: Ge Dallas 1221 
SAGAS URI:  aat «fag: 1 A Wa STE Hal AleERAUaAL 120! 


The Lord Said : In my opinion the only means to final beatitude is Yoga in the form of 
contemplation on the Supreme Spirit, which is characterized by absolute cessation of both 
joy and Sorrow. (13) I shall now explain to you that very Yoga, which is perfect in every limb, 
and which | taught of yore to sages (like Narada), who were keen to hear of it, O virtuous 
lady. (14) Mind alone Is held responsible for the bondage and emancipation of the soul. 
Attached to the objects of senses, it leads to bondage; when, however, it develops affinity 
to the Supreme Person, it brings liberation to the soul. (15) When the mind is purged of its 
impurities in the form of lust, greed etc.—which have their root in the sense of I-ness and 
mine-ness—and becomes pure, it grows indifferent to pleasure and pain and gets 
equipoised. (1 6) With a mind equipped with true knowledge and dispassion as well as with 
Devotion, the Jiva (individual soul) then perceives the Self as one (without a second), 
undifferentiated, self-effulgent, subtle, indivisible, unattached and beyond Prakrti (Matter), 
and Prakrti as reduced in strength. (17-18) For striving souls there is no blissful road to God- 
Realization like Devotion directed towards the Lord, who is the Soul of the universe. (19) The 
wise consider attachment as an unyielding fetter for the soul. The same, however, serves 
as an open door to liberation, wnen it is directed towards saints. (20) 

fafaara: cprefttent: Yea: daciear! sistaaa: Bra: Alaa: AAT: 1221 
Tae Wed Meh Haba A aeMlineha AmHalRemasrareal: 1221 
Testa: HM We: ata Hwaha aiaaha fafaenamt AaMredaaa: 1231 
qd UW area: ata adagiaain: | agega a wed: agemer fe aiexi 
Gat owagmm ditdiact afad eenviteraat: He: | 
asiaunearattadia STegI taftarareata 1241 
Waa UMaidiart Uren gsadrMsedidfad | 
faa ate? aa afer safSafraT: 126 1 
aTaaara THAT Waa amrafasfaras | 
aa uafiaa a wae A weameaMMeaest iv! 

Saints are forbearing, compassionate and composeg; they are friendly to all living beings 
and inimical to none and follow the injunctions of the Sastras. Their good disposition itself 
Serves as an ornament to them. (21) With an undivided heart they practise unflinching 
devotion to Me; and for My sake they abandon even their obligatory duties and forsake their 
kinsmen and relatives. (22) Nay, they listen to and narrate delightful stories relating to Me, 
their mind ever set on Me. Afflictions of various kinds, therefore, never torment such 
People. (23) Such are holy men, free from all attachment, O virtuous lady. Attachmentto such 
holy men must be sought for by you; for they counteract the pernicious effects of 
attachment.(24) Through the fellowship of saints one gets to hear My stories, leading to a 
Correct and full knowledge of My glory and pleasing to the heart as weil as to the ear. By 
hearing such stories one is sure to develop one after another reverence and fondness for and 
Devotion to the Lord, whose realization is preceded by the cessation of ignorance. (25) 
Developing distaste for the pleasures of sense, belonging to this world as well as to the next, 
through Devotion engendered by contemplation on My pastimes connected with the creation, 


Preservation and dissolution of the universe, the man who enjoys the fellowship of saints will 
diligently and devoutly strive to subdue his mind through easy processes of Yoga (Devotion).(26) 


ai 





TTT 





i lm 





250 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 25 


BERR Re Re Re Re eR Re Re Re RR RR Re RE REE RR RR RE RRR RR RR RE RRR eR Re MY Re Re Be BEM Be Me Be Me Be Be Be We Be We Be Ke Be Be He We Ke Ke Br Hr He We Br Be Be Hr He Be We we wy 





Through renunciation of the material objects of sense, through wisdom supplemented by 
dispassion, through Yoga (concentration of mind) and through Devotion directed towards 
Me, man attains to Me, the Self of all embodied souls, in that very life. (27) 


aided win: leat aA Wed! aa ud a Maluagaratal ste 121 
a an wagut fraturemaatiea: | mle: ait Usa aderaaatery 12° | 
dean fame ame wWellktiqa qe agile art vaqquend igo 
Devahiti said : What kind of Devotion is worth developing towards You, and what is 
the type fit to be practised by me, through which | may easily and immediately attain to Your 
Being, a synonym for Liberation? (28) What is the character of the Yoga (discipline) 
referred to by You, O Embodiment of supreme bliss, as a direct means to God-Perception 
(like an arrow which goes straight to its target) as well as to the realization of Truth; and how 
many are the processes supplementary to the same? (29) Kindly explain all this to me in such 
a way that I, a dull-witted woman, O Hari, may understand the difficult process with ease by 
Your grace. (30) : 
HAY Savaq 


fafearst 4 oafuet adhe weet at arisen: | 
Tae dsaea are sla a wvfafaasarmise 


Maitreya resumed : Having thus learnt the object of His mother (Devahuti) through 
whom He had appeared in a human semblance, Lord Kapila was filled with affection for 
her and expounded the system of philosophy which teaches the fundamental principles 
(such as Prakrti, Purusa and so on) and which they call Sankhya, as well as the elaborate 
course of Devotion and Yoga (the process of meditation and the other methods of mind- 


control). (31) 
STATA 
earl Ties MMaystahhHong | Ga Waste qf: aatfaat { at 1321 
staf arad wake: fated saa a att frivinast ger 133! 
jar 8 8 8 weaha | 86rd «=—s eta: | 
Aad Usd: Wed awed aA utesfor ext 
Ud a a wBeavra Ad: WaAtawlcrenih | 
sco feet amet ah at wera adhd 134i 
qesitaraaaeanfacreaeratardartarh: 
Sarean «= BaSTOTISTUieetireset «fad «= eh 1361 
Stat fayta aa ARAMA AaA SAAT | 
fa wumadt argeatd wal We A asdad { ws 1301 
q amidtraa: arded aeeha at aster fe efa: 1 
aug fla sien was wel we: Wed caftemizc 


The Lord said : Motiveless devotion to the Lord may be defined as the natural 
inclination—towards the Lord, who is an embodiment of Sattva (goodness)—of the senses 
of a man of undivided mind, which are the only means of perceiving the objects, as well as 
of his organs of action, which are engaged in activities enjoined by the Vedas. Devotion (as 





Dis. 25 ] BOOK THREE 251 


defined above) is superior to final beatitude itself in that it speedily dissolves the subtle body 
even as the gastric fire digests the food that is devoured. (32-33) Some devotees of the 
Lord—who ever delight in the service of My feetandare engaged in activites only for My sake, 
and who lovingly sing to one another of My exploits alone—crave not even for absorption into 
My Being. (34) The aforesaid saints, O mother, behold My charming and divine forms 

ossessed ofa smiling face and ruddy eyes—forms which confer boons on them—and have 
talks with them, which are the envy even of the greatest sages. (35) Their devotion (to Me) 
secures to them (a place in) My subtle Abode even though they never seek it, their mind and 
senses fascinated by those forms with attractive limbs, captivating playful gestures, glances 
accompanied with a smile and delightful speech. (36) They no longer crave for the wealth 
and enjoyments of Satyaloka (the highest heaven) and the other spheres falling within My 
jurisdiction as the Lord of Maya, nor for the eight kinds of Supernatural powers that come to 
them of their own accord as a sequel to Devotion, nor even for the wealth and splendour of 
the Lord's own realm (Vaikuntha), which are full in every respect; yet they do enjoy these in 
that Abode of the Supreme. (37) They who depend on Me, nay, to whom! am the only object 
of love, nay, the very self, the son, the friend, the preceptor, the kith and kin and the chosen 
deity, are never deprived of these enjoyments in Vaikuntha (which consists of pure Sattva); 
nor does My weapon in the shape of Time ever devour them. (38) 


sa le | aMaTTMAqUuarfeerL| ate A Ae A Wa: Uaal Fer: 1391 

faqea Caltaigg wma fase wre «Nae «arya Ixo | 

ara Tatad: TAAGSM | Sea: «Aaya «wa dist frada ixei 

Tete anise gia asadiaddts! ceafdaaf  asadixet 

Wawra «86 Maat: 1 aaa Gere A yfaareendtaad 1x3! 

Udiama wlnser, gat f:stdiea: i disor ara wat weft fer ivy 

sa sitrerrad AEM GRASS Meda Ta ASAT Talaenseara: 1241 

| take them once for all to the other side of death (the ocean of birth and death), who 
worship Me with exclusive devotion in the aforesaid manner, realizing My presence in 
every quarter and renouncing this world and the next, nay, even their own conditioned self 
(in the shape of their subtle body), which wanders through both, and all those who are 
connected with: the same here (viz., one's near and dear ones) as well as (one’s 
possessions such as)wealth, cattle and houses and everything else. (39-40) The terrible 
fear of birth and death can never be got rid of by resorting to anyone other than Myself, the 
almighty Lord, the Ruler of both Prakrti and Purusa (Matter and Spirit), the Self of all living 
beings. (41) Itis through fear of Me that the wind blows; it is through fear of Me that the sun 
Shines; it is through fear of Me that Indra (the god of rain) sends forth showers, fire burns 
and death goes about (taking its toll). (42) For lasting happiness the Yogis (striving souls) 
betake themselves through the practice of Devotion, accompanied by spiritual Knowledge 


and Dispassion, to My feet, which are free from fear (of every kind). (43) A mind fixed on 
Me through the intense practice of Devotion and steadied thereby—that is the only means 


for men in this world to attain final beatitude. (44) 


ifth dl. | f the "Story of Lord Kapila" 
ds the twenty-fifth discourse, forming part o i f 
ae in Book Three of the great.and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


~ 








252 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26 


eRe BER Ree Br Be Re Be BRR RHE Be REE BER BB BR BRR ARE BLL BY BB Be Br Be Hr Mi Be Br He Be Be Be Ke He He Kr Sr Hr Hr Se Hr Se Br Br Ke Ke He Ke Hr kr 
sss eeeeeeeeeeoY_aexreae ee V5 eeVw[Y'’r’/F’F—_<—c6—V—.v_ a a ea peta 


Igy Tefaanseare: 


Discourse XXVI 
The process of evolution of the Mahat-tativa and 
other fundamental principles 


aI A AMA AAA Haol gry iafefacat faqelt yea: steel: 1 et 
wa 486 fa:saarefa )«=—-: Gesentaniatl! aateduta ad geaaaveqqi 2 | 
sient gest faefur: seed: ot: 1 sere eeeaittiad a4 aaa! 3 | 
@ Ul Naid gant eat yuma fay: | aqeedaronameaued Ota 1s | 
Waa: Padi Aaa: waft sen: | fase yas Wel: A se AMTATI & | 
Ua wife ada Sed: GaRMiadg fag whe agi ¢ | 
Sgada: Unda WA dea Macendiieres alan fda: 1 © | 
aru sald fae: 1 apa Gae-aMi Ger sed: ULI C1 


The Lord continued: Now | shall tell you, one by one, the distinctive features of the 
different categories, by knowing which a man is freed once for all from (the yoke of ) the 
modes of Prakrti. (1) | shall (also) explain to you the nature of Knowledge in the form of Self- 
Realization, which, by cutting the knot of egotism existing in the heart, leads the Jiva to final 
beatitude: so declare the wise. (2) The Purusais no other than the Spirit, who is beginningless, 
devoid of attributes, existing beyond Prakrti (Matter), revealed in the heart (of all beings) and 
self-effulgent, nay, pervaded by whom the universe presents itself to our view.(3) This all- 
pervading Purusa accepted of his own free will the unmanifest divine Prakrti, consisting of 
the three Gunas, that sought him in her playful mood.(4) (Already) abiding in Prakrti, the 
Purusa fell a prey to her charms, that obscure knowledge, and forgot himself the moment 
he saw her evolving through her Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) progeny of various kinds 
with forms conforming to either of the three Gunas. (5) By identifying himself with Prakrti, who 
is other than himself, the Purusa attributes the doership of actions which are being performed 
by the Gunas of Prakrti to himself. (6) It is this feeling of doership which binds him to actions, 
although (really speaking) he is a mere witness and therefore a non-doer. And it is this 
bondage through action which makes him helpless (in the matter of pleasurable and painful 
experiences), although he is independent (in reality), and subjects him to repeated births and 
deaths even though he is blissful by nature. (7) The knowers of Truth recognize Prakrti as 
responsible for the identification of the soul with body, with the senses and mind as well as 
with the agents (the deities presiding over the senses etc.). As for the experience of pleasure 
and pain they hold the Purusa (identifying himself with Prakrti) to be responsible, although 
(as a matter of fact) he is beyond Prakrti. (8) 


eaetdearay 
MA USAMA Ale ARO Wada aalatent gt 


Devahiti said: Kindly also tell me, O Supreme Person, the characteristics of Prakrtiand 
Purusa, the two causes of this universe, which in its gross and subtle forms is nothing but 


a manifestation of these.(9) 
ATTA TATa 
aioe fel aamtai set spit meee faaraigol 





pis. 26 ] BOOK THREE 253 


BeBe BeBe Ke Ke Ke Be Br Be Ke Ke Ke He Ke Kr 
gy hr br Be HERE SSSI RRR BRB BRR BEBE BER BE Be BAER Be Re BeBe Be et Be eRe RRR REA PAE EERE AREER ACR RARER 


uate: RIMES aaiticaitedan | uraddarie mot srenfres fag: 1281 
Tey eu Wisirisay: | cenit a aaha wendht waht A122! 
srsatt A afer: | ae «aot A ured «sara 1231 
Tat Tenegniratrearmrercey | agett Sead Vel GAM HaAVRAqa 12x! 
rar ALT AAT: ATT waa eT she a: res: BPI: 1841 
sara ured Wg sets at weiss a:  sefriaw: 1261 
sepcrreraea = Pafelsterey Ama | Ast ad: A TAM wie saTefata: 121 
ad: GETSA aeeto at af: iaraae al wearer ieci 


The Lord resumed : The wise speak of Pradhana (Primordial Matter) as Prakrti—the 
Pradhana, which consists of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), nay, which is 
unmanifest and eternal and exists both as cause and effect and which, though undifferentiated 
(in its causal state) is the source of distinct categories (such as Mahat-tattva and so on). (10) 
The aggregate of twenty-four categories—viz., the five gross elements, the five subtle 
elements, the four internal senses, the five senses of perception and the five organs of 
action—is known to be an evolute of the Pradhana. (11) The gross elements are only five, 
viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether. The number of the subtle elements too is in My opinion 
just the same: they are smell, taste, colour, touch and sound. (12) The Indriyas (the senses 
of perception and the organs of action) are ten in number, viz., the auditory sense, the tactile 
sense, the sense of sight, the sense of taste, the olfactory sense, the organ of speech, the 
hands, the feet, the organ of generation and the organ of defecation, which is said to be the 
tenth. (13) The internal sense is seen to have four aspects in the shape of mind, under- 
standing, ego and reason. Their distinction lies in their functions which represent their 
characteristics. (14) The disposition of the conditioned Brahma (Brahma manifested through 
the Gunas of Prakrti) has been recognized (by the knowers of Truth) as consisting of the 
twenty-four principles just enumerated by Me and no other, Kala (Time) being the twenty- 
fifth.(15) Some people speak of Kala as a potency (destructive power) of the Purusa (God), 
which causes fear to the doer (the individual soul) who has come to associate himself with 
Prakrti and is deluded by egotism (arising out of self-identification with body etc.). (16) As 
a matter of fact, O daughter of Swayambhuva Manu, the Lord Himself, who activates 
Prakrti—which is only another name for the equilibrium of the three Gunas (Sativa, Rajas 
and Tamas), and which (in that state) admits of no particular name or form—is designated 
as Kala (Time). (17) In this way the Lord Himself, who by His own Maya (wonderful divine 
energy) abides unaffected within all living beings as the Purusa (their Inner Controller) and 
Outside them as Kala (is the twenty-fifth category).(18) | 

Saregfaaaftval ae at we: GALI stent ated ATT Aeret feTAAA 188 | 
feared «Sa RRM SHTERT: | eaersteria BIEEUSIE| & 2s ee ae | 

When the Supreme Person placed His energy(in the form of Cit-Sakti or the power of ) 
intelligence) in His own Maya, the source of all created beings, the equilibrium of whose ' 
Gunas had been disturbed by the destiny of the various Jivas, the Maya gave birth to the | 
Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), which is full of light. (19) The Mahat-tattva, 
Which knew no languor or distraction etc., and represented the shoot of the tree of the 
Universe, drank off by its own effulgence the thick gloom (prevailing at the time of universal 
dissolution)—which had once swallowed the Mahat-tattva—in order to manifest the universe, 


Which lay in it in a subtle form.(20) 








neg SRIMADIBHAGAVATA , cwaraetarseeanseenenasn’ 26 
Seana arta Aaa: afaisent skh aerat sepfa: aT 1221 
TEMA fagpat urea TATA, | fearerkrtegntatan: FATT 13 | 
darkoeseas amex ad wa: aqasdisait a yam aeamft iex 
Weald Wataaad Tad ase «= Gee || SATE 1 24 
aia HU A aaa dit sami ardniaqeaaia al lesa: 1261 
Achillea unaerated laegeifaacanat ada ara: 1201 
afegelregret Salen | IRedlargara Ged aT: art: 1221 
weg  fapatong ahemeanyeia | sarepriagarsaromar: 1281 
arasa faqaea fsa: wta aiwm sqem aacanl gia: qa i301 
awa esavaa frarmmtasera: | sure fe fimo atkneelesrrarkrat 132 1 


Citta (the faculty of reason)—which abounds in the quality of Sattva, is pure and free from 
passion and is the place where one can realize God—is spoken of as the Mahat-tattva and 
is also called by the name of Vasudeva (because it is through the cosmic Citta that they 
worship Vasudeva, the foremost of the Lord's four forms).(21) Just as water in its natural 
state {when it is free from foam and ripples etc.), before its coming in contact with earth etc., 
is clear (as crystal), sweet and unruffled, even so transparency, freedom from languor and 
distraction etc., and serenity are predicated of Citta (reason) as its characteristic traits.(22) 
From the Mahat-tattva, evolved from the Lord's own energy (in the form of Cit-Sakti or the 
power of intelligence), as it underwent transformation, sprang up Ahankara (the Ego), which 
is predominantly endowed with active power and Is of three kinds—Sattvika, Rajasika and 
Tamasika. From these three types of Ahankara were severally evolved the mind, 
the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as the organs of action) and the gross 
elements. (23-24) This (threefold) Anankara—the source of the gross elements, the Indriyas 
and the mind, and hence identical with them (because it is the cause which reproduces itself 
as the effect)—is the same as (symbolic of) the Purusa called Sankarsana (the second of the 
four forms of the Lord), whom the Vaisnavas speak of as no other than Lord Ananta with a 
thousand heads.(25) The Ahankara is characterized as a doer (when conceived in the form 
of deities presiding over the Indriyas and the mind), aninstrument(in the form of the Indriyas) 
and an effect (in the form of the gross elements). It is further characterized as serene, active 
or dull (according as itis Sattvika, Rajasika or Tamasika). (26) From the Vaikarika (Sattvika) 
type of Ahankara, as it underwent transformation, was evolved the mind, whose thoughts 
and reflections give rise to desire.(27) It is mind which is known by the name (recognized aS: 
a symbol) of Lord Aniruddha (the fourth of the four forms of the Lord), the supreme Ruler of 
the Indriyas, who is possessed of a form swarthy as the blue lotus growing in autumn, and 
who is slowly won by the Yogis.(28) From the Rajasika ego, as it underwent transformation 
sprang up the principle of Buddhi (understanding), O virtuous lady. Ascertaining the nature 
of objects on their-coming to view and helping the senses (in their work of perceiving 
objects)—these are the functions of Buddhi (known by the name of Pradyumna, the third form 
of the Lord). (29) Doubt, misapprehension, correct apprehension, memory and sleep are 
said to be the distinct characteristics of Buddhi as determined by their functions*. (30) The 
senses of perception as well as the organs of action—both the types of Indriyas too are 
EE Ie ara ee 


* Maharsi Patafijali too attributes the same functions to Buddhi in his “Aphorisms on Yoga":— 


“gamiartatancatiareyda: |”? (1. 1.6) 





evolutes of the Taijasa (Rajasika) ego alone, since the power of action belongs to Prana (the 


vital air) and the power of perception inheres in Buddhi (and both these—Prana and Buddhi— 
are evolutes of the Taijasa €go).(31) 


ETS LIoMAAIATA: Met A Bear 132! 
sera Bess Witsara Aldea aA aval wet Haat fag: 1331 
wet fea ofeemda IMPs awa qhrseor 13% | 


From the Tamasika €go, as it underwent transformation, impelled by the Lord's 
energy (Cit-Sakti), sprang up the principle of sound: and from the latter was evolved 
ether and the auditory sense too, which catches sound. (32)The knowers of truth define 
sound as that which conveys the idea of an object (not within sight), indicates the 
presence of a speaker screened from view and constitutes the subtle form of ether.(33) 
Even so ether IS characterized as that which affords room to living beings, gives rise to 
the notions of inside and outside and is the abode of Prana (the vital air), the Indriyas 
and the mind.(34) 


Te: Veatarchete § faepda: | weatiswaad ataeaen WA A UAE: 1341 

Wee alot a eqeta aiuente weld amas Awe: 1361 

Wet et wiftiqed saree: | adtsaroreree ara: sateen 130 | 
From ether, which is an evolute of the principle of sound, as it underwent transformation 
under the impulse of Time, sprang up the principle of touch and thence the air as well as the 
tactile sense, by which we perceive touch. (35) Softness and hardness, and even so cold 
and heat are the distinguishing attributes of touch and it is further characterized as the subtle 
form of air. (86) Even so shaking (the boughs of trees etc.), bringing together (straws lying 
apart), having access everywhere, bearing particles of substances containing smell etc., to 
the olfactory and other senses, and sound to the auditory sense. and giving strength and 

vitality to all the Indriyas—these are the characteristic functions of air. (37) 

ats 8 wala «0S eae afer «= ee eA 1321 

FAH lec TTOTAT akpawrana dldasied da: afta manne qda: 1381 

ta | waned feancaniasal aqdaeaa: seu aysa a Ivol 
From air—which is a product of the principle of touch—impelled by the destiny of the 
Various Jivas, was evolved the principle of colour and thence fire as wellas the sense of sight, 
which enables us to perceive colour.(38) To appear in the same form as the material 
Substance (in which it inheres), to depend (for its existence) on the substance, to have the 
Same spatial relation as the substance and to constitute the essential nature of fire—these, 
O virtuous lady, are the functions of the principle of colour. (39) To give light, to cook and 
digest food, to destroy cold, to dry (moisture etc.), to give rise to hunger and thirst and to drink 


and eat through them—these are the functions of fire. (40) 
waATafggaloresrat Saale! Tana «= TST «| WaTE: RI 
Hea Aexteten: areas oft Sener vitfeenrat fear wa Went faftrert zt 


Set fest gia: Marana cartel YaeTTe qaafeeereT: 13 | 
From fire—which is an evolute of the principle of colour—impelled by the destiny & the 
Various Jivas, proceeded the principle of taste and thence water as well as ne sense oO oe 
Which enables us to perceive taste. (41) Taste, though one Scant ee mani pss 
as astringent, sweet, bitter, pungent, SOUr and salt, due to contact wit shell eter 2) 
Ven so to wet substances, to bring about cohesion, to cause Satisfaction, to maintain 








256 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26 


life*, to refresh by slaking thirst, to soften things, to drive away heat and to be in a state of 
incessant supply (in wells etc.)—these are the functions of water. (43) 

eaeiicdld | TRA | TORRE: 1xx 

Rone: YAR sara wa fafa ix 

Wet HU: Wa WMT Uieteurl Uda: Ufereitehresarory 1g | 
From water—which is an evolute of the principle of taste— impelled by the destiny of the 
various Jivas, proceeded the principle of smell and thence earth as well as the olfactory 
sense, which enables us to perceive odour alone. (44) Smell, though one, becomes 
many—as mixed, offensive,fragrant, mild, strong, acid and so on,according to the proportion 
of connected substances. (45) Even sotto give form (through images etc.) to the concept of 
Brahma (the Infinite); to remain in position (without any support other than water etc., which 
are its causes); to hold (water and other substances); to limit (the unlimited space through 


walls of houses etc.) and to manifest the bodies as well as the distinctive qualities (sex etc.) 
of all living beings—these are the characteristic functions of earth.(46) 


auuifassisat Bat dadtaqed | arirfaseisat aa acuald fae: iv 
asiuiasisat aa adaeead i srmsiquiasreisal ae axed fag: | 
qerfurfassisat Gat A MT Seta 1¥C1 
Te cead sat gate aca sit fate samt waraatamed ise 
Wiese sel Adele AA al mlecndqunad SHTavaSanferateL 1 Go | 
eee erent GHAVSHAd | Shed «SET | eNecfaseet «faa 1421 
wens 4 fasrei  maaddaet: ideafefe: aad semataddfe: | 
aA ClcHladisa GA WTaa BW: 1421 
ferunacuShiane era Aaerwad| qatleaea Agleat ager Pfsite GL I43 | 
Puta 3a Wa awit adistad.t awa afar Aa Mondl Alot Uda: 14x 
BUNS au eratrareront AMAA: | Aa Saselat Short sitet adt fear: 1441 
fafasie farisieaaaanstalededd: | da sires fart fafafe aa: 1461 
Vaated «6 otafaitet «=a | RA! Uelearisarra GqOnwag: 1491 
eet a fitelat ae asa dd: Mate! wet a ffsea whrensat adi Biz: 14¢! 
Areuisel farittera arsat oifeaaryde i Aeleda: wavaqer =. anf 18 1 
aaa dd: idl AysKadaNud| sara wa fa waar sie ico! 
Tass SI feactehtiet «afd: | stegrercdt §« east «= Aereratse7a_ 162 | 
The sense whose object of perception is sound (the distinctive characteristic of ether), 
is called the auditory sense. And that whose object of perception is touch (the distinctive 
characteristic of air) is known as the tactile sense.(47) Even so the sense whose object of 
perception is colour (the distinctive characteristic of fire) is spoken of as the sense of sight. 
Again, that whose object of perception is taste (the distinctive characteristic of water) is 
known as the sense of taste. And (finally) that whose object of perception is odour (the 


distinctive characteristic of earth) is called the olfactory sense. (48) Since a cause exists in 
its effect as well, the characteristics of the former are observed in the latter. That is why the 





* The Sruti too says:— 2194: wm:1 “Life depends on water." 





Dis. 39 | PO BOOK THREE a 
SI SARS LE RES LER BE BAB BE BEB ACR RARER AAR EERE GE RR EARL 


eculiarities of all a elements are found (to exist) in earth alone. (49) When the Mahat- 
tattva, the ego an the five gross elements—these seven stood disunited, Lord Narayana 
(the Cause of the universe) entered them taking with Him Time, the destiny of the various 
Jivas and ne Gunas (modes of Prakrti). (50) From these seven principles, roused into 
activity and united by the Presence of the Lord, arose an unintelligent egg, from which 
appeared the well-known Cosmic Being.(51) This egg, which is known by the name of 
Visesa, IS enveloped on all sides by belts of water, fire, air, ether, the ego and the Mahat- 
tattva, each ten times larger than that which it encloses, and these six being enveloped by 
the outermost belt of Pradhana (Primordial Matter). All the fourteen worlds, which are a 
manifestation of Sri Hari Himself, are spread within this egg. (52) Shaking off an attitude of 
indifference to that shining €gg, which lay on the causal waters, the Cosmic Being (now) 
presided over It and manifested the seats of the various Indriyas out of it. (53) First of all 
appeared in Him a mouth and thence came forth the organ of speech and along with it the 
god of fire (the deity presiding over the organ of speech). Then appeared a pair of nostrils 
and in them the olfactory sense along with Prana (the vital air). (64) In the wake of the 
olfactory sense came the wind-god (the god presiding over that sense)* and thereafter 
appeared (in Him) a pair of eyes and in them the sense of sight. In the wake of this sense 
came the sun-god( the god presiding over the same) and next appeared (in Him) a pair of 
ears and in them the auditory sense andin the wake of it the Digdevatas (the deities presiding 
over the latter). (55) Then appeared in the Cosmic Being the skin and thereon the hair (on 
the body as well as on the head), a pair of moustaches and a beard. In the wake of these 
came the herbs and annual plants (the deities presiding over the hair, which represent the 
sense abiding in the skin), and then appeared in Him an organ of generation. (56) In the latter 
appeared the faculty of procreation and thereafter the god presiding over the waters. Next 
appeared in Him an anus and in the wake of it the organ of defecation and thereafter came 
the god of death, the terror of the world. (57) Then sprouted forth in Him a pair of hands and 
in them the capacity of grasping and dropping things and thereafter came the god Indra (the 
deity presiding over the hands). Next shot forth in Him a pair of feet and in them appeared 
the power of locomotion and thereafter appeared Lord Visnu (the deity presiding over that 
power). (58) Next appeared in Him the blood vessels and thereafter came forth blood (the 
power of circulation). In the wake of it came the rivers (the deities presiding over the blood 
vessels )and then appeared an abdomen. (59) Next grew therein a feeling of hunger and 
thirst and in their wake came the ocean (the deity presiding over the abdomen). Then 
appeared in Him a heart and in the wake of the heart a mind. (60) After the mind appeared 
the moon (the deity presiding over the mind) as wellas Buddhi (the faculty of understanding), 
and in the wake of Buddhi came Brahma (the lord of speech and the deity presiding over 
Buddhi). Next appeared in Him the ego and thereafter Lord Rudra (the deity presiding over 
the ego); and last of all appeared in Him a Citta (reason) and then the Ksetrajna (the Inner 


Controller, the deity presiding over r eason).(61) . 
We gngtee ar Jaretersret Gafateg: eI qeMafag sat 1ez I 
afgatet aad aa aefteda fewer ania afte aTeticivewar fee 1e3! 


arfaruit ssa atefrsrat fares stat aot a feat arefrsaet fee vex! 
aa wae Fefienat fameitaa ReMATIE arefesdear fame igh! 


1 yaa Aefasdel uci geiadt seta efrswct fae iat 


“In Brahma's creation itis the twin-gods Agwinikumaras who preside over the olfactory sense. In the body of the Cosmic 


Being, however, it is the wind-god who Is mentioned as presiding over this sense. 








ee 


258 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 26 


AELAAKK ALAA ALAAAAR ALE AAK AAR ALARA ALAR RAH HH ARAL HERES RE SE BEBE SESE SE RE RE RE REMEBER ROA RR Re Re He Hr Hy, 
a 


faupida ant Aefisdat fadeiadHet olfeda xlefasdel fame sey 
aqeamat  faeplefsaat fageigad waa al aleigwal fame sec 
aan sent wea alefasnct fadaiesisiaer ead xlelapre fee iee 
faaa gi da: aaa: sifeeeaifame aca gee: wafoongefasa iol 
am See Ged | eifsefta: issaha fat aa atenufaquistar ie! 
qf seemed fea armada! deen farqen ar fafa fara 192 | 
efit 9 < set fare: area aa : 
US faans tara: IRI 
When all the aforesaid deities (with the exception of the Inner Controller), though active, 
were unable to rouse the Cosmic Being into activity, they re-entered each his own seat in 
order to rouse Him one by one. (62) The god of fire entered His mouth along with the organ 
of speech; but the Cosmic Being could not be roused even then. The wind-god entered His 
nostrils along with the olfactory sense; but the Cosmic Being refused to wake up even 
then.(63) The sun-god entered His eyes along with the sense of sight; but the Cosmic Being 
failed to get up even then. The Digdevatas entered His ears along with the auditory sense; 
but the Cosmic Being could not be stirred into activity even then. (64) The herbs and annual 
plants (the deities presiding over the skin) entered the skin along with the hair on the body; 
but the Cosmic Being refused to get up even then. The god presiding over the waters entered 
His organ of generation along with the faculty of procreation; but the Cosmic Being would 
not rise even then. (65) The god of death entered His anus along with the organ of defecation; 
but the Cosmic Being could not be spurred into activity even then. The god Indra entered the 
hands along with their power (of grasping and dropping things); but the Cosmic Being would 
not get up even then. (66) Lord Visnu entered His feet along with the faculty of locomotion; 
but the Cosmic Being refused to stand up even then. The rivers entered His blood vessels 
along with blood (the power of circulation); but the Cosmic Being could not be made to stir 
even then. (67) The ocean entered His abdomen along with hunger and thirst; but the Cosmic 
Being refused to rise even then. The moon-god entered the heart along with the mind; but 
the Cosmic Being would not be roused yet. (68) Brahma too entered the heart along with 
reason (Buddhi); but even then the Cosmic Being could not be prevailed upon to get up. Lord 
Rudra also entered the heart along with the ego; but even then the Cosmic Being could not 
be made to rise. (69) When, however, the Inner Controller, the deity presiding over Citta 
(reason),entered the heart along with reason, that very moment the Cosmic Being rose from 
the causal waters. (70) Even as Prana (the vital air), the Indriyas (the senses of perception 
as well as the organs of action), the mind as well as the understanding are unable to awaken 
an embodied soul, who is fast asleep, by their own power, without the presence of the Inner 
Controller, similarly they could not do so in the case of the Cosmic Being. (71) Therefore, 
through Devotion, dispassion and spiritual wisdom acquired through a concentrated mind 
one should contemplate on that Inner Controller as present in this very body, though apart 
from it. (72) 


Thus ends the twenty-sixth discourse, forming part of the teaching of Lord Kapila 
on the nature of the fundamental principles, in Book Three of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 





Dis. 27 ] BOOK THREE 259 


Sr Br Be Br Ke Se Sr Hr Ke Hr Be He Ge Ve We He Ke Hr Hr vr 
gern Be We Be We We Br Hr He He Se Br Fr Fr He Hr Hr BER Be We Me Re He Re Be Re we Re Be Re Re Me He Re HERR RE RE RE BTR Re BER ACRE RE Re BAER BR 


AY Teleanseaa: 


| Discourse XXVII 
How to attain Liberation through the differentiation 
of Matter and Spirit ? 





a w an sepcrlvighifarsta | séinearfayern  cpatefearaa 1 2 | 


at diaest dad fadti ened fens east aaix i 
at Wa «Bist =a Ufa i uke dao fara a Aaear! & | 
SPIT EL CIO CE TEE § Teaihad: \a West AA AeHUMsavr awl 
Baya Petunia: | xerereiot aa eter ate 1 
aaa wy faye Ot: | faferrenar: Sed Ha: Heat sear tc 1 
at 86 eeSGdaREI AA «Gea Ned: UST WI | 
Faqtequaeirt RATA: | SMASH «=—- AA VaTehUIHeeh 120 | 
Unies  aasranafa  swauediad ayaa:  walqeqaeieei 
The Lord continued : Just as the sun, though seen reflected in water, remains 
unaffected by the attributes of water (Such as coolness, unsteadiness and so on), so the 
Spirit, though abiding in a material body, remains unaffected by its pleasurable and painful 
experiences, being devoid of attributes and doership and, therefore, free from change. (1) 
When, however, he gets attached to the Gunas (modes) of Prakrti, he begins to look upon 
himself as a doer, being completely deluded by egotism. (2) Due to this sense of doership 
he loses his peace of mind through evils attaching to action (in the shape of virtue and sin) 
and brought about by association with Matter and, helplessly thrown into wombs of good, 
evil and mixed types, has to undergo repeated births and deaths. (3) Justas a dreaming man 
experiences sorrow—even though there is no real cause for it—(because he takes the things 
seen in the dream to be real), even so for the man who dwells on the objects of senses, 
the round of births and deaths does not cease, even though those objects do not exist 
in reality.(4)Therefore, through concentrated practice of Devotion as well as through 
dispassion one should gradually bring under control ones mind, addicted to the pursuit of 
Se€nse-objects. (5) Practising concentration of mind through Yama (self-control in the form 
Of non-violence etc.) and other paths of Yoga with reverence, he who has realized the Self 
(as distinct from Prakrti) by means of sincere devotion to Me, and by listening to My ate ee 
by even-mindedness towards all beings and absence of enmity or attachment to amy dy 
Practising continence and observing a VOW of silence, and by devotion to one's own duty in 
4 Spirit of dedication to God; who remains contented with whatever » ooh eiccbes 52 
dispensation of Providence) and takes food in a measured quantity, is ever given to yj 
: ; ‘¢ calm and composed, friendly (to all), compassionate 2 
Contemplation, lives in seclusion, andis ca , n the peros nucHEGAPEEERnen 
and self-possessed: nay, by virtue of wisdom acquired througn hes ie anaes 
both Matter and Spirit, Ke who ceases to identify himself with his boay an g 








260 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 27 


BeBe BeBe Ree Sr Br Be Br Re REBT Re BELT Be BeBe Be Be Re Be Be Be Re He Be BT Re BE Re BY BeAr Br Be Ae RE BE BE RE Ae He Br Br Re Be Hr He Be Hr Me Ke He He Me Ke We Be Br Be Br Be Be Be He Re He Hr Be Re Me Ke Be Re Be eg, 


connected with it as his own, who transcends the three states of consciousness (waking, 
dream and deep sleep), and therefore no longer sees anything else than God—such a man 
is able to perceive his true Self with his purified intellect even as one sees the sun with his 
eyes, and (forthwith) attains to that Brahma who is one without a second, who is free from 
all adjuncts (such as body), who shines as the only reality through the false ego, who is the 
foundation of Prakrti,(the material cause of the universe), nay, who reveals the Mahat-tattva 
and other evolutes and interpenetrates everything—both cause and effect. (6—11) 


aM Wea sae: Weaaeead | Aaa aw gal aoe fefa fea: 1221 
wa 486fiacesnt 0 Weed: | eafadissta Terma Ate 123 1 
qagentsanlaealietye Feariaeygaa aaa fast fda: iexi 
ASA MeISSHIAAABY ASTTM I ABSESTM se ASfad = sala: 1241 
Wi 8 8oseaqeaearedt «=—s_ Siete | ese TR SISTA: 126 | 


Just as a reflection of the sun in water (existing in a pot in a corner of some house) is 
discovered (by the inmates of the house) with the help of a reflection of that reflection ona 
wall of the house, and the sun in the heavens can be seen with the help of its own reflection 
in water, even so the threefold (Sattvika, Rajasika and Tamasika) ego (which reflects the 
Spirit) is revealed through its reflections on the body, the Indriyas and the mind; and through 
the ego, which contains a reflection of the Spirit, is seen God, who is possessed of true 
wisdom, is absolutely free from egotism and keeps awake even when the subtle elements 
(in the shape of sound etc.), the Indriyas, the mind and the intellect etc., get merged in the 
Unmanifest (Primordial Matter) on account of sleep (during the state of deep slumber).(12—14) 
Although (in waking life)the existence of the Self can be vividly felt as the seer (of objects 
of perception such as sound etc.), he falsely takes himself as lost, though not lost, because 
of the disappearance of the ego (which forms its adjunct) during the state of deep sleep, just 
as aman who has lost his fortune feels distressed and takes himself as lost. (15) Pondering 
thus, a man of understanding realizes his own Self, who is the substratum and revealer of 
all fundamental principles including the ego. (16) 


Ue Wahid faqs afefadi aataosaa eater: wat ie 


aM We was A lal SAicted: | 3a Weal A aM aM qe: We a ieé! 
Bed: HuaSA GSI Aaa: | WY A Ned: Hacd Aga: Herz! 
ad adaddea Fad waqcaur aqua: Waafasad 120 | 


Devahiti said : Matter, O divine sage, can never leave the Spirit, the two being 
interdependent and co-eternal, O Lord. (17) Just as odour and earth and (similarly)taste and 
water can never exist apart, so can Buddhi ( understanding, which is an evolute of Matter) 
and the Spirit never remain dissociated from each other. (18) Hence how can there be any 
freedom for the soul so long as the Gunas (modes) of Prakrti continue to exist—Gunas that 
bind the soul, who is a non-doer, to actions?(19) Even if the great fear of such bondage !S 
averted through an enquiry into (the nature of) the fundamental principles in any particular 
case; the same may appear again, since the cause of it (in the shape of the aforesaid Gunas) 


has not ceased.(20) 
STA Tara 
stata SHO | cise A Aa A saya FAT 122 | 
Amd add ara acai daar ata dixonaraarfe 122! 








spit: URI ee retary ferret AAG ARAaT: 123 | 
qeurn GReRET peter a frag: | aaxenget ah @ ufsfx firmer a 1ex! 
ae wage went aera w wise a a Wea weTd eh 
I later sepfertfer AAA Gad Aeed stem afer 1261 
ACRES: = AT GT ea ETE «STAI SATAT: 12101 
Tem: sidqgief asta Waa | se SRI aed AISA 1221 
sisitteaet FR: Rae fewdiwa: age a fata abit feerktrht ize 

aq A attoferg «Sat omer feet farrstass | 

saedga A uit: we snefaet ax 3 yegre: 1301 

eft Srrerad Fe Ue Sedat adap aaftreaoReMy Gasiseara: 12061 


The Lord replied : Assailed day and night by intense devotion to Me—developed by 
hearing My stories for a long time with a heart purified by doing one's duties in a disinterested 
spirit—by spiritual enlightenment which enables one to perceive the truth, by strong 
dispassion, by practice of meditation accompanied by sacred vows and religious 
observances, and by thorough concentration of mind, Prakrti, which binds the soul, gradually 
withdraws, even as the wooden stick used for kindling the sacred fire by attrition is consumed 
by the very fire it produces.(21—23) Ever recognized to be a source of evil and abandoned 
after enjoyment, she no longer does any harm to the soul, who stands supreme in his glory 
(blissful nature) and is now absolutely independent. (24) Justas the dream ofa sleeping man 
is fraught with many evils, but the same does not conduce to his infatuation once he is 
awake, so Prakrti can never do any harm to him who, having realized the truth, ever keeps 
his mind fixed on Me and who (consequently) delights in his own Self.(25-26) When a man 
who is given to contemplation remains absorbed (as aforesaid) in (meditation on) the Self 
for a period extending over many births, he develops a distaste for everything as far as (the 
enjoyments of) Brahmaloka (the highest heaven, the abode of Brahma). (27) Having 
realized the Self by My abundant grace, that strong-minded devotee of Mine has all his 
doubts resolved by Self-vision and, when freed from his astral body, easily attains in that very 
life the supremely blissful state known by the name of final beatitude, which is his essential 
character and rests on Me, and having attained which a Yogi never returns to (the cycle of) 
birth and death.(28-29) If the mind of the accomplished Yogi, O beloved mother, does not 
get attached to the (eight kinds of) superhuman powers (such as the faculty of reducing one's 
body-to the size of an atom andsoon, which are products of Maya), developed through Yoga, 
whichis the only means of acquiring them, he is sure to attain My immortal state, where death 


has no power. (30) 


Thus ends the twenty-seventh discourse, forming part of the "Story of Lord Kapila” 
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita. 


won 





> 


262 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28 = 


BeBe Re Re ee Pe Ve Kee DO BBE BER EBERLE BE BEBE Bee Bee BBE Bie HM RRR Re He He REHM HEBEL BEE RHE RERE Be HEREC BEBE BE EM Re Ge Re BeBe He He Gr-Hy 9, 
—__ TEE eee: ee _ I a a a eR k fo 


STATSTaaN SEAT: 
Discourse XXVIII 
The process of the eightfold Yoga 


ana Gaol aqelt aah Fae! watt Ata fate waa ait Aa! gz J 
weanfat wea fama fradaqicaesaa aa sretfaanedtas 2 | 
BeRSOES ESTE (oto es Meredcicetan | fFraAeatet aafgiamaaaaty | 3 | 
afar eae SC(ité‘é TI: | eee aU: ileal WaTeaTa: Gear x | 
Ga PISS Wa: «aA: I setenarsao «= fawaret dig 1 & 
Masa ehest AAA WOTANUM| AqUSmlonMeA AAEM AMISSAA: | & | 
waeas  ufafinitt  eraaMigqall gail aachisiamot aabsa: 1 © | 


The Lord continued : (Now) | shall tell you, O princess, the character of Yoga 
(meditation) with some object to rest upon, by practising which—and in no other way—the 
mind gets purified and takes to the path of God. (1) To do one’s allotted duty to the best of 
one's ability and to shrink from prohibited acts; to remain contented with whatever is got as 
a dispensation of Providence; to adore the feet of one who has realized the Self and to cease 
from duties connected with the pursuit of religious merit, worldly possessions and sensuous 
enjoyment; even so to take delight in duties tending to final beatitude; to take pure food in 
a measured quantity*; to dwell permanently in a place which Is not only secluded but also 
free from molestation; to practise non-violence (in thought, word and deed); to speak the 
truth, to abstain from thieving, to limit one’s possessions to the extent of one's barest needs, 
to abstain from sexual commerce, to practise austere penance, to observe purity (of body 
and mind), to study the Vedas and other sacred texts, to worship the Deity, to observe 
silence, to acquire steadiness by firmness in the very best postures, to control one's breath 
by slow degrees, to withdraw one's senses from their objects and direct them towards the 
heart with the help of the mind, to fix one’s mind as well as the vital air on any mystical circle 
in one’s body, to contemplate without break on the pastimes of Lord Visnu and thereby 
to compose one’s mind—by these and other such methods.(e.g., observing fasts, bestowing 
gifts and so on) one should diligently control one's breath and then gradually curb 
one’s wicked mind, addicted to evil ways,with the help of one's reason and apply it to 
contemplation on God.(2—7) 


Wat eet sfasra fafserat STAT | he aed AA HTT: AALS 
TUT «= |-aaaT | Gente: I Shed at fet gem fiemasien i ¢ | 
THisttietast fae atta: | arafaat gen oe exit cathe a Ae | Ro | 
MMUTaHee TIONS || FepeaA ATL TEU PATA. TOIL 128 t 
aql Wa: @ fat at gqealedd! ast wad eardaaaramiacite: 1221 

* The quantity of food one should take has been indicated in the following Smrti-text, quoted by Sridhara SwamI:— 
3 Gl UM Taare ath WAG | Arete Marae aqerasrad It 


=44 "One should fill two quarters of one’s belly with articles of food and one quarter with water. The fourth quarter should 
| be kept empty for the free passage of air." 








Dis. 28 ] BOOK THREE 263 


Br Br Be Be Gr Br Ge Ge Be Hr Be Br Br He He Ke Gr Br Be He Ke He Ge Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke He Ke Ke Ke We Ke Ke Ke He Ke Be Ke He Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke He He Ke Re Ke He Kee He Ke Be Ker He Bee Be Re Be BeBe Be Be Be Be eBr BE. BeBe He Be He Ke Ke 
sss 


Having controlled one's posture, one should spread a seat (consisting of KuSa grass, 
deerskin and so on) in an undefiled spot. And sitting there in an easy posture, keeping the 
body erect, one should practise control of breath.(8) (At the very outset) the striver should 
clear the passage of the breath by first inhaling the air to his utmost capacity, then holding 
the breath and finally exhaling it, or by reversing the process( i. e., by exhaling the air in the 
first instance, then holding the breath outside and finally inhaling it), so that the mind may 
become steady and free from distraction.(9) Even as gold throws off its dross when heated 
(and melted) by the force of air and fire, so the mind of the striver who has controlled his 
breath gets purified before long.(10) A striver should (therefore) eradicate the disorders of 
the three humours of the body (wind, bile and phlegm) by the (aforesaid three) processes 
of breath-control, his sins by concentrating his mind, contacts (with sense-objects) by 
withdrawing the senses from their objects and the characteristics which are contrary to the 
Lord's divine nature (such as attachment and aversion etc.), by means of meditation. (11) 
When his mind gets purified and concentrated by the practice of Yoga, he should meditate 
on the form of the Lord (as indicated hereafter) with his gaze fixed on the tip of his nose.(12) 

THAAATTS VENTA SU AUT | Alearaaeeaa Vg aH ATA 1 V3 I 
Waa enaeah Ach aaa. \sactaad «=—|—- sien equa 1 
HafstHcncal Uitte AAAI | UTA ENA Sach leleeqae, 12uI 
aaticora  geeivifasmicattaat wt  AdMaadtaiee 
shaeatt WAAR! Ga aaa Hatt yarqaeide 1291 
Caldas QUaRethagene | aAea AAAS Alaa Aad AA: 12C1 
fad aad Wad al Veni yaitaed  weteguer Adar i2ei 
dence fad wdalaqadie floater daraes wadl fa: 1201 

The Lord has a cheerful lotus-like countenance, eyes ruddy like the interior of a lotus, and 
a body swarthy (of complexion) like the petals of a blue lotus and bearing a conch, discus 
and mace (in three of His four hands). (13) He has wrapped round His loins a shining piece 
of silk yellow as the filaments of a lotus, bears the mark of Srivatsa (a curl of white hair) on 
His bosom and has the brilliant Kaustubha gem suspended from His neck. (14) He also 
Wears round His neck a garland of sylvan flowers, that has attracted a swarm of bees drunk 
with its delicious fragrance and sweetly humming about it, and is further adorned with a pearl 
necklace and a crown, and pairs of armlets, wristlets and anklets, all superb.(15) With His 
loins and hips-graced by a girdle He stands on the lotus of His devotee's heart, is most 
Charming to look at, wears a serene aspect and gladdens the soul and eyes of those who 
behold Him.(16) Eternally continuing in the prime of youth, He has acaptivating appearance, 
is ever greeted by the entire universe and is impatient to show His grace to His servants.(17) 
His glory is worth singing and sanctifies all; nay, He confers glory even on men of sacred 
renown (like the demon king Bali). In this way one should meditate on the integral form of 
the Lord till the mind does not shake. (18) The pastimes of the Lord are all attractive to the 
Sight; hence with a mind full of sincere devotion one should visualize Him as standing, 
moving, sitting, lying or dwelling in one's heart. (19) Having ascertained that his mind, though 
fixed on the aforementioned form of the Lord, only takes a collective view of all His limbs, 
the practicant should fix it on each individual limb of the Lord (as follows) .(20) 


Serra Taare AA GUASME OS SASTA. | 
FUG Ch ACA AMAA CA ATH eT eT SAT TTA, 12g I 


0 eet wees 8 > 


; 





> 


264 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28 


SERRE ee Ree RY eRe Bee Ree Re RR We We Wr Weer Wr Wy We Be We Me We We We A Re Me A We We We Be eA Be He We Ae We We We We Rr We A We We Be ee Hie We We Wr Wr Wr Wy 


aSaa-gddReRicaa dia yeifands fra: feratsya 
aiaaadeomgsadt weft  wnaaqsronfaaieei 
The devotee should (first of all) concentrate his thought on the Lord's lotus-feet— 

adorned with the marks (in the form of lines) of a thunderbolt, a goad, a banner and a lotus— 
the splendour of whose prominent, ruddy and brilliant nails, resernbling the orb of the moon, 
dispels the thick gloom of one's heart. (21) The blessed Lord Siva became all the more 
blessed by bearing on His head the holy waters of the Ganga (the foremost of all rivers), 
which has its source in the water that washed the Lord's lotus-feet. Again, His feet are like 
a thunderbolt hurled to shatter the mountain of sins stored in the mind of the devotee 
meditating upon them. One should meditate on these for a long time.(22) 


Wed Wesel waa oeakaea garadar faend: | 
Saad HUesmitas ad detfed ge faanvaas Hai 1231 
SE AOU ysaeanwaridisitet  sidfaentepquravrat | 


age 480oyanntenigerst «= aaa aferaunhametencery | 

ae teatiquaranqe wre ga fasta 12k 

aaisttaraqaye 4delfayd: Ger Aamir | 

aus ad cmiquainiayeuned qalaaahasetnrtepdes 1261 

Then the devotee should impress on his heart the knees (as well as the shanks) of the 

birthless Lord (who cuts short the transmigration of His devotees), which are fondled by 
Laksmi (the goddess of fortune), the lotus-eyed mother of Brahma—the maker of the 
universe—and the adored of the gods, with Her shining sprout-like hands, placing them (the 
knees) on Her thighs. (23) Next he should fix his mind on the Lord's thighs, the storehouse 
of energy, that possess the (blue)lustre of the linseed flower and appear most graceful when 
borne on the shoulders of Garuda (the king of the birds). Similarly he should contemplate 
on His rounded hips, encircled by a girdle resting on the exquisite yellow silk that covers them 
and extends up to His ankles. (24) Now he should meditate on His pool-like navel at the 
centre of His belly, the abode of the entire system of the worlds, from which sprang the lotus 
representing all the spheres and forming the home of Brahma (the self-born). Likewise he 
should concentrate his thought on the Lord's nipples, resembling a pair of most excellent 
emeralds, which look whitish on account of the rays of the milk-white pearl necklaces 
(adorning His chest). (25) He should then fix his mind on the bosom of the Supreme Person, 
the abode of Goddess Mahalaksmi—which brings delight to the mind and eyes of men (who 
contemplate on it). He should also imprint on his mind an image of the neck of the Lord who 
is adored by the whole universe—a neck which serves to enhance the beauty of the 
Kaustubha gem itself. (26) 


Tes Wain: URadtd Pltimargacantiernaer | 
Tariana: IG HARES 12091 
aitient wad cad eta ferenqafanestftrenda | 
Hel apadasatRage! were aan afore mus Rc 
He should further focus his thought on the Lord's four arms, the abode of the guardians 


of the various spheres, the ornaments (armletsetc.),on which were burnished by revolving 
Mount Mandara (at the time of churning the milk ocean along with the gods at the dawn of 





Dis. 28 ] BOOK THREE 265 


Br Br Br Br Br Sr Br Br Br Br Be Kr Br Sr Br Br Br Br Br Hr Kx Be Ke Br Ke Hr Kr Hr Hr Br Hr Hr Hr Hr BRR RE RRR BERR He RR ROR he Re RR RR Be BB ORE ERE Rt REE RE RY BRT BE BER RAR AR ABBE 





creation). He should also duly contemplate on the Lord's discus (Sudarsana), containing a 
thousand spokes and possessing a dazzling lustre, as well as on the conch, which looks like 
a swan in His lotus-like palm. (27) He should then call to mind the Lord's beloved mace, 
known by the name of Kaumodaki and besmeared with the clotted blood of enemy warriors; 
His garland (of sylvan flowers), attended with the humming of a swarm of bees; and the gem 
(Kaustubha) adorning His neck and representing the pure essential character of the Jivas 
(viz., the Spirit). (28) 


ehh mMeaaadesad 8 seoday 1301 
Next he should rivet his thought on the lotus-like countenance of the Lord, who reveals 

His form in this world out of compassion for His devotees—a countenance which is 
distinguished by a prominent nose and whose crystalline cheeks are irradiated by the 
oscillation of His glittering alligator-shaped ear-rings. (29) Adorned with curly tresses and 
possessed of lotus-like eyes, the Lord's face, which is further characterized by dancing 
eyebrows, puts to shame by its elegance a lotus (the abode of Goddess Laksmi) swarming 
with bees, with a pair of fish throbbing on it. With an alert mind he should dwell on a 
conceptual image of the aforesaid countenance.(30) 

qeaetenait puaicaauraaaa  fysreit: | 

Batt ar Mt 132 

aa Sad Ra wontchdisancHlsyarRragnaoragqane | 

ane tad femme woes yaad Anata 132! 

Mee seed 9 agorentsuaeuladdiiatparakn | 

widened fanideasssaticra A yaaa 133 | 

With full devotion he should contemplate for a long time in his heart on the glances 

frequently cast out of compassion by His eyes in order to soothe the most fearful threefold 
agony of His devotees—glances which are accompanied by loving smiles and are full of 
abundant grace.(31) He should similarly meditate on the most benevolent smile of Lord Sri 
Hari, a smile which dries away the ocean of tears—caused by intense grief—of all those who 
bow to Him, as well as on His arched eyebrows manifested by dint of His own Maya 
(wonderful creative energy) in order to charm the god of love (whose ensign bears the 
emblem of an alligator) for the good of hermits (who are molested by him).(32) Full of 
devotion steeped in love, he should finally fix his thought on the laughter of Lord Visnu, 
visualized as abiding in the cavity of his heart—a laughter which is so captivating that it can 
be easily meditated upon, andin the course of which come to view the rows of His small teeth, 
resembling jasmine buds, rendered rosy by the profuse (crimson) splendour of His lips. And 
having (exclusively) devoted his mind to the same, he should no more desire to see anything 
else.(33) 


UW Rt WMA Mose Ysa sAcHea SoH: Wlerc | 

Siero Yeinmenia faratsst warenfelaem 13x! 

anid uf fides faas faturpesia aa: aga ante: | 

saat «60 eNSeaaAediad 8 86—- Sidfaaqqosare: 1341 
[S64] B. M. 11— 








266" SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28 


LRAALAAALLE LALA A ALLAH AAA AGL A LA A A AA A AA AAA RRR AEB RARE RE RRR KER Rr oe 


Asada aaa Ata Faw aferafeeaatsa: Wee: ware | 
VAAN Hat aad Wier fast BIeOIHIS: 1361 
te ad a ae: Regie ai fiat feugait adisenranaedd | 
SaTgadaa caagneid art aa uUftced afaMHelRy: 131 
aistt daar: We He Aad SNe shratera wa are: | 
aq wusntiacaniam: Gs Ga wad sige: 13! 


By following the above course of meditation the devotee develops love for Sti.Hari: his 
heart melts through Devotion, the hair on his body stand erect through excessive joy and he 
is constantly bathed ina stream of tears occasioned by intense love, so thathe now gradually 
withdraws (from the object of meditation) even the mind, which was (till now) being used by 
him as a means to attract Sri Hari (just as a hook is used for capturing fish). (34) Even as 
the flame of a lamp is extinguished (i.e., becomes one with its cause, viz., the element of fire) 
when the oil etc., are burnt and the lamp broken, so the mind gets immediately dissolved 
(becomes one with Brahma or the Absolute) the moment it is cut off from its moorings in the 
shape of the soul and, rid of passion, it ceases to think of anything. The adjuncts of the soul 
in the shape of body etc. (which are nothing but a continuous flow of the Gunas or modes 
of Prakrti), being withdrawn at this stage, the striver sees pervading everywhere the one 
Absolute having no distinction of subject, object and so on. (35) Having established himself 
in the glory of his own being (viz., Brahma)—which transcends joy and sorrow—through the 
dissolution of his mind, brought about by the practice of Yoga and divorced from ignorance, 
the striver realizes the truth of the Supreme Self, and discovers that pleasure and pain as 
well as their experience, which he attributed till now to his own self, are attributable to the 
ego, which is a product of ignorance.(36) Even as a man blinded by intoxication caused by 
spirituous liquor sees not whether the cloth wrapped round his loins is still there or has 
dropped therefrom, so the enlightened soul who has attained this final stage no longer 
discerns whether the body (which they still call his own) is seated or has risen from its seat, 
whether it has shifted (from the place where it was) by the will of Providence or whether it 
has come back (to that place) by the will of the same Providence; for he has realized his 

_ essential character. (37) The body too, which is (now) subject to the will of Providence, 
survives along with the senses till the destiny which contributed to its existence has not been 
reaped. Yet the enlightened soul who has attained to the heights of Yoga culminating in 
Samadhi (abstract meditation) and (consequently) realized the truth no longer regards that 
body or those connected with it (e.g., wife, children and so on) as his own, even as a man 
who is awake no longer thinks of the body etc. —seen in a dream—as his own.(38) 


aM Utd fad quend: wdlad | stented: Gea 139 | 
aaiedelethiesiema VAM! AeaTeaaAAMA: Gaede iso! 
Wasa: FRONSAATSaa ead, | STAT AMT YMSBT WTA Aerated: 1X2! 
aa yay aad way Tare | Sada-auraat Miya Aare 1¥2! 
ates AM Witte AMT Uelad | atitar Woraerardenssan Nepal feed: 1s 1 
aaa al Snld cdl Genel! dave wie Wedunafasd xx! 
ofa SAMA FEM Wee Sedat Was atest MAE 
ATATEAaMS*ATA: 12Z I 7 
Just as a man is realized (on a little thought) as distinct from his son and possessions, 





Dis. 29 ] BOOK THREE 267. 
Br Br Br Br Br Br Br Br Br Gr Br Kr Be Hr Hr Ke Se Ge Bre Ke Kr Hee Be Kee We Be Ke Re Re Me Ree Re Hr Ge rr Be Be Re Br eRe BR Be Be RR RY BR BER A Be Be ATH RE AAA RAE KB 


that are regarded (by the common people) as their own self (on account of excessive 
fondness), so is the perceiving subject recognized as distinct from the body, senses and 
other adjuncts, which are generally identified with one's own self (due to ignorance).(39) (To 
take another illustration) just as fire is distinct from a piece of burning wood, a spark or even 
from the smoke arising from it, and just as it is distinct even from a torch, which is recognized 
as identical with it, so the perceiving subject is distinct from the elements, the senses and 
the internal sense; the all-pervading Self, which is called Brahma is distinct even from the 
perceiving subject, which is called Jiva (an individual soul); and the Lord (the Supreme 
Person) is distinct from Prakrti (which is activated by Him). (40-41) One should see the Self 
as identical in all living beings and all beings as identical in the Self, even as all (the four 
species of) living beings (viz., mammals, oviparous animals, sweat-born creatures and 
those sprouting from the earth) are seen as identical in essence with the gross elements 
(being products of the same). (42) Just as fire, though one (undifferentiated) appears as 
diversified in the media (pieces of wood etc.) manifesting it, due to the diverse characteristics 
(size, shape etc.) of those media, so the Self, though one, appears different as abiding in the 
various material bodies, due to the diverse characteristics (species etc.) of those bodies.(43) 
Therefore, conquering (by the grace of the Lord) this divine Prakrti (Maya)—which veils the 
true character, and brings about the bondage of the Jiva, a fragment of the Lord, nay, which 
appears both as cause and effect and is so difficult to comprehend—a devotee of the Lord 
realizes his true being.(44) 


Thus ends the twenty-eighth discourse entitled "The pursuit of disciplines for 
God-Realization", forming part of the "Teachings of Lord Kapila", 
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PISS SIS 


ZINA Seale: 


Discourse XXIX 
True meaning of devotion and the glory of Time 


aaeriearea 
Bat Agdldlat Nd: Gea Wi wed seadsater aa acaaiisinr 2g | 
am deg afd aye dacaad! akparre A ani ale facia: wat 2 | 
farm a4 geal wad addl ad stated sacle fafaen aa adi: 1 3 1 
ROMS Wt A Wa Al aed ad Haid Aad: Hale Gat: | x | 
Cla frearhradraaratent Tae THATS | 
Tae adedaga fer waarfardt: feo are: 141 
‘ Devahiti said : You have told me, as described in works on the Sankhya system of 
philosophy, the characteristics of Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence)as well 


as of Prakrti (Primordial Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit)—characteristics which reveal their 
true (and distinctive nature); now be pleased to reveal to me at length, O Lord, the path of 








| 
' 


HEL 


268 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29 


Re Be Be Br Rr Br Re Be Ber Re A BeBe ABER BEBE Be BR EB Be BY RBS BE BE Be BeAr BT BI AE BE Ae Be Be Br Br Bs Br Br Hr Hr Ke Be Br SSSR RGR BBR BB He Pr B49, 


Bhaktiyoga (the discipline of devotion), which is said to be the end of the above 
discussion. (1-2) Pray, also tell me the various destinies (in the form of birth in different 
species as well as of death) attained by the Jivas, by hearing an account of which man ma 
develop a distaste for everything (in this world as well as in the next), O almighty Lord | 3) 
Further let me know the essential character of the all-powerful Time, who is the Ruler even 
of Brahma and others and identical with You, and for fear of whom people do that which is 
good. (4) You have appeared as a sun to diffuse the light of Yoga for awakening men, who 
having lost the eye (of wisdom), have identified themselves with objects (such as the body 
possessing no reality and who, feeling fatigued on account of their mind being attached to 
action, have long been lying asleep in the bottomless darkness of ignorance. (5) 
WAY Sara 
sfa adda: seeut fate Nera: i stase pests sitet eonfed: 1 | 

Maitreya continued : The great sage (Kapila) greeted these charming words of His 
mother and overwhelmed with compassion and full of delight, O crest-jewel of the Kurus, 
replied to her (as follows). (6) 


la! 


AATATASA 
Warm agen arta aeadti amaqumania gat wal fated © t 
atten at feat esi aredda ari dest feared afa qake ame: ci 
fase «= aatCUeeAaAaT | Steiietacdadtall AT gera: @ Usa: | 2 | 
SHtetiead Wey al dedumLasteseaiafa at gorse: a Ua: 1201 
Aaa fa Tea HATaheoa ae STATA sraEH 1281 
ean Ueatra Frere delet i steqaderafe at wi: geared 122! 
AlaetaPaniteranraanargyad laa a defa fant aad sat: 1231 
a Wa wnane state seed: iar «= rut wstareiaaere 1 ex 
The Lord said : The discipline of devotion, O noble lady, is recognized as manifold 
according to our ways of approach (attitudes of mind with regard) to it; and men's attitude 
of mind varies according to the diversity of their natural characteristics. (7) A man who is 
given up to anger and views Me as distinct from himself, and who practises devotion to Me 
with a mind full of violence, hypocrisy and jealousy, is a devotee of the Tamasika type. (8) 
He who worships Me through an image etc., as distinct from himself with a view to acquiring 
objects of senses, fame and power is a devotee of the Rajasika type. (9) And he who adores 
Me as distinct from himself, aiming at the eradication of his sins or with the intention of 
offering his actions to the Supreme or again with the feeling that it is his duty to worship 
Me is a devotee of the Sattvika type.(10) The uninterrupted flow of the mind-stream 
towards Me, dwelling in the heart of all—like that of the waters of the Ganga towards the 
ocean—at the mere mention of My virtues, combined with motiveless and unremitting love 
to Me, the Supreme Person, is spoken of as the distinguishing character of unqualified 
Bhaktiyoga. (11-12) My devotees accept not, in exchange for My service (the five forms of 
final beatitude, viz.) Salokya (residence in My divine realm), Sarsti (enjoying My powers), 
Samipya (living in My presence), Sarupya (possessing a form similar to Mine) and Sayujy4 
(absorption into My Being), even when they are offered to him (by Me). (13) The aforesaid 
Bhaktiyoga has been declared as the highest (final) goal; for transcending the realm of the 
three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) the devotee thereby becomes qualified for My state (without 
any effort). (14) 





Dis. 29 ] -- BOOK THREE ~ 269 


Br Br Be Be Br Be Br Hr Br Gr Br He Hr Be Br Mr Ge Be Ge He He Kr Br Be He Kr Ke Se Ke Ke Ke Ke Kr Hr He He Ke Ky Ke Gr BAe Be Be He Kee Be Be Be Ke he Be Be eRe Be Be ee BG BE BEBE BET BEBE BEBE Be BEBE BER Be He Br 
Pefadcnmiea  weriot uadtaeri fearatta area arfafeaor freer: 124! 
Afiguaeriteaatganegensaras: l3ay Weleda «aT ATR 
fet ae deta sages ata Paw aie 
STATA AAAS ATE Riana  frefaat aa lec 
Agron WR: Ufa STA: | CTA qaqa «fe Ar 129! 

By devoutly performing one's duties (both of an obligatory nature and those arising out 
of a special occasion) in a disinterested spirit; by following everyday a course of worship 
(enjoined by the Pafcaratra and other sacred works) involving no destruction of life and 
actuated by no worldly desire; by beholding, touching, adoring, extolling and bowing to My 
images etc., by regarding all living beings as My own manifestations; by resorting to patience 
and dispassion; by showing great respect to exalted souls, commiserating with the afflicted 
and behaving in a friendly manner with one's equals; by practising the five Yamas (non- 
violence, truthfulness, non-thieving, abstaining from sexual commerce and possessing 
things not exceeding the bare necessaries of life) and the five Niyamas (viz., external and 
internal purity, contentment, undergoing penance, study of sacred texts and meditation on 
God); by hearing spiritual discourses and chanting the divine names; by unity of mind, 
speech and body, fellowship with holy men and absence of egotism, the mind of the man. 


engaged in activities intended to please Me gets thoroughly purified and conceives a liking 
for Me without any effort the moment My virtues enter his ears. (15—19) 


AM AMM MUATGah WI Bea wa Ard aad sieafaaik aio! 
3% «Aa WAG weather: eli dqdaga ai ued: Hedsalfasaay 1221 
a at ada way aaaedte! fara wed Aleaserda welt a: 1221 
fgaad: ura at ufadt faaefia: 1 gag agave A aa: anfagesfa 123! 
sTeqeaased: fradeaane laa qeisfidtsatat sqarraarhra: 12x 
sraleradadadiat sil (GL GTA aa ele UA gafea 124 
aera wen a: mileaelenida facet yafack wagcqur 1261 
a At Way WAI Hai skaeaamma Asana Aaai 121 


Just as odour wafted from its source through the vehicle of a breeze catches the olfactory 
sense, so an equipoised mind engaged in the pursuit of Yoga (Devotion) embraces Me. (20) 
| am ever present in all living beings as their very Self (Inner Controller). A man (therefore) 
who worships Me through an idol, showing disrespect to Me (as abiding in all creatures), 
makes a travesty of worship. (21) Ignoring Me, the Supreme Ruler, the Self present in all 
living beings, he who stupidly resorts to idol-worship alone throws oblations into the 
ashes.(22)The mind of a man who, full of pride, hates Me, abiding in the body of another, 
views Me as distinct from himself and bears deep-rooted malice to living creatures can never 
find peace.(23) | am not pleased, even though adored through an image by means of formal 
worship carried on with costly or cheap materials, O sinless mother, by a man slighting other 
Creatures. (24) Performing his (allotted) duties, a man should worship Me, the Supreme 
Ruler, through images etc., only so long as he does not realize Me as presentin his own heart 
as well as in (the heart of) other living beings. (25) Figuring as Death, | cause great fear to 
him who makes the least discrimination between himself and another because of his 
differential outlook.(26) Therefore, through charitable gifts and attentions as well as through 
friendly behaviour and by viewing all alike, one should propitiate Me, abiding in all creatures 


as their very Self. (27) 











270 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29 


SERRE BRR RR RHE HH Re REBT BT BEBE BT BE AE RE BRE RE BE ME HEME Me MEME STB HY BE SESE BE BEE BEBE SY Sr Be Be Sr Be Be Be He He Me Br Be Re Br Br Br Br Br Br beg, 
tea CLEA AAAS es) 


Sar:AEt silat dd: Woya: WAidd: Aft: yaweasfeaaaa: 121 

aaa wealesa: sad ~aafer: | deat wefae: Need: Beafael aw: 1201 

wu efaaedat aAMAadadt: 1AM Adal: Aeiaqareerh fF 1301 

aa aUiss Bae AMT SAA sag dat eistsvafeepeta13e | 

Rites dd: A Medal idwdse  Yareren ema: 1321 

AM aed arash areata Prem: | eaters: ger afa deeded: | 

qt agate at yaad: Gaeta 133 | 
Tad «6 TOM eI Set Samet ofast omarait vax 
Living beings are superior to the inanimate creation, while animals are superior to 

(other) living beings, O blessed mother. Higher than the animals are beings gifted with 
consciousness and still higher than these are those endowed with sense-perception. (28) 
Again, among the creatures endowed with sense-perception, those endowed with the sense 
of taste (Such as fish) are superior to those having the sense of touch alone. Higher than 
those capable of perceiving taste are those endowed with the olfactory sense (bees etc.) and 
still higher are those capable of sensing sound (snakes etc.). (29) Higher than these latter 
are those capable of perceiving the differences of colour( crows etc.) and still higher are 
those having teeth both in the upper and lower jaws. Of these latter, those endowed with a 
number of feet are superior to those having no feet; the quadrupeds are higher than those 
possessed of many feet; while a biped (human being) is superior to the quadrupeds. (30) The 
members of the four castes are superior to other human beings; while the Brahmana ranks 
the foremost among the four castes. Of the Brahmanas, again, the knower of Veda is the 
best; and higher still is the man who knows the meaning of the Vedas. (31) Higher than the 
latter is he who can clear doubts (a master of the Mimamsa system of philosophy) and higher 
Still is the man who performs his own duty. Superior to him is he who is free from attachment 
and performs his duty in a disinterested spirit (expecting no reward for the same either here 
or hereafter). (82) Higher than the latter is the man who has dedicated all his actions as well 
as their consequences, nay, his very self (his body) to Me and thus sees no difference 
between himself and Me. And | find no living being higher than the man who has given his 
mind and offered his actions to Me, who has no sense of doership and regards all with the 
Same eye.(33) Treating all living beings with great respect under the belief that it is the 
almighty Lord who has entered their body as the Inner Controller of the soul tenanting it, one 
should mentally bow to them. (34) 


Upariasa ais Aa AME: \aaReatla «Gee: «GEe | AIG! 
Udettadt Ch AU: UI: Iat send ged ea adfactear iss 
wanae feet oie safietadi yet weal aat fires sa 1301 
Misa: Mast Uh wdeahaersta: | a fawareistragisal are: Hae WY: 1321 
A ae aigefadt 4 Bel A a area: | stlagreasaisal a | aaa 1381 
aeaiatda aidist Wael asad aeateda eal WON wala asad Ivo! 
agra it safe: del AA arestryeha Gena Herta Ive! 
Sara Aidt wer aeadaefeda: i ofita uke asia aga ive! 
amt cdi wadt Ge afaamed: i oleh wee aad Fem Bafa ix3! 
TOMA sat: AMaqe AKA adasyt Aa aM Uda sy! 


oY 





Dis. 30} BOOK THREE 271 


Pr Rr Br Be Br Be Be BeBe Be Be BeBe Br Me He Sr Be Be Ke Ker Kr Be Be Behe He He Br Fr Re Br Ke Ke Ke Ke Ke Kr Le We Ke Ke Ke Rr Be Ke Ke Ve Ke Ke Be Ke Ve Ke Be Be Ve Ke BeBe BE Be Be Be BBE EEA AAA AA 


WstHisMa: HOSEA: 1S SA SINS ISG 
gia atterrad Fer uRagea discret Gases ‘anf aea’ WARNS ATA: | 2 | 


The Yoga (discipline) of Devotion as well as the Yoga with eight limbs have (thus) been 
expounded by Me, O daughter of Swayambhuva Manu! By following either of these two 
Yogas a man Can attain to the Supreme Person.(35) The aforesaid aspect of the Lord—who 
is the same as the Absolute (of the Vedanti) and the Supreme Spirit (of the Yogi), nay, who 
figures both as Prakrti (Primordial Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit) and yet lies beyond the 
two—is also known by the name of Providence, who brings into play the activity of Karma 
(the destiny of the different Jivas in the shape of birth in the various species of life).(36) It also 
bears the appellation of Kala (Time), which brings about the transformation of things and is 
possessed of wonderful prowess, nay, which is a source of (constant) terror to those who 
regard themselves as a separate entity and have identified themselves with Mahat-tattva 
(the principle of cosmic intelligence) and other products of Matter. (37) Kala (the Time-spirit), 
who is the Ruler of rulers (Brahma and others) and who, being the support of all, enters the 
heart of all living beings (as their Inner Controller) and devours (destroys) them through other 
beings, is no other than the deity presiding over sacrifices and known by the name of 
Visnu. (38) Although there is none dear or hateful to Him nor anyone His Kinsman, He is ever 
on the alert and attacks and destroys the man who (having forgotten the Lord) wallows in 
the error of sensuality.(39) For fear of Him blows the wind; for fear of Him the sun shines; 
for fear of Him the god of rain pours forth showers and for fear of Him the host of heavenly 
bodies shed their lustre. (40) Afraid of Him, trees and creepers along with herbs or annual 
plants (that die the moment their fruit ripens) put forth blossoms and fructify each in its own 
season. (41) Afraid of Him, rivers flow and the ocean never overflows. Nay, for fear of Him 
fire burns and the earth with its mountains sinks not (into the waters supporting it). (42) 
Subject to His control the yonder sky allows room to living beings and Mahat-tattva (the 
principle of cosmic intelligence) expands its own (sprout-like) form into this (vast) universe 
enveloped by seven sheaths (in the shape of earth, water, fire, air, ether, the ego and 
Prakrti). (43) For fear of Him the deities presiding over the (three) Gunas or modes of Prakrti 
(viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva), who hold sway over the entire creation consisting of animate 
and inanimate beings, remain engaged in their duties of creating, preserving and destroying 
it from time to time.(44) That imperishable Time-Spirit, who, though beginningless, is the first 
maker (of the universe) and who, though endless, brings about the end of the phenomenal 
world, carries on the work of creation by bringing into existence one individual (a son) through 
another (his father) and likewise dissolves the universe by destroying even Yama (the lord 
of death) through Himself (the Destroyer even of Death). (45) 





Thus ends the twenty-ninth discourse, forming part of the “Story of Lord 
Kapila," in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


seh BETH BS 
FIFI SI OD 


aia fararrsearea:: 


Discourse XXX 
Downfall of men attached to their body, house etc. 
alae Sara 
aad Sal Ad Aa aarefaenan | areaarist afeat arate aaraios: 1&1 








272 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 39 


SR RRR RRR RR A RAR ER ER RR RR RR Br We Ar Be Br Ke We We Wr Sr Br Br Br Vr By Hr Wr He ar Hr Hr BeBe Sr Br Rt BR fr ay 9, 


q andqged gaa  Yaedadld a eatfa ware yAworaia aed i 2 | 
aaa tee TST Sit: | afr Wad Aele eaaagh a1 3 | 
Sa Va Udi at at ahagasial det qa a oud Media a few i x | 
Tees 2 A a wieitefaiaraat fda aat tanreniaarea: 1 & 1 
STAM ATARI SATA TY IMacqoeqt Sie ay At! & | 
Wedurdas Wee |atetiaw At katy ara: | 
siaqarsa: aoreadat a area wenfadaissemd: rapt weaker 2 1 
Tey ReTHy SUdagiadt: | Heenan qaaww tie 
sekinfeniant  fedaas ari genta aai aaor sey: Wa 1201 
ada GAA Ua: Ua: | otsniay Fara: uae Hed Wer ie 
Sean wert geile: | fren fade: Hoon enesgiata yee: 1221 


Lord Kapila continued : Just as a mass of clouds knows not the inordinate strength 
of the mighty wind-god, though driven (here and there) by the latter, so this Jiva surely does 
not know the enormous power of the omnipotent Kala though being subjected to repeated 
births and deaths (by the latter). (1) The almighty Time-Spirit destroys each and every object 
the Jiva acquires with great pains for the sake of happiness, and for whose loss he grieves 
much. (2) That is because the stupid creature foolishly regards as everlasting the house, 
lands and wealth etc., belonging to one's transient body and those connected with it (viz., 
one's wife, son and so on, who are equally perishable). (3) The Jiva in this world finds delight 
in whatever species of life he is born into, and never feels aversion for it. (4) Deluded by the 
Lord's Maya, the Jiva feels little inclined to cast off his body even in hell, taking delight in the 
infernal enjoyments. (5) With his heart deeply attached to body, wife, progeny, house, 
animals, wealth and relations, he deems himself blessed.(6) Burning all over with anxiety to 
maintain them all, the evil-minded fool incessantly commits sins. (7) Nay, with his mind and 
senses captivated by the charms wrought on him in the private chamber by lewd women, 
as well as by the talks of lisping infants, the householder remains attached to his home life, 
which is mainly full of trouble and the duties of which involve the practice of wiles; and if, while 
scrupulously performing these duties, he succeeds in averting calamity, he deems himself 
happy as it were.(8-9) Through moneys procured from here and there by practising great 
violence, he maintains those people (the members of his family) by fostering whom he goes 
down to perdition, himself enjoying only whatis left after nourishing them. (10) When he finds 
his business hampered, though renewed again and again, he loses patience and, over- 
whelmed with greed, longs-for others' wealth. (11) His efforts coming to nought through bad * 
luck, he becomes moneyless and is no longer able to maintain his family. Nay, puzzled in 
mind, he is reduced to a wretched plight, and full of anxiety, heaves deep sighs. (12) 


Wf GAONHeG Acoma | Asad AMgd aiden sa Ms 1231 
darasidtdecat Tan: aaryd: i salamat anid We 12 
SASAMAGae «RUT «= SATSNLI SIMIAN OIiacuTERiseaaied: =«-« 12 I 
CIP CIC: CIR EE | Sitegtish: | Hamada: hws read 12a 
sa: uUftaahe: ufdta: wmerafa: | ares a ga areurmrast mW: 1291 


Seeing him unable to support them as aforesaid, his wife and others treat him not with 





Dis. 30 ] BOOK THREE ~ 273 
BBB SSS Sa Se BeBe Be RS Behe BeBe Se HH BR ARB BR RRR RRR BEBE RR ER RRR RARER RRA RELATE 


the same respectas before, even as the miserly cultivators do notaccord the same treatment 
to their old and worn-out oxen. (13) Yet he feels no aversion for them. Maintained by those 
whom he had (once) brought up himself and deformed on account of old age, he falls a prey 
to diseases like dyspepsia; his diet and activity both diminish and he remains confined to his 
house, awaiting his death and living like a dog on whatever is thrown despisingly (by his sons 
and wife). (1 4-1 5) (At the approach of death) his eye-balls are shot out by the action of the 
life-breath trying to find an exit; his wind-pipe gets choked with phlegm, coughing and 
breathing cause him exertion and death-rattle is heard from his throat. (16) Lying (in his bed) 
surrounded by his sorrowing relations and caught in the noose of Death, he cannot utter a 
word even when addressed. (17) 


Sa se angmentatsa: frat seat wrarqederaredit: 1221 
amet wat smet sit eat 1a apr aca: wer faasft ee 
Tes AGA Usa AS Fed Aad eine wel Weyl ga 1201 
TAM Rae aRs aay: laf afsisiearor anise aaeeL 122 | 
aetiiiisncaeite: Uta: ule agate | 
Pant os mal a atsast@errnist  froemedh 1221 


wa TA User fest: urefed: tue uniter dtaerqear amare i231 
ast ween vaft aa areas: 1 fafeededshat at ata: sostfa area: 12x 
sTetat | eToT «= apfaaledentfefs: | seated ef ard ards ar iui 
Sad AANA: asreiraren | Mg fsrencarelearlee sea aaa IRG I 
Qa waeddaent meet eamiaed fies det aradat: 1201 
Taare WARN Aaa: | Yeh aA ala at faa: asa Pitan: 12C1 
aaa AN: wat sla aa: waadl a aaa a aneen sereqaetad: 1291 


He whose mindis thus engrossed in the thought of maintaining his family and who has 
failed to subdue his senses dies in the midst of his weeping kinsmen, rendered unconscious 
or thrown out of his wits by excessive agony. (18) Trembling at heart to see a couple of 
frightful messengers of Death arrived at the moment, their eyes full of wrath, he passes stool 
and urine. (19) Clothing his soul in a special (aerial) body” fit for undergoing the tortures of 
hell and binding him with cords about the neck, they forcibly drag him along a long road (to 
the abode of Yama) even as the constables of a king drag a convict (to gaol). (20) With his 
heart cleft by their threats and trembling (with fear) he feels deeply distressed at the thought 
of his sins when bitten on the way by dogs. (21) Nay, overcome by hunger and thirst, 
Oppressed by sunshine, forest fire and hot winds and flogged on the back with whips, he 
trudges along, though unable to walk, on that road, which has no shelter or water and is 
covered by burning sands. (22) Dropping down now and then and fainting due to exhaustion 
and rising again, he is quickly taken by that exceedingly troublesome path to the abode of 
Yama (the god of punishmeni). (23) Dragged along this road, which is ninety-nine thousand 
Yojanas (7,92,000 miles) long, within two to three hours, he suffers the tortures (indicated 
hereafter). (24) Placed in the midst of burning pieces of wood, his limbs are set on fire, while 
in some cases he is made to eat his own flesh cut out either by himself of by others. (25) His 
entrails are pulled out by the hounds and vultures of hell, even though he is still alive (to see 


| 


* It is mentioned in our scriptures that sinners condemned to hell are invested with an aerial body, which, though 
subjected to tortures in various forms, is wonderfully tenacious and does not perish till the sinner has fully served the sentence. 





Me . 





274 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 34 


PRA ALARA A LL RR LE BEBE Re ABER BERG ER He EEE BER GES Re Be Be Be BEB Se Se Be He He Be Be Be He He He BB Be Ke He He Hr Hr Fp, 


it); and he is subjected to torment by serpents, scorpions, gnats etc., that bite (or Sting) 
him (26) Nay, his limbs are lopped of one by one and rent asunder by elephants;(in some 
cases) he is hurled down from hill-tops and is also held up either in water or in a cave. (27) 
Whether man or woman, one has to suffer in the regions of hell known by the names of 
Tamisra, Andhatamisra, Raurava and so on (enumerated hereafter in Book Five), tortures 
brought about by association with one another in sinful acts. (28)Some people aver that 
heaven and hell exist in this very world, O mother; for the tortures which are experienced in 
hell are seen even here.(29) 


Wa wea fawm sas wa ati fagqedeyd Sa Yew aAchodtes i301 
Uh: WU ead fede BHA! Haag Waser ae Aq13e1 
Saarifed aaa OAC Ge TST sedi waa: 1321 
Saeed Gado Haram: | ala satsantea aw aya: aa 1331 
BARA Aa Wadiaidaed: | HA: «=AAAHA = AaIsetaofer: 13x 

Sa stead Fe GRASa Gears Ties aoa Hse ay FMseArA: 130 | 


He who supports his family in the aforesaid manner (vide verses 7,10 and 11 above) 
Or simply nourishes his own body leaves both (his family as well as his body) here and, 
departing hence, reaps the fruit of his actions as indicated above (in verses 20 to 28). (30) 
Shuffling off his body, which he nourished by marring the interests of other creatures, he 
goes down to the dark region of hell alone, carrying a wallet of sins (on his head). (81) Man 
reaps in hell the evil consequences, inflicted by Providence, of (the sins committed by him 
in) maintaining his family, and feels distressed like a man who has lost his wealth.(32) The 
man who is keen to support his family by recourse to purely unrighteous ways goes to the 
darkest region of hell known by the name of Andhatamisra.(33) Having gone through in a 
regular order all the tortures of hell and passed through the lowest forms of animal life 
preceding human birth (such as that of a dog, swine and so on), and thus purged of his sins, 
he is reborn as a human being on this earth.(34) 


Thus ends the thirtieth discourse entitled "the fruit of actions pursuing those who 
commit them through subsequent existences", forming part of the "Story of 
Lord Kapila”, in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


DSSS OS 


312ch fran sear: 


Discourse XXX] 


The stages of growth of a human embryo 


STATA 
aetioni SaAAUT seed | frm: sfes sat Wat Y-anursra: 12 
He ARUAT UAUAN Aqsa | aaled q Hee: WeaUS al dd: WIR 





Dis. 31 ] BOOK THREE 275 . 


BBB ABN RR RR BBR RR He Be BeBe Re PRE BEARER BE ERR RE BE ERR RE Re Re Be Be Be Be Pr Br br te Ge hr te Bf tr fe tre te re te fe Re Be rhe te tee tet 


met ¢ fart gmat atesruragiene: | Tactaferenifin feefedhaafeta: 131 
safteica: wa waft:  ateaa: | vefistrgon dia: gat ara afar it 
ATS TATE eR Ia faut oa rashqaea 141 
eae: adealy: atgrratetiaon | qustaiaeyareare: erfertefe: 161 
ceagiNIMauRaeneErT: | ATG YSRRTETE: aalstiadaat: 19 | 
sett gaia «6 afguga: lame et aR: wal qagEfertas: 1c! 
aed: ARUea Berd gt uetica serahitarent aedeat 
wedteagagre at fe ara frat 11 


The Lord resumed : By force of Karma (destiny), as directed by Providence, the soul 
(destined to be born as a man) enters the womb of a woman through the generative fluid of 
a man for the formation of a body. (1) In the course of a nightit is integrated by being united 
with the ovum, and in five nights it is rounded into the shape of a bubble. Ina period of ten 
days it becomes as hard as a plum and later on it develops into the shape of a ball of flesh 
or an egg (in the case of oviparous creatures).(2) In the course of a month a head is formed 
and at the end of two months hands, feet and other limbs take shape. By the end of three 
months the nails (of fingers and toes), the hair on the body, bones and skin appear, as also 
the organ of generation and the other apertures in the body (those of eyes, nostrils, ears, 
mouth and anus).(3) In as many as four months the seven essential ingredients of the body 
(viz., chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow and semen) come into being; while at the end of : 
five months hunger and thirst make themselves felt: In the course of six months the foetus | 
is enclosed by an amnion and begins to move in the right side of the abdomen (or in the left | 
if it is a female). (4) Deriving its nutrition from the food and drink etc., taken by the mother, 
the foetus grows and remains in that abominable receptacle of faeces and urine, the 
breeding-place of worms.(5) Bitten again and again all over the body by the hungry worms 
in the abdomen itself, the creature suffers terrible agony on account of its tenderness and 
swoons away moment after moment.(6) Nay, adversely affected by the bitter, pungent, hot, 
Salt, dry, acid and other such irritating substances consumed by its mother, the foetus 
experiences a painful sensation in every part of its body. (7) Enclosed by the amnion and 
covered outside by the intestines, it remains lying in one side of the abdomen with its head 
turned towards the belly and with its back and neck arched (like a bow).(8) Unable to move 
its own limbs like a bird which cannot freely move in a cage, the creature in the womb finds 
its memory awakened by the will of Providence and recollects its doings committed during 
hundreds of previous lives and feels suffocated for a long time. What peace of mind can it 


have under such circumstances? (9) 


seg aAAITEIeeaast afta: iter «© aidantcfasrya «= Alex: 1201 
aera safaeiia: apaft: aeetfe: gett a fageat are actatsiia: 12 


The foetus, though endowed with consciousness from the seventh month of its 
conception, is tossed by the winds that press the embryo downwards during the weeks 
Preceding delivery, and cannot remain at one place like the worm born of faeces in the same 
abdominal cavity. (10) Tied to the physical body, made up of the seven ingredients 
(mentioned in verse 4 above), which are like so many cords to bind it, the human soul, which 
regards the body as his own self, is much afraid (of the process of gestation being repeated 
in other such births), and with joined palms he entreats and extols Him by whom he was cast 


into the womb, in a tone full of agony. (11) 





——* a © ease «men <> — == —— 


ere). nmeeeseser 


: 
: 
: 
t 
: 








276 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 34 


Ee Re Re Re Re ir Be Re Re Re Re Re RR Re Be BERG BRT ER RT Ee BY BE RE Re BEBE BEE Be BeBe HE Be AY BY Be Br Br Ar Br Hr Br Hr He Hr Kr Br Hr Br Br Kr By Br Hr Hr Kr Br Kr Hr Br Fr BrP Br Br Rr BW 8 kr trap, 
I .  tSStStStSC~SststSSS 


Teale 
dawmaaaatad MTesanIAMda sat ATAU aay | 
Sse asnft aut Padua A Aaait awaaazdaatsqaat 122 
Gada ag sa Sditiqaen wdtsaandiaaeey Aa! 
aT faa guiannnausd aad emrecasatad TAT 1231 
q: usgymfad wed: waiteat aafsaqunefacracnise | 
Aafapuenfeangn aad ac ut sepfagesal: qarriex! 
Taare arate ais «atedefssaor | 
Wea: UR squid ele AAA HA AeATAUOT 1k4 1 
Wa aGedectienda: a caeenifoen feerertgqaftar: | 
4 Slasduedinqadamrenaruaaa ad wariesi 


The human soul says : | take shelter in the lotus-feet, which once trod the earth and 
bring immunity from all fear, of Him who of His own sweet will assumes various forms in order 
to protect the universe—which has sought His protection (from time to time)—and by whom 
| have been thrown into such a condition as this, which is quite becoming of my wicked 
self. (12) | bow to Him who, having embraced Maya in the form of this psychophysical 
organism (consisting of the gross elements, the Indriyas and the mind) in this womb, appears 
as bound by virtuous and sinful acts, and has His reality screened by Maya, but who flashes 
on my afflicted heart as absolutely pure(untainted by Maya), immutable and possessed of 
wisdom which knows no break. (13) Though bodiless (in reality), |appear as clothed in a body 
made up of the five elements and as consisting of the Indriyas, the Gunas (modes of 
Prakrti),the objects of senses and the ego (a reflection of the intelligent Spirit). Therefore, 
| adore the all-knowing Supreme Person, the Controller of both Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa 
(Spirit), whose glory can never be obscured by such veils (the body etc.). (14) Having 
forgotten his own self under the influence of the Lord's Maya, the embodied soul traverses 
the path of Samsara (transmigration)—strewn with numerous shackles of Karma, having 
their source in the three Gunas—undergoing hardships of many kinds. By what other 
expedient, then, than through the grace of that Supreme Being can he expect to realize his 
true nature?(15) Who else than that Lord has bestowed upon me this knowledge of the past, 
present and future? For it is He who dwells in all animate and inanimate beings as the Inner 
Controller, who is no other than a part manifestation of the Lord Himself. Therefore, for 
soothing our threefold agony it is Him that we adore—we who are playing the role of a Jiva 
as a result of our Karma (destiny). (16) 


agracetaat Sotiaarg lawns taat TACAae: | 
sotadt faatad wre waar Fated qaurettsinas Het J 1291 
eat ufrat area ga doled: qeada wares 
a dad hed @ chara: at am deta farrier Hata 1201 
Fallen into a sink of blood, faeces and urine within the abdomen of another body (the 
body of the mother) and with his own body scorched by the (mother's) gastric fire, this 


embodied soul (my own self) is anxious to get out of it, counting his months (the period of 
gestation). Oh, when shall this wretched soul be released (from this confinement), O Lord? (17) 


Dis. 31 ] BOOK THREE 277 


Gr Br Br BBR BEBE SS SERB BBB BB RRB RR BRE RE BRR RR ERE RRR BRE RE Be Be Be Be Be rr Be Be Be See Be be Ge Be Br Be he Be Be Be Be Re BeBe Be Be Be BeBe Re BE 


Overflowing with compassion, it is Your peerless Self, O Lord, that has imparted to this 
creature, who is (hardly) ten months old, such (incomparable) wisdom. May that Protector 
of the afflicted (Yourself) be pleased with His own (benevolent) act (the bestowal of wisdom); 
for who can ever repay His obligations except by joining his palms( out of gratitude)?(18) 

cRaea «feeuret «Aq ARafe: aka enarikiaz: ee | 

AMSaSSea WHe Tet GUot aga afedie a aaftra udlaqi2el 

aise aeaft fast agerwerd aufa fine afeeerad | 

aaereqredtfa =| SaaTaT faearaitded «=8=—- AaftrarewAad 1201 

qetce ferdaga seiter sree ara: qecissaa | 

wat aa aetaetaet a A oferguarfeaferame: 1221 

The other type of embodied souls (viz., birds, beasts and so on) perceives (experiences) 

by instinct only the agreeable and disagreeable sensations in its body. 1, however, endowed 
as | am with a (human) body capable of practising self-control (and other spiritual 
disciplines), behold that most ancient Person, both without and within my heart, by virtue of 
reason conferred on me by the selfsame Person, whois as manifest as my own self, referred 
to as 'I' (19) Though living.in this womb a life full of numerous troubles, O Lord, | have no 
desire to get out of it and descend into the pitfall of the outside world; for the Lord's (Your) 
Maya overtakes the soul who goes there, and in the wake of Maya appear the false notion 
of 'I' (with reference to the body) and the consequent cycle of births and deaths.(20) 
Therefore, having installed:(in my heart) the feet of Lord Visnu and shaking off all distraction 
of mind, | shall quickly redeem myself from the ocean of worldly existence with the help of 
reason, which is my greatest friend, so that this calamity (in the shape of transmigration), 
entailing many rounds of gestation, may not befall me again. (21) 


He SavT 
wa 3 paaetet aera: wdaafe:i aa: feawearit swat gfered: 122! 
WAGs: Wea Healey fA stat: | fares Heap Preegrat edeyia: 1231 
ufadt «oyergaqa fasta asdideata ut wet fautitt aft Aa: 12%! 


/ 
Lord Kapila went on : When the ten-month-old Jiva, who has thus resolved even | 
while in the womb, extols the Lord as aforesaid, the wind that helps parturition propels him | 
forthwith, with his face turned downward, in order that the child may be born. (22) Pushed | 
downwards all of a sudden by the wind, the child issues out (of the womb) with great trouble, | 
head downward, breathless and deprived of memory out of agony. (23) Fallen on earth in | 
a pool of blood and urine (discharged by the mother), the new-born babe tosses like a worm | 
| 

| 

| 





Oe ee ee —_ 


Sprung from ordure, and having lostits wisdom (acquired in the womb) and reduced toa state 
(of self-identification with the body) which is just the reverse of wisdom, cries loudly.(24) 
Uese a faee GeO aaa a: | Sahasaaa: TARTANA: 1241 
Tasyess 9 : «| Mawtefet | A: HUA MAMAN AAAS? 12K | 
qewrad da Aare ee: eat fara Hae: pits Tail 
Being nourished by people who do not know the mind of eee it . eur sores 
whi he pity of it is that) the child is unable to refuse tt. aid on 
nich was not intendeeag aaa be creature is incapable even of 


a foul bed infested by sweat-born creatures the (poor) able 
Scratching its limbs (to tices itching), much less of sitting up, standing or moving itself.(26) 


Just as smaller worms bite a big worm, even so gnats, mosquitoes, bugs and other creatures 








; 
: 
; 
: 
: 


278 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 31 


SRELARALRARELAA RAE REE ARR ALAA LAR LALLA ALLL ALE RES BT Be BEBE RE Be EH Be BB BB Br He Hh Hoy gy 


Sting or bite the babe, who is most tender of skin and deprived of its wisdom (acquired in the 
womb), cries (bitterly). (27) 


saa sea yaar ea ubeda a1 seensiftedisamieerg: yerftia: 12¢1 
Ge @2t UA alameda  AxATi wila fare Het alas areas: 12e1 
qe: wshtRel 88 aaaeisaad seeame: atta safety 1g01 
det ed bo Agel ala air! atsqaia Sara HATRTA: 1321 
aeraies: uf a: faretexpcted: | suf wad sraem faafa gdai3et 
Gel Beat cat A afe: sister: erat i sal. ant sisi acagrenfa Aga 1331 
areas «CSCC STITT aS A Haley aeons a ax 
qa qe wate aeaseage: | afeaga Gat am aaisage: 1341 
sorafd: wit deat apr aguefia: i tfeaat asaeageradt edad: 1361 
AGSGSESY al event: Gai we aANaoga aerate AAT 1301 
ae 8 Usa Waa: eae sift fear at caf Velsarar, Wlasysat hares 1321 


Having similarly gone through the painful experiences of infancy and boyhood too, the 
man (on attaining his youth) flares up due to ignorance when he fails to attain his desired 
object and is overcome by grief.(28) His pride and anger growing with age, that seeker of 
sensuous enjoyment enters into hostility with (other) pleasure-seeking men for his own 
destruction. (29) Clinging to the unreal, the foolish Jiva of misguided intellect constantly 
regards the body, made up of the five elements, as his own self or something belonging to 
him.(30) For the sake of this body—which is a source of constant trouble to him and ever 
follows him, bound by ties of ignorance and destiny—he performs actions (of various kinds), 
tied to which he goes through repeated births and deaths.(31)If under the influence’ of 
sensually-minded people engaged in the pursuit of sexual enjoyment and the gratification 
of the palate he delights in their ways again, he goes to hell as before. (82) One should never 
cultivate the fellowship of those wicked fools, the toys of women, who are ever fidgety, have 
identified themselves with the body and therefore deserve to be pitied, nay, by whose 
company truthfulness, purity, compassion, control over the tongue, wisdom, prosperity, 
modesty, fair name, forbearance, control of mind and the senses and good fortune are 
blotted out of existence.(33-34) The infatuation and‘bondage which accrue to a man form 
attachment to any other object are not so complete as those resulting from attachment to 
women and from the fellowship of men fond of women. (35) At the sight of his own daughter 
(Saraswati) Brahma (the lord of created beings) was bewitched by her charms and 
shamelessly ran after her in the form of a stag when she took the form of a hind. (86) Among 
the creatures (gods, human beings and so on) begotten by Kasyapa and others, (who had 
sprung from the loins of Marici and the other sages, the mind-born sons of Brahma), then, 
what male is there, save the (divine) sage Narayana, whose mind is not distracted by the 
Lord's Maya in the form of woman? (37) Behold the might of My Maya in the shape of woman, 
who by the mere play of her eyebrows treads under foot even the conquerors of the four 
quarters.(38) 


a A gaan wd aT amt wTTETa: | 
aaa «86 Mid@enment «=e ats PTT 139.1 
aaa Baal allacatattddaridmaaem yet qui: Hufrarady vol 


He who aspires to reach the culmination of Yoga (in the shape of God-Realization) or 
who has realized his true nature by adoring Me should never cultivate the fellowship of young 





Dis. 31 ] BOOK THREE 279 


Set RBS SS SA SE SE Be BRR BB Be BeBe Be Br Be Be Re BEBE BRE BRC RE BEBE BER BEBE Be BeBe Se hfe te hte te te te de te re fe be fe Be Be rb br be tet fe be heehee 


women, whom the scriptures declareasa gate to hell for him.(89) Woman is a personification 
of Maya (illusion) created by the Lord and slowly entraps man (under the pretext of service 
etc.). One should, therefore, regard her as death to oneself, even as a well whose mouth is 
covered with grass (is to an unwary traveller). (40) 


at aati Mhererererqasretel | Gite lag: set fermorenyerer 12 

TAT TA lerrtterererren yearn | catrenfert Wa WTartat «ae xR 

tet | Slat CACC | YAR wa cafe ated GAM 13 | 

viet wert tat aaieeriee: vaftedisa monnfaalae Gea: 1x 

TACIT saMANI  Aal| cSsaMeAeaeresL Ise 

AM aiseneaaaestararara aqiidet aaa sesipearataaral: 1x1 

cea cred: Cae A aoe Ta: | geet sfanft eit amagatee ive 

Treat Get aera uenataa wee waa eae xc! 

sit AMErad FER Use Ged ddl safest 
Sere aMSEA: 13.2 | 

Similarly the Jiva who has been endowed with the form of a women as a result of 
attachment to a woman (in his previous life) foolishly looks upon My Maya, figuring as a man, 
as her husband, the bestower of wealth, progeny, house and so on.(41) A woman should, | 
therefore, know that Maya as veritable death to her—in the form of a husband, progeny and 
house etc.—preordained by Fate, even as the song of a hunter (is to the deer).(42) Moving 
from one sphere (the earth) to another (heaven or hell) with the subtle body, which is (falsely) 
recognized as the very self of a Jiva, the human soul goes on reaping the fruit of his actions 
(performed in previous existences) and unceasingly at the same time performing fresh 
actions (thus paving the way for future births).(43) The subtle body (which is an adjunct of 
the Jiva) and that which accompanies it (viz., the physical body)—both these go to make the 
psycho-physical organism, which is constituted of the gross and subtle elements, the ten 
Indriyas and the mind. When this organism ceases to function as a whole, it is known as the 
death of a Jiva; while its beginning to function as a whole is spoken of as his birth.(44) Just | 
as when the eyes lose their capacity to see colour etc. (due to a morbid affection of the optic 
nerve or other such diseases), the sense of sight also gets deadened that very moment and 
the Jiva too, the seer of both (the eyes as well as the sense of sight), loses its power of sight, 
similarly when the physical body(the place where the perception of objects takes place) is 
rendered incapable of perceiving them, that is known as death (because when the physical 
body ceases to function, the subtle body too is no longer there to function); and when one 
begins to view the physical body as one's very self, that is called birth. (45-46) Therefore, 
aman should neither view death with horror nor have recourse to stinginess in life nor give 
Way to infatuation. Realizing the true nature of the Jiva, he should move about in this world 
free from attachment and steadfast of purpose. (47) Nay, he should relegate his body to this 
illusory world through his reason endowed with right vision and strengthened by Yoga 
(concentration of mind) and dispassion, and move about (unconcerned).(48) 


~-first discourse entitled "The Fate of the Jiva’, forming part of the 
Thus ends eras Three of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 


" f Lord Kapila”, in Book - 
Story Pia Ste ees known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita. 


TSE 








280 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 30 


SQVLVVAAEAN ALAA AAAAA ALAA LAAALNLN KLAN ALLNL VLA AH HAHA LAA Kae Br A Br Br Br Br Be Be Br BY Gr Br Br Hr Br Gr Pr Br x Br Br Sr Br Pr By Ht Br Br Pr er Fy Hy ry 
TTT al. lll! aT of 


SIA Fiagnseara: 
Discourse XXXIl 
Destiny of the souls departing from this world by the "Bright Path", 
the "Dark Path" and so on, and the superiority of Bhaktiyoga 


PI SATA 
aq at yqeadlaemaada Jel aaa aaiaraite va: frat ai 2 | 
@ ala wnaguiemye: wWeyqu:i aad smdfidam fader stefan: 1 2 | 
ceria: faqeasd: GAIT arated oleh ar: Grea 1 3 1 
Gel etsaeaat «asada Sait: | deal Glew Ga Atha A Ua FeRleari x | 
Qa wenta gdra ata: awrmrdeda | Faget AHA: SIM: Weta: | & | 
Rqkenfeat fia fest ieemni@a wea uheyet ada! & | 
dena a ata gee fade aati Topher I | 
fatigiaant a: Wea aU Al daeewad Sle Ue Utferdeal: 1c | 
AIM AcoHoartsrsaayaieasa: aad wera: 1 
sietend fata ate Wore cH UIA Ut: ay: 1 <4 
WW wa wadaias a ahret faresaar fam: | 
Wa AeHAgd GSt WMO wel NeMAquaaTaiaat: 101 
34 d Aaya wade adeaqisadaaa aot at aaa wish eet 
ata: ferent at aand: aefefs: amet: pant:  fagafasradch: 1221 
Tepmivard saga Hao i mda cel Get yous 123 
a Wa GT: ae aeragdiaiad Wreaitnt aad wird ex 
tad uw a ast adfamtiani fee yareata quent aft ieul 
Lord Kapila continued : As for the man who, while continuing at home, performs the 
duties of a householder and, earning wealth and the pleasures of sense through them resorts 
to those actions again, he too turns his face away from the Lord, deluded as he is by desire, 
and worships through sacrificial performances the gods as well as the manes with 
reverence. (1-2) His mind being swayed by reverence for the aforesaid beings, the man 
undertakes vows to propitiate the gods and the manes and, having attained (thereby) to the 
realm of the moon (a part of the heavenly world) drinks (with them) the (inebriating) sap of 
the Soma plant; but (when the stock of merit that earned him an abode in the aforementioned 
realm is exhausted) he must return (to this mortal world).(3) When (at the end of a Kalpa) 
Sri Hari, who has Ananta (the serpent-god Sesa) for His seat, reclines on His couch of Sesa 
(the lord of the serpents), these worlds, attained to by the householders, get dissolved (enter 
His body and disappear). (4) Those wise men, however, who do not perform their duties for 
the sake of sensuous enjoyment and wealth but offer their actions to Me, nay, who are free 
from attachment, most serene, pure of mind, devoted to the duties of those who have retired 
from the world, have no feeling of “I" and "mine" (with regard to the body and everything 
connected with it) and are endowed with a mind thoroughly cleansed by recourse to Sattva 


(the quality of goodness) passing by the name of one's own sacred duty, reach by the "Bright 
Path" the all pervading Supreme Person, the Lord of both Prakrti and Purusa (Matter and 





Spirit), the ultimate Cause (of the universe) andalso responsible for the creation, preservation 
and dissolution of the world.(5—7) As for those who meditate on Hiranyagarbha (Brahma) as 
no other than the Supreme, dwell in the realm of Brahma (the highest heaven known by the 
name of Satyaloka) til the dissolution of Brahma, which takes place at the end of two 
Parardhas. (8) Intending to dissolve the universe enclosed by earth, water, fire, air, ether, 
the mind, the senses and their object and the ego (the source of the elements) and so on, 
and having finished his regime extending over two Parardhas, when Brahma (the self-born), 
who is higher than the other gods, identifies himself with Prakrti (consisting of the three 
Gunas) and enters the Absolute, the Yogis that have controlled their breath and mind and 
are free from passion enter (the body ot) the worshipful Brahma after casting off their body, 
and along with him get merged into the Supreme Brahma, who is an embodiment of the 
highest bliss and no other than the most ancient Person, and to whom they did not attain 
before inasmuch as their egotism had not left them till then.(9-10) Therefore, O great lady, 
seek refuge with devotion in Him alone who has taken up His abode in the lotus-like heart 
of all living beings and of whose glory you have (just) heard (from Me). (11) On the other hand, 
even Brahma (the repository of the Vedas and) the cause of the mobile and immobile 
creation, alongwith the sages (Marici and others), the lords of Yoga like Sanaka and others, 
and other Siddhas who are the first teachers of Yoga—even after entering (at the time of final 
dissolution), by virtue of their disinterested action, (the body of) the first Purusa, the foremost 
of all Purusas, who is no other than Brahma presiding over the three Gunas—is born again 
as before (if the Lord so desires) at the time of creation—when the equilibrium of the Gunas 
is disturbed by the Time-Spirit, a manifestation of the Lord Himself—because of his retaining 
the notion of difference and due to his sense of doership. (12—14) And the sages too—after 
enjoying the glorious life of the highest heaven, earned by their meritorious acts—(likewise) 
return (by the will of the Lord as the mind-born sons of Brahma) on the equilibrium of the 
Gunas being disturbed (at the time of creation). (15) 


a feeramaqa: adgq segatham: | paw fears a peer: 1261 
We querta: aMmaristsdtse: | gq asreadiet  yegharcansran: 1201 
vafiera ue fager zkaea:i neat aeiatelamme nefes: ec! 
wi faa fen 8 areqdeoge | feat Wawaqen: atta fares: 1281 
data uae: faqele asia TIS Sele WeArdisasha: 1201 
aaa  aforgad: weteir afa | dda facet 2a: ae fasifertea: 1221 
Tard oadwaa we WA cee Fae UsMlamergsry 121 
aaa ownaft afte: sealita: israery ae at apetaRiay 129 | 
aera feeersigg«aafePecafat: 1a feyerict ama fraaftrafireaga 12x 
@ aarissamt frag weet cataatiedied UaHtatt 12% 1 
SIA oUt Wel CURA: «UA aearfef: | Gararaimartie 9 gad 12g 
Wana =a aaavle Oftra: | qeaashradt Wal AA Hea: 1291 
sais  uaiihetta: feet srareciete arc WeaiaeHun 1221 
ae wareahaqesfae: PTE | UcHleaarerenreat ee SRTela: 1281 
- | aaltedia Tt: Ufa 1301 

ie ren ae toe a to the iu who are full of Secee for 
ey, however Who Sian e actuated by desire, though not prohibited by the 


religious rites perform actions that ar 


SS 








282 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 30 
SSSA LALAL ALA AAAL ALLA LLL LAE AAA RAL LA HR BH RR RR BR RR Re te, 
EEL ae 


Scriptures, as well as those which are of an obligatory nature, in their entirety.(16) With their 
understanding clouded by passion, their mind full of desires and their senses uncontrolled 

they worship the manes everyday, their heart finding delight in the home alone. (17) Devoted 
to the first three objects of human pursuit (viz., religious merit, wealth and sensuous 
enjoyment) only, these people are averse to the stories of Sri Hari (the Slayer of the demon 
Madhu), whose knowledge takes away the fear of birth and death and whose innumerable 
exploits are worth recounting.(18) Abandoning the nectar-like stories of the immortal Lord 

they who listen to vile talks (relating to sensual enjoyment)—even as the swine feed on 
filth—have surely been cheated by fate. (19) Performing religious rites from the ceremony 
connected with impregnation down to the obsequies, they ascend to the abode of the manes 
presided over by Aryama (the lord of the manes) by the southern path (also known as the 
"dark path") and are (eventually) born in the line of their own progeny. (20) Thereafter, when 
their merit (that earned them an abode in the realm of the manes) is exhausted, they are 
forthwith robbed of their glorious state by the gods (in charge of that realm) and helplessly 
descend once more to this world (of mortals), O virtuous lady. (21) Therefore, do you worship 
with all your being the supreme Lord—whose lotus-like feet are worth adoring—through 
devotion evoked by His virtues.(22) A link formed through Devotion with Lord Vasudeva calls 
forth before long dispassion and spiritual wisdom that reveals the truth of the Absolute. (23) 
When the mind of the devotee ceases to perceive, even through the faculty of the senses, 
any difference, in the shape of agreeability of otherwise, in the objects of senses, which are 
just the same (as being the manifestations of the same Reality, viz., Brahma), he forthwith 
realizes by his intellect his own self as the revealer of unity, free from attachment, devoid of 
merit and demerit (that which Is worth accepting or rejecting) and established in its own 
(glorious) state. (24-25) The Lord is nothing but absolute Consciousness and is the 
same as the Transcendent Reality (Brahma), the Supreme Spirit, the Ruler of all and the 
Highest Person. Though One, He appears in diverse forms as the seer, the object seen, the 
means of sight and so on.(26) Absence of attachment to all—that is the only desired end to 
be attained through all forms of Yoga practised by a Yogi. (27) Brahma is absolute 
Consciousness, one and attributeless; yet, through the senses, which have an outward 
tendency, it erroneously appears in the form of various objects possessing sound and other 
attributes. (28) Just as the same supreme Brahma appeared as Mahat-tattva (the principle 
of cosmic intelligence), the threefold (Sattvika, Rajasika and Tamasika) Ego, the five gross 
elements and the eleven Indriyas, and the same self-effulgent Being was named as Jiva 
when endowed with these, even so the body of the Jiva in the form of the universe is no other 
than Brahma; for it is from Brahma that it has sprung.(29) Of course, he alone can perceive 
it as such, whose mind has been composed and rid of all attachment through reverence, 
Devotion, daily practice of Yoga and dispassion. (30) 


sadeniad Ul wa deggie atdgead Ad Hd: Ger A128! 

Sars Afast Asoat wfMsaAol: | gael  Wataf wWiaasoqeaT: 122! 

aah: Umea AUN: | Ut Aad deta waa: 1221 

faa Paes: | sasasa AAA A HAVIN 2 | 

ana fafanea ukeatta va feiedonvatet a: safafghrar 134! 

sraiaaaiaa «= ATC A Sad TAH: GON fio: we 136! 

| have thus expounded to you, O revered mother, the wisdom which reveals the true » 
nature of the Absolute, and by means of which one can realize the truth about Prakrti (Matter) 


and Purusa (Spirit). (31) The discipline of Jhana (spiritual knowledge) and the discipline of 
Devotion—which is free from the influence of the three Gunas—directed towards Me, lead - 





is. 32 
Dis. 92 | BOOK THREE 283 


BeBe Be Br te Br Rr eRe Be Be Re Hr Brea 
grote Be 88 SRR BRE SE RB Be Be BeBe BBB Be BBR Be Bef BeBe BB Be BREA RE REI PE Be PB Be Be ibe 


to the same goal, which is Signified by the word ‘Bhagavan’. (32) Just as one and the same 
substance possessed of several attributes (such as colour, taste and so on) is perceived in 
different ways through the senses, following different courses, even so the Lord, though one, 
is variously realized through different paths recommended by the scriptures.(33) Through 
works of public utility (such as the digging of wells and tanks, construction of roads etc.) and 
sacrifices, charitable gifts and austere penance, study of the Vedas and an enquiry into their 
meaning, nay, even through the control of the mind and senses ((i.e., abstaining from 
prohibited acts) as well as through the renunciation of action, through Yoga with different 
limbs (such as Yama, Niyama and so on) and likewise through the discipline of Devotion, 
through the twofold Dharma, viz., that which is accompanied by worldly activity and that 
which is characterized by renunciation, and again through the realization of the true nature 


of the Self and through dispassion do we attain to the same self-effulgent Lord, who is both 
with attributes and without attributes. (34—36) 


wert vk wet a wari ame cermtdiscalat sae 1301 

were wadistehtaerendthhin: | arag stearate a aq wae: 1321 

Adc afesrartattare lea! A wena a fara Aa aeasra a 1381 

a oleurarateatat TerAcada | ASA A A Aq A Aenea ixol 

wera TaC(iéieITTEN TAA EHTS ETA Ss CIS 

afestidiarrma «= ders clea Pia era ee «Seats: 1x21 

a sq NUM Meg Gea: Wael a afwed afea: a aia vedi a a iva 

Sia Ser Tad AS GRAS Sleds Tila sas Sirens: 1321 

| have already told you the fourfold character (according as it is predominated by any- 
one of the three Gunas or is absolutely free from their influence) of Bhaktiyoga (the discipline 
of Devotion) as well as the nature of Kala (the Time-Spirit), whose movement cannot be 
perceived (through the senses) and who brings about the birth and death etc., of living 
beings. (37) | have also described the various states of existence of the Jiva—brought about 
by his actions prompted by Avidya (ignorance)— passing through which, O mother, the soul 
forgets his true nature. (88) One should never teach this gospel of Mine to a wicked person(a 
source of annoyance to others) nor to him who is wanting in modesty, nor to an arrogant man 
nor again to a moral rake and in no case to a hypocrite. (39) Nor should one impart it to a 


man thirsting after pleasures, nor to him who is attached to his home, nor again to him who 


is not My devotee, nor to those who hate My devotees. (40) It may no doubt be imparted 
to a man full of reverence, a devotee, a meek soul, an uncavilling man, One who is friendly 
m who takes delight in service, one who has developed 


to living beings, and (likewise) to hi ; 
a distaste for external objects, a man who is serene of mind, one who Is free from jealousy, 


one who is pure both within and without and above all to him who holds Me dearer than 
all. (41-42) With his mind fixed on Me, O mother, the man who reverently listens to or repeats 


this (discourse of Mine) but once will surely attain to My state.(43) 


the thirty-second discourse, forming part of the “Story of | 


ds 
mee ee Kapila", in Book Three of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 


the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SRS 








: 


284 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 33 


LEELELEAELEA ELS AEALLKAKKLKLKKHNKLKLK MAK ASRLKAN KKK LA ALK LK LAH HK LK AHH HKHKHAKHMHHKHOM HHA BBS Re BS Be BBR BR AR BB tr oe 


31g aaheranseara: 


Discourse XXXIll 


Devahuti receives the light of wisdom and attains final beatitude 
HAT SavT 


wa Pera attea aat afeit a aera fact fea taafe: 
faaamtietert aan gsa  dadlaseanisafateyir ie 


Maitreya resumed : When Devahiti, the beloved spouse of the sage Kardama and 
mother of Lord Kapila, heard the foregoing discourse of the Lord, the veil of her ignorance 
was torn asunder. She bowed to Him, the disseminator of the knowledge of Sankhya—which 
throws light on the fundamental principles—and extolled him thus: (1) 


CAgITeATA 
BATA SA Alors Wart Wars age | 
Toa eS ee A) ASOT: 121 
a wa faye wan fart wWroeaen  farsmdid: | 
AMiettel aaa PeNTAM saa STAI eh: 3 131 
aa Ui A wow waa ae 3Y aelet waa 
faa gid acut um: wd ww  arafeareattar: ix! 
a cada: saa wom ferme a fam fay 
aMadReAal GAUCAMAAAAAAM ATT 1G | 


PE DDE MIC CARE ITCE AcgBUTaIcALTala Stele | 
masta Od: Wa wet ha: WR Wag ataricl 
Sel ad gudisdt Wham area add ama qa 
qed Wed: Baw cae > a divi 
e ; we ut ns: > . +f | 
eastatsiaeTISaTe Sati ssf Cf tT IC 1 
Devahiti said : Brahma (the birthless creator) saw only with his mental eyes Your 
(Cosmic) Body—pervaded by the (five) gross elements, the (ten) Indriyas, the (five) objects 
of senses and the mind—from which proceeds the stream of the three Gunas (modes of 
Prakrti), nay, which is the seed of all and lay manifest on the waters that had submerged the 
universe at the time of Final Dissolution, and from the lotus of whose navel Brahma himself 
had sprung.(2) Though actionless, You are of unfailing resolve and possessed of countless 
inconceivable powers, and the Ruler of all the Jivas. That is why, having partitioned Your 
energy according to the predominance of the three Gunas, it is You who carry on the 
creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe. (3) How, then, could it be that You 
were borne in my womb—You into whose belly the whole of this universe disappears at the 
time of universal dissolution and who at the end of a Kalpa rest all alone on a leaf of a banyan 
tree in the form of an infant possessing inconceivable powers and sucking its great toe? (4) 
You assume a personality for the extermination of the sinful and the exaltation, O Lord, of 
those who abide by Your commands. Just as You appear in the semblance of a boar and 
so on(for various other purposes), even so this descent of Yours is intended for showing (to 





Dis. So) Re Br RR RBG BCR RH Re rs oy BOOK THREE Bess 
EE SSSRERREREERENERORANS ONE REET OE SEREEEER ER EEE 


the world) the path sala to Self-Realization.(5) By occasionally hearing and chanting Your 
names, bowing to You or even remembering You, a pariah (one who feeds on the flesh of 
dogs) becomes worthy of adoration In this very life as a Brahmana who has performed a 
Bomassaciince (a sacrifice which brings great Sanctity and extraordinary religtous merit to 
the sacrificer)! There could be no doubt, then, about.one's attaining the object of life by Your 
sight. (6) Oh, how wonderful thatevena Pariah (who cooks the flesh of dogs) becomes highly 
venerable only because he has Your name on the tip of his tongue! Nay, they who utter Your 
name have (thereby or in their previous life) practised austere penance, poured oblations 
into the sacred fire, bathed (in sacred waters), conducted themselves well, and even recited 
the Vedas. (7) In the form of Kapila (my son) You are no other than that Supreme Reality, 
the Highest Person, who could be rightly conceived only in a mind that has been turned 
inward, and who brings fo an end the stream of the three Gunas (in the shape of 
transmigration) by His own effulgence. You are Lord Visnu Himself, the source of the Vedas. 
| bow to You.(8) = 
HAY Sara 


get ward afters: a: uMiart fagadere amt mga: 1? | 
Maitreya went on: Thus praised (by Devahiti), the Supreme Person bearing the name 
of Lord Kapila, who was full of filial affection, spoke to His mother in unfaltering accents.(9) 
HIS Jaq 
arrest «8AM gaertferr Aianieaa wat arpmfeeadeta 1201 
Terarad wa Ws aggarefa:1 a2 and are yeasesewaiac: 1221 
Lord Kapila said : By following the easy path pointed out by Me, O mother, you will attain 
before long to the supreme goal (in the shape of final beatitude). (10) Have faith in this 
doctrine of Mine, which has been followed even by the exponents of Veda, so that you may 
attain to My birthless state. Those who are ignorant of this go through the process of (birth 
and) death (again and again). (11) 
Sad 
st sed ama ad dere aie eae Neefen aaftetszad sat 1221 
a outa aqdeea ames aaa l dae amis: aaa: arte 1231 


STURT ERI Heer Heese | Sa ATT ferat etoT sary 1k 
Tada:  medel quarter! eee | eat Tene 1 Ru 
Uae: se aa vanUhisa: | area a eat Geen a 1ge 1 


wun lemmas HEMaRhag aI | Taserar Susie Meanaadaga: 1291 


; : - Having thus shown to His mother the noble way to Self- 
Reclizaton enone ae now declared that all was Brahma, Lord Kapila went 
His way.(1 2) She too applied herself to the practice of Yoga, ae ang iS ne plosese 
Meditation taught by her son, in that hermitage, which stood likea | & at O : owers on a e 

ead of) the Saraswati, and attained peace of mind.(13) The oy aks : e wore oe 
©ad turned brown on account of ablutions performed thrice a eee a a eee (14) 
While her body, which was clad in rags, grew emaciated as a result of Severe pe (ce 





a 


286 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 33 
LRLLAERKERKLKEKAHHLKARKRKAHKLAKKARKKAKERLALK RRA LKLKHHKALAKLA AAA KLAN NEA ANAK NK HH Khe : 


SS SS SS SS SSSR RRR SE SSSA SSS SERA AAT A BRR Rete rte 

She renounced her incomparable house, which had been enriched by the austere penance 
and Yogic power of the sage Kardama, a lord of created beings, and was coveted even by 
the gods, furnished as it was with beds of ivory, soft and white as the foam of milk and 
adorned with gold,“and seats of gold provided with cushions exceedingly soft to the 
touch. (15-16) In the walls of that house, which were made of transparent crystal and 
precious emerald, shone lights of jewels borne by beautiful statues of women.(17) She also 
deserted the garden attached to her house, charming with its many blossoming celestia| 
trees, cooing pairs of birds and humming bees drunk with honey.(18) When she used to enter 
the pond in that garden, (the water of) which was scented with the fragrance of lotuses, along 
with Kardama, who bestowed his loving attention on her, Gandharvas and Kinnaras (the 
attendants of gods) sang her praises.(19) (Although she felt no compunction) while leaving 
that garden, which was most eagerly sought after even by the spouses of Indra (the lord of 
paradise), Devahuti did wear a desolate look on her face, afflicted as she was at the 
separation from her son. (20) 


a Watsta UU | MAAS aa WRaA ater i221 
wa ward cana aioe sti ayaa ac feqet areal Weir 
aad Wasdale AMMA ad: saad 8 aaetetedfercay 1231 
akasaar . atau acai amassed Wea wHeleda 12% 
fied deassamarea fameniaaye  fadsanrearnqoifesteur eu 
AGUA aA AA Aa Ha aA STS | Frqristlaratacancaitursenssadia: = 1 2&1 
PASAAT Aca AT UTA la GAR aaISSHH GS aEfrarferd: 1201 
dee: Utd: UNSISeIAIAEATAIEI | AM Akasa: BIA sa Ula: 121 
aig warm yet Taraicag A gqgqe atqeasfapel: 1291 
(She had somehow consoled herself by the presence of her son) when her husband 
(the sage Kardama) retired to the forest; but she felt very disconsolate, in spite of her having } 
realized the truth, at the separation from her son (Lord Kapila), even as a cow, who is 
extremely fond of her calf, is grieved at the loss of the latter.(21) Fixing her thought 
exclusively on her son, the divine Kapila, who was no other than Sri Hari, she soon grew 
indifferent, my son,-even to such a house (as has been described above). (22) She (now) 
meditated on the form of the Lord, adorned with a cheerful countenance and spoken of by 
her son as worth meditating upon, fixing her thought on the same as a whole as well as in 
parts.(23) With a mind thoroughly depurated by the uninterrupted practice of Devotion, most 
intense dispassion and spiritual enlightenment leading to Brahmahood (oneness with 
Brahma) and resulting from a due performance of one's duties, she then contemplated on 
her own self as projected everywhere, having set aside by the realization of its true nature 
the limitations imposed on it by the modes of Prakrti. (24-25) Her mind being now settled in 
Brahma, the substratum of all the Jivas, who is no other than the Lord, she no more thought 
of herself as a Jiva, and was accordingly rid of all afflictions and attained final beatitude. (26) 
Firmly established in perpetual Samadhi (deep meditation), her misapprehension about the 
reality of the sense-objects now disappeared and she was no more conscious of her body 
than-the man arisen from sleep remembers the body seen in a dream.(27) Her body, though 
nourished by others (the Vidyadhara damsels summoned and lodged in the hermitage by 
; her husband to look after her), did not grow lean because there was no mental agony. 
Though covered with layers of dirt, it shone through it like a fire enveloped in (a mass of) 
smoke.(28) Her mind being fully merged in Lord Vasudeva, she did not perceive herown 
body—which was completely given up to austerity and Yoga, and was being maintained by _ 





is. 33 ] 
ON aE EAR tietrtr tt watt nwnermnenee OON THREE 287 
NNER RSS B BBM BB BBB BARBER BACAR BEE EAR BATA BRE 


Fic lemme when her hair got loose and her clothes fell off from her body.(29) 
= : ae MOTE: | UCL ST wa fatott wraadamd g 1301 
3 ACSA Te fers aa a dfafgytet 12e1 
SS ppt a Tea Strat seer ater fafger feegafaa 1321 
In . - pe ie See lls the path pointed out by Lord Kapila, she attained before long 
to (the a a6 acy € Lord, who is eternally free and is no other than the Supreme Spirit or 
Bevoe ) : most sacred spot where she attained final beatitude, O valiant Vidura, was 
known all over the three worlds by the name of ‘Siddhapada'.(31) Her mortal frame, which 
had been purged through Yoga of all its dross, was transformed into a river, which ranks 


foremost among all streams, O gentle Vidura, confers the highest blessings (on those who 
bathe in it) and is (frequently) resorted to by Siddhas.(32) 


cafaeststa mera WAM asa | Ara AMAMaA weet feat saat 1331 
faeganurrerdy rset: (SAM: = BASU. aeteutfachea: 13X11 
are UT Ware arerendfpa: | zaonafe aenraqaered wariea: 1341 
Having taken leave of His mother (Devahiti), Lord Kapila, the great Yogi, proceeded 
towards the north-east from the hermitage of His father.(33) Duly worshipped and offered 
an abode by Ocean himself, He continues (there even to this day) in perfect peace of mind, 
absorbed in deep meditation for the good of all the three worlds, and is (ever) being extolled 
by Siddhas, Caranas (celestial bards), Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and sages as well 
as by hosts of Apsaras (celestial nymphs), and praised by the teachers of Sankhya (Asuri 
and others).(34-35) 
Wiad dd ages dandiaiee a dart eaeais ulead: 1361 
a senqquifa  asited afteqadanrearne 
waft pat: qvicndquewd waded 3! 
FOAM AAkaaSeATa: 1331 
ons Xe 
sla Gata: het: TAa: 
lant: 20 Aa 
| have thus narrated to you, dear and sinless Vidura, what you asked me, viz., the holy 
dialogue between Lord Kapila and Devahtti (His mother).(36) He who listens to and 
(Similarly) he (too) who expounds this teaching of the (divine) sage Kapila, which is the most 


; f God-Realization, is able to fix his 
secret of all the doctrines teaching the ways and means O 2 
mind on Lord Visnu (who bears on His banner an emblem of Garuda, the king of the birds) 


and attains (proximity) to the Lord's feet. (37) 
Thus ends the thirty-third discourse, forming part of the "Story of Lord Kapila’, 
in Book Three of the great and glorious Bhaga vata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita, composed by 


a isting of 
the sage Vedavyasa and consis 
eighteen thousand Slokas. 


VOSS 
END OF BOOK THREE _ 


PP SES 











DRL 


ada: Xena: 


31 WTA Sear: 


Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana 


Book Four 
Discourse | 


The Progeny of Swayambhuva Manu's Daughters 
WAY Saray 
Tah wUdeae fra: Hans ati sneiidagtis seafettia fasqat: 1 2 | 
Sait ead sere wad? Fa: | orem WdearsAtiad: 1 2 I 


Maitreya continued : (Besides his two sons, Priyavrata and Uttanapada) three 
daughters were also born to Swayambhuva Manu through Sataripa (his wife). They were 
severally known by the names of Akuati, Devahtti and Prastti. (1) With the concurrence of 
Sataripa he gave away Akiti to Ruci (one of the lords of created beings), treating her as a 
Putrika (a daughter married on the explicit understanding that her first male issue would be 
taken in adoption by her father), even though she (already) had (two) brothers. (2) 


Tid: A War Saeamsism! fet wAelaceat amor Aare i 3 | 
ae: Uee: AMantgweaeay | a et ar alan syecarsyaraarfet | x | 
Sia Me Gat: wat fadathae areal yar aml Sfeasiore cfeom & | 
a HA Wiasate AAS Ut: | qe Atenaalssae gles! & | 
aa: Ware: drat ws: Widkseaid: | sen: Hfafdy: ae: Yat teat feaei © | 
Gad AA a dal Sed Alasyardt | Atif «seal ae: Geol: | C | 
Basar 8 Aquat 8 8=—- alse | aacarqoaaa AGATA | 8 


The worshipful Ruci, who was a lord of created beings and invested with the spiritual 
glory appropriate to a Brahmana, begot through her (Akati) a pair—a male and a female 
child—after propitiating the Lord through his supreme concentration of mind (on the Lord).(3) 
Of them, the male was no other than Lord Visnu, who takes the form of sacrifices, (and was 
also known by the name of Yajna). And the female was Daksina (representing the sacrificial 
fee), who was apart manifestation of Laksmi (the goddess of fortune) and hence inseparable 
from the Lord. (4) Full of joy, Swayambhuva brought his daughter's son of boundless glory 
to his home (as stipulated), while Ruci accepted Daksina (as his own progeny). (5) Lord 
Yajfia, who is the Ruler of all sacrifices, married Daksina, who longed for Him and was 
(accordingly) much delighted (at her union with Him). The Lord (too) felt (highly) gratified and 
begot through her (as many as) twelve sons. (6) These twelve sons were Tosa, Pratosa, 





Dis, senasannnannnannnnrenseeeennnn COS FOUR 289 
NR ESRI R RA Be eS BB BB Be BBB BERR AB BBE BR BBR 


santosa, Bhadra, Santi, Idaspati, idhma. Kavi, Vibhu, Swahna, Sudeva and Rocana. (7) It 
was these (twelve sons of Lord Yajfia) who held the office of gods in the Swayambhuva 
Manvantara and were collectively known as the Tusitas. Marici and others figured as the 
(seven) Rsis, while Lord Yajfia Himself filled the place of Indra (the chief of the gods). (8) 
Priyavrata and Uttanapada, who were possessed of great might, were the two sons of 


Manu. Their sons, grandsons and great grandsons as well as their progeny ruled for the 
whole length of that (Swayambhuva) Manvantara. (9) progeny 


‘ TETAS AT: laceratre star «Waal «Medi AA 10! 
eert FEATS Ta: | SrawEepA: weiRactaat faaal AEP 122 I 


a aeciaenlp a (next) daughter, Manu gave her to Sage Kardama (another lord of 
created beings), O dear Vidura. Their story has already been heard by you from my mouth 
almost In full. (10) And the worshipful Manu gave Prastti (his third and youngest daughter) 
to Daksa (still another lord of created beings and) a mind-born son of Brahma, whose 
numberless descendants are spread all over the three worlds. (11) 


aT: eM: Skat Aa waftuaa: i arai sekirad star frater Bie 

Udit Ate met aa wadmenniasad gin a adraghd aTie3t 

guia «fat fat oa ci aageat «oR: | Creaiteneryeahiza: ex 

3a: Uta Ae Waa: Gaiad qaled arenes iui 
Now hear as | tell you about the sons and grandsons of the nine daughters of the sage 
Kardama, who became the wives of (great) Brahmana sages (the mind-born sons of 
Brahma) and of whom | have already spoken. (12) The daughter of Kardama named Kala, 
the wife of Marici, bore KaSyapa and Purnima, whose race filled the universe. (13) PUrnima 
(the younger brother), O Vidura (a chastiser of enemies), begot Viraja and ViSwaga and 
Devakulya (a daughter) who (in her next incarnation) descended in the form of the 
heavenly stream (Ganga) from the waters washing the feet of Lord Visnu.(14) Atri's wife, 
Anasuya, gave birth to three well-renowned sons, Datta (Lord Dattatreya), the sage Durvasa 
and the moon-god, who were severally born as (part) manifestations of Lord Visnu, Lord Siva 


and Brahma (the creator). (15) as 


safe 8=—- AST: fuqerdeda: | fefstaentdat siet Were A at 1241 


Vidura said: With what intention did the three foremost gods (Brahma, Visnu and Siva), 
who are severally responsible for the (processes of) creation, preservation and destruction 
(of the universe), appear in the house of Atri ? Tell me this, my master. (16) 


HAY Jara 
sen 496 Ned: +4 gBlafasiallact at: | ae Ua aaa hens cute Rea: 1291 


he, SEA TARUOTM ARIA | A AaheS. Pisa: Wada: 1221 
SMUT | SET Wal aaald fa: | stfeagecnaet Pesistousr: 1221 
aut «oad yas «Oa CO STAR: (STATA Ae Merah Fray Io 
Mait lied: Urged by Brahma to multiply creation, the sage Atri, the foremost of 
the kn its te a eTriGNed with his wife to the Rksa mountain, one of the principal 
Maistre of Bra anaes inten tere penance. (17) On that mountain, 
clothed Mn ranges o } Palaéa and Asoka trees, which was laden with bunches of flowers 
and echoes snvalloltes with the sound of the waters of the Nirvindhya river falling (on its 








290 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dista 


Be Re Rr Bee Be Br Bee Re BB Re RE BR REE Re EBB BEB A AE BeBe Be Be Be Be Be Be He Be He Me Br He He Be We He Ke Be Be Ke Pe We We We Ke He Kr Hr He Be Rt Br Rt Br 8 kr Be ww, 


rocks), the sage subjugated his mind by means of Pranayama (breath-control) and remained 
standing on one foot for a full century, subsisting on the air and defying cold and heat ang 
other such pairs of opposites. (18-19) The thought which was foremost in his mind (all the 
time) was : "I resort for protection to Him who is the Lord of the (whole) universe. May He 
bless me with offspring like Himself."(20) 


dam fyat swonameatar iftida ytdet: aiter sae: 1201 
STRAT ea eee aeMeR: | facreaaaaraetaisrae Aq: 1221 
ASS Masa TaeN aay WA: i shigaeeatet = cet Ss fgets 1231 
SUT USA RATGUASUe: | Ge a: Vises faa i ex 
ulawtent Weelaehstar i dstfasmiced «ater |= afafaroit au) 
AdeaUT GAT aediaties: | ASIA Ya ATM Adal: 1261 


Seeing the three worlds being tormented with the fire produced by the fuel of Pranayama 
and issuing from the crown of the sage's head, all the three lords (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) 
went to his hermitage. Their glory was being sung (all the time) by Apsaras (celestial 
nymphs), sages, Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and (other demigods such as) 
Siddhas, Vidyadharas and Nagas. (21-22) His mind being flooded with light by their 
simultaneous appearance, the sage stretched himself up even on one leg and saw the three 
foremost gods seated severally on a swan, Garuda (the king of the birds) and a bull (Nandi 
and distinguished by their characteristic marks (a Kamandalu or water-pot, a discus and a 
trident and so on). He greeted them by falling prostrate on the ground and paid them homage 
with articles of worship (Such as water, flowers and so on) in the hollow of his palms, their 
gracious look and smiling faces bearing testimony to their pleasure. The sage closed his 
eyes, which were dazzled by Their splendour, and collecting his mind, which had conceived 
a fondness for them, extolled with joined palms and in sweet and significant words, the three 
gods, who were the greatest of all in the whole universe. (23—26) 


SHACATA 
fanisaketeag  famaaeafarurgg  fandiacer: | 
at Satake: WoMdisess AMI: H UA Vad A sete: 1201 
Unt Wade War faqeenisiid: ssa met a aT 
SAMARIA AAI qe oe Seled Vette foe A122! 


Atri said : You are (evidently) Brahma, Visnu and Siva, who assume a personality at the 
beginning of every Kalpa (round of creation) with the help of the three Gunas (modes) of 
Maya (Prakrti), divided for the purpose of creation, preservation and destruction of the 
universe. | bow to You all. (Pray tell me,) of You three, who was called by me here? (27) It 
was the one (supreme) Lord, the foremost of all the gods, whose presence here was invoked 
by me in order to be able to beget children. How, then, did You all (condescend to) come 
here—You, who are beyond the reach even of the mind of embodied beings ? Be pleased 
to tell me-(the secret of it); for great is my wonder at this. (28) 


Sard 
Sit Teal aa: At Aa faqestu: | Nee: Boal Ara Nea aa Wat 122! 
Maitreya went on : Hearing these words of Atri, the three foremost divinities laughed 
and replied to the sage in sweet accents as follows, O mighty Vidura. (29) 


Sat Sr: 
qa pda dae Wel Ha araen | akperet & mar aa carafe & wa 1201 


m)6hUlhUU =" 


Dis. 1] BOOK FOUR 291 


Be Br Br Br Be Be Br Br Be Be Br Ge He BeBe Be Ke Ge Ke Ke Ke Ke Ve Ke Kee Kee He Re He He REY He Be Re RRC BE BORE eB Re Ree Re Be Be Be RE Re Ree Re BeBe BE Be BORE Be Be BEBE BEBE BE BEBE BE BEG BEBE EAE HE 





WMA sie clefayd: | afadmiss us a faauara a a at: 1321 


The Deities said: As you willed, precisely so it must happen; it could not be otherwise. 
For it was your will, O Brahmana—you, who are so true of resolve. We three (taken together) 
represent the truth on which you contemplated. (30) Now there will be born to you, may you 
be blessed, three sons embodying our rays, who will themselves be celebrated throughout 
the world; O dear sage, and shall spread your fame too. (31) 

Wa BA sat sfasry: tent: | aude: aeramenttivdredd: 1321 
asp amt few atria gate: stewie fratenfeca: yet: 1331 
seg GT: Ueit arelisad cpm: | fata qe Wert aaedauie 13x! 
TTA | Mt Maes i saeal TET Mangas seats: 1341 
MIs dA veayfaidsasram agifafferats wert: 13€1 
wa 8 aaufida: «8 pathacfastqa: | Wan: Hernuiss aererent faite: 1301 
Yeea aaviat aga adt gai ads atta ufesy a aemaisci 
man fer wet amfaraagud | erapaeentr saedt selastea 13e1 
saat «St «6a Cafes atau i faachasenared «Ss TSI: IXol 
fred: aifas fawn faa wa Al scant aqua! WAM wacleaism 1x2 
fafixard: uel OY Ul dda eam yitder fate Aixei 

Having thus granted the boon sought after by him, and duly worshipped by the Brahmana 
couple (Atri and his wife), the three Rulers of the gods returned thence (each to His own 
abode) even as the couple stood looking on with wide open eyes. (382) The moon-god was 
born with a portion of Brahma, while Dattatreya, a Master of Yoga, appeared with a ray of 
Lord Visnu and the sage Durvasa represented a portion of Lord Sankara. (Now) hear of the 
progeny of the sage Angira (another mind-born son of Brahma). (33) Angira’s wife, Sraddha, 
gave birth to four daughters—Sinivali, Kuhod and Raka, Anumati being the fourth.* (34) 
Besides these, they had a couple of sons too, who attained celebrity in the Swarocisa(next) 
Manvantara—the really worshipful Utathya and the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of the 
gods), who was the foremost of the knowers of Brahma. (35) Pulastya (the fourth mind-born 
son of Brahma) begot through his wife, Havirbhu, the sage Agastya, who took the form of 
the gastral fire in his next incarnation; and the great ascetic Visrava was his second son. (36) 
Of the latter was born the (celebrated) god Kubera (the god of riches), the lord of the Yaksas 
(a class of demigods), son of Idavida; while (the world-renowned demons) Ravana, 
Kumbhakarna and Vibhisana were born to his other wife (Kesini). (37) Pulaha’s virtuous wife, 
Gati, bore three sons—Karmasrestha, Variyan and Sahisnu, O talented Vidura. (38) Even 
so Kratu's wife, Kriya, brought forth sixty-thousand sages collectively known as the 
Valakhilyas, all burning with spiritual glow appropriate to a Brahmana. (39) By (his wife) urja, 
O chastiser of enemies, Vasistha (the seventh son of Brahma) had seven sons, Citraketu 
and others, who all turned out to be pure-hearted Brahmana sages. (40) They were Citraketu, 


Suroci, Viraja, Mitra, Ulbana, Vasubhrdyana and Dyuman. He had other sons too, Sakti and 
SO on (by another wife). (41) Atharva's wife, citti (Santi), got a son, Dadhici, also known 


* Of the four daughters of Angira, and Sraddha, Sinivali is the deity presiding over the fourteenth day of a dark fortnight, 
while Kuhd presides over the fifteenth; even so Raka presides over the full-moon day and Anumati over the fourteenth day of 


every bright fortnight. 








292 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


We Bee We Re Ke We We We Me We ee Be MT We Be OME Be eee eee Kee eRe Re eee We Ke Ke We Mee Be He Ge Br Hr Hr He He Hr Kee Be Se He Fe Ge He Ke Pe We We Ke Me Ke We Ke Ke Mr enewnneg rs | 


as ASwasira, who had taken a vow of austere penance. (Now) hear from me of Bhrgu's 
race. (42) 


WT: CIA AAMT: Vea GAsiisad | aa a fanart Bea a way sy | 

strata fraft da Wa Aaa aA AakAadl Yous: WU wa = xx 

Wea Yves wWunecet YA: i afas wrlal aA WTA Ya: isu 

q WW We: adele aletaaiw  adndiedas: afer t 
YUad: ACAAA Aad: Wat: AU: sal 


The illustrious sage Bhrgu begot through his wife, Khyati, two sons, Dhata and Vidhata, 
and a daughter named Sri (a part manifestation of goddess Laksmi), who was devoted to 
the Lord. (43) The sage Meru severally gave away his two daughters, Ayati and Niyati, to 
these (two sons of Bhrgu). By them (Ayati and Niyati) Dhata and Vidhata severally had (two 
sons) Mrkanda and Prana. (44) (The celebrated sage) Markandeya was the son of Mrkanda,. 
while the sage Vedasira was sprung from the loins of Prana. The sage Bhrgu had one more 
son, Kavi by name, who had the worshipful Usana (the sage Sukracarya, the preceptor of 
the demons), for his son. (45) The above-mentioned sages too (in their turn) peopled the 
(different) worlds with their descendants, O Vidura. | have thus given you an account of the 
progeny of Kardama’'s grandsons (daughters’ sons), which is the best and quickest means 
of driving away the sins of a man who would listen to it with reverence. (46) 


Walt Ae ca sat Gas: ical Past ged: sewer: ive 

FaeMerga  dadnmya fay: 1 fq wal Gow wae vated ive 

Seg Vat Ca AMiaedie: Us: fmarafa: \afeten fatter shifter aera: ise! 

Ted Bt at yeTenwd aia: Ta ae die: wa aiecad iol 

ant fHaratacdaed Geared | Her ape fafaan qT at St: WaT TTL IG 

Old: PaO 142 | 

FasiaraAet faamarentad | Fathea HHA ala: Wee: Ahdtssa: 143 | 

feared dail ug: qaqnaea: | qradsaqsr SAPeaatehay: 14% | 

Jara w feat tear ardiaageni@a sees: ad sudepfnsa: 1441 
Daksa, another (mind-born) son of Brahma, accepted the hand of Prasati, (the third) 
daughter of Swayambhuva Manu (as already mentioned inverse 11 above), and through her 
he begot sixteen fair-eyed daughters. (47) Daksa gave away thirteen (of them) to Dharma 
(the god of piety), another to Agni (the fire-god), still another to (all) the Pitrs (manes) 
combined and the last one to Bhava (Lord Siva), who cuts asunder the bonds of worldly 
life.(48) Sraddha, Maitri, Daya, Santi, Tusti, Pusti, Kriya, Unnati, Buddhi, Medha, Titiksa, Hin 
and Murti are (the names of) Dharma’s wives. (49) (Of these) Sraddha bore Subha; Maitrl, 
Prasada; Daya, Abhaya; Santi, Sukha; Tusti, Mud (a daughter); and Pusti gave birth to 
Smaya. (50) (Evenso) Kriya brought forth Yoga; Unnati, Darpa; Buddhi, Artha; Medha, Smrtl 
(a female child); Titiksa, Ksema; Hria son called Prasraya.* (51) And Marti, who is a mine 


of all virtues, bore the (divine) sages Nara and Narayana, on(the occasion of) whose descent 
(on earth) the whole world rejoiced, highly pleased, and the minds (of the people) as well as 
aad a ae 


* Twelve of the thirteen wives of Dharma are the deities presiding over virtues and mental states and other phenomena 
of the same name, viz., reverence, friendliness (towards all), compassion, calmness of mind, complacence, prosperity, formal 
worship, advancement, prudence, intelligence, forbearance and modesty. The progeny of these are also embodiments of 
similar other virtues, mental states and phenomena which are the direct outcome of the previous ones. They are in order good 
fortune, placidity, fearlessness, happiness, joy, pride, concentration of mind, arrogance, opulence, understanding, peace of 
mind and civility. 





Dis. 1 ] BOOK FOUR 293 


Br Br Se Br Be Br Br Be Ge Ke Be Br Br Ge Be Be Be Hr Hr Ke Ke Ke Ke Be Ke Ke Kr He Ke Ke Ke Hee Ke Be CE BeBe Ke Ke Ke BeBe Ree Bee BeBe RE RR ERE RE RE RE ERE BEBE Be BEB BER BEBE RE BEBE ERE 





the quarters, the winds, rivers and mountains (all) became placid and tranquil. (52-53) 
Musical instruments played in heaven, showers of flowers rained, sages offered their praises 
(highly) gratified, the Gandharvas and Kinnaras sang and celestial women danced. (in this 
way) there was supreme felicity and Brahma (the creator) and all the other divinities waited 
on the Lord with songs of praised. (54-55) 


Cal A”: 
at aren fexfad frorassenté @ eudtefia acitraana | 
Wa adaet cmiafiar: ses yea Aa: utc 
Tisd fefreateturaa ger, Hat A: Wewnadade: | 
Rave fasted aeafrcanns faranfere iu! 

; The gods said : Obeisance to that Supreme Person who manifested in His Self this 
universe created by His own Maya (delusive potency), even like the phenomenal 
appearances in the sky, and who has appeared today in the house of Dharma (the god of 
piety) in the yonder form of a sage in order to reveal that Self. (56) May He whose true 
nature can only be inferred be pleased to look on us, the gods—who have been created 
by Him by means of Sattva (the principle of goodness and harmony) in order to put an end 
to any disturbance in the orderly existence of the world—with an eye full of compassion, 
an eye which outvies the shining lotus, which is the abode of beauty (or the home of 
Laksmi, the goddess of beauty). (57) 


Ta genre «= ramafagdt | wenactndageeldt TATE 1S I 
wat a wad sient wea a ya: Het gape 141 


Thus extolled and honoured by the gods, who were blessed by Their sight, dear Vidura, 
the two divine sages (Nara and Narayana) left for the Gandhamadana mountain. (58) It is 
those two part manifestations of Lord Sri Hari that appeared in this world, with a view to 
relieving the earth of its burden, in the person of Sri Krsna, the Ornament of the Yadus, and 
Arjuna (also known by the name of Krsna because of his swarthy complexion), the foremost 


of the Kurus. (59) 
SSAA Neal steed \Wlaeh Ua AU Wa A edt 101 
WASTE: BAYA Uae WI Ala Wiese  fugitame: 12 
ene satin aarafiseante: | saat seat ad Meerdisaag a 1g2I 


Swaha (the spouse of the fire-god) bore three sons—Pavaka, Pavamana and Suci—all 
of whom are deities presiding over fire and partake of the sacrificial offerings. (60) From 
these, again, sprang up forty and five other fire-gods. Itis these (forty-five) together with their 
fathers and grandfather (mentioned in the preceding verse), that make the forty-nine fire- 
gods. (61) These are the (forty-nine sacred) fires in whose names Istis (Sacrifices on a small 
scale) intended for the propitiation of the fire-god are undertaken during Vedic sacrificial 


performances by men well-versed in the Vedas. (62) 
afin affae: Aten: frat smear: | AIaasAaaMa Uelt claaoit eT 1g3 1 
The Agniswattas, the Barhisads, the Saumyas and the Ajyapas—these are (the four 
main divisions of) the Pitrs (the eternal manes). They are either Sagnika (receiving libations 
of water through the sacred fire) or Niragnika (receiving libations of water without such 
medium). Swadha, daughter of Daksa, is their common spouse. (63) 








294 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 2 


aaa ees s asst ahe si aSeenasnennaneetseeressanenrsanukennemese Pe 
OOOO tttti(‘i‘ié; S*;:;:;S:SS 


wa ea eat 2 agai fii wisN a saafest weafaqma iex, 

waa uct q ait wa eangadtionen: Tat GA OA guealtod: eu) 

farisiret QQ YAMA Sal! silcaraissmmaseerredaar 1G I 
sfa srsrad He weet Sfecra aan faewadare yepitseaa: 121 


Swadha bore them a couple of daughters, Dharini and Vayuna, both of whom not only 
mastered the scriptures but also attained spiritual wisdom, and further taught such spiritual 
wisdom. (64) Sati (Daksa's youngest daughter and) the Consort of Bhava (Lord Siva), was 
devoted to Lord Bhava, but did not get a son resembling her in good qualities and character. 
For, while yet very young, she dropped her body of her own accord by dint of Yoga 
(concentration of mind), in a spirit of indignation against her father (Daksa) on account of his 
antagonism against Lord Bhava, who had done him no wrong. (65-66) 


Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the Dialogue between Vidura and Maitreya, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SISOS 


31g fadialseara: 


Discourse Il 


Ill feeling between Lord Siva and Daksa 
fagt Sara 
Wa isda AS dat eqace: | feats adi ei 
eM meas at ardaseisnanr we ee and fad Ae! 2 | 
Werente A see SMG: saavat ai fase aa: sie aera | 3 | 
Vidura said: How did Daksa, who was (so) fond of his daughters, happen to bear ill-will 
towards Lord Bhava, the foremost among those possessed of an amiable disposition, 
disregarding his own daughter, Sati ?(1) Who would bear enmity and how could anyone bear 
enmity to Him, the Teacher of the whole animate and inanimate creation, who bears enmity 
to none, is possessed of a tranquil personality, delights in His own Self and is the highest 
object of veneration to the (whole) universe ? (2) Be pleased to tell me, holy sage, what led 
to such bitterness of feeling between the son-in-law (Lord Siva) and the father-in-law 
(Daksa), as compelled Sati to give up her very life, which is so difficult to part with? (3) 


HAY Sard 
Ga faagsat et aan: umda:iamaemn: wl alam qaatsza: | x | 
wa Sasqeat ea diastisnmmr fafaet gd amece: | & | 
saltet, Weed ealerweasy: aera: ised faker ad a aaraissfareada: | & | 
aerate War Ae Aen: 1 set cles aa frame dala vt 


Maitreya replied: (Once) of oldall foremost seers and sages as well as hosts of divinities 
including the gods presiding over the sacred fires assembled with their attendants ina 





Dis. 2 ] BOOK FOUR 295 


Be BBE RBBB BRE BeBe BBE BEB BEB Be BB Be Be Be Hr Be Be Br BRE He Be Re BER Ge BEEBE BERR PE BE RE RRR BERR BE BRE RR BEBE BEBE RERE BE BORE BEBE BEBE DBE BEBE RE RE LEBER BEBE 





sacrificial session held by the Prajapatis (lords of created beings). (4) Daksa too appeared 
there, shining like the sun and illumining the grand assembly by his splendour. With their 
mind overwhelmed by his brilliance, (all) those assembled there, including the deities 
presiding over the sacrificial fires, rose from their seats when they saw him, excepting, of 
course, Brahma (his father) and Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe). (5-6) Duly 
honoured by the superintending priests, the worshipful Daksa bowed to Brahma, the 
progenitor of the universe, and took his seat with the latter's permission. (7) 
meta YS Gel AMSMeted: | sate art wapataficta geht | ¢ | 

Seeing Lord Sankara (the Delighter of the world) already seated, and receiving no 
attention from Him, Daksa grew indignant. He looked with angry eyes at Siva as if he would 
burn Him, and exclaimed :(8) 


gad wedat A aeeal: Aeaa: | Ayal Aaa Gd AMMA A ANIL! @ | 
sad Clete ait froau: i aferaha: ue at wea afta: 1201 
wa A reat sat aa dead afer fanfpaa: fas sa area 1221 
Fete WrRnaaeM: uot achestea: 1 saeaeree area Alfa 1221 
anager ont 86 fitadad i aiteaaet aiet qaraddlardt freie3 | 
WaTaTAy, any Vasfrtdd: | aeaadaaa aya BAL GEL 1ex! 
Rereean: Stee afeyen: | freee afeat adt masa: | 
Ufet: TANYA TAMAS 1.24 | 
Ta «sae «Apa «ae Lae aa Har Uredl alfad Ufa 126! 


"Listen to me, O Brahmana sages along with the gods (present here) including the deities 
presiding over the sacred fires, as | speak to you about the conduct of pious souls neither 
from ignorance nor from spite. (9) This shameless fellow has wrecked the fame of the 
guardians of the various spheres inasmuch as the arrogant man has violated the path 
trodden by the virtuous. (10) He has become a veritable son to me ever since he accepted 
the hand of my daughter, who is another Savitri (the consort of Brahma) as it were, in the 
presence of Brahmanas and the sacred fire like a good-natured soul. (11) Though he has 
taken the hand of that fawn-eyed girl, this monkey-eyed fellow did not show due courtesy 
to me even by word of mouth, when (as a matter of fact) he ought to have risen from his seat 
and greeted me. (12) To this haughty and impure person, who has not only abandoned all 
pious acts but has outstepped all bounds of propriety, | gave away the girl, though unwilling 
to do so, even as one would impart the sacred word (Veda) to a Sudra (who has been 
declared by the scriptures as unqualified to receive it). (13) Surrounded by spirits and troops 
of ghosts, with his hair scattered about, now laughing and now crying, he roves about 
uncovered like a madman in frightful crematories (the abodes of spirits). (14) Bathed in the 
ashes of funeral piles and adorned with a garland of skulls (befitting spirits) and wearing 
Ornaments of human bones, he is really inauspicious, though bearing the appellation of Siva 
(all-auspicious). (Ever) drunk (himself), he is fond of drunken people and is the lord of goblins 
and-ghosts, who are purely Tamasika (wicked) by nature. (15) At the instance of Brahma, 
alas | | gave away my virtuous girl to such an impure and evil-minded person, the lord of 


ghosts." (16) 
Hat Sara 


fateata a firfterasdtanaftect! aaisam samea Be: Wy WaeHs ie! 





a 


296 : SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


SERB Re Rees A Rear A Ber Br Br HBr BeBe BB PR Bee BED Be Br Br Be Br Gr Br Br He Be Be Re Br Hi Sr Br Br We Ke Me Kr Hr Br Wr Sr Br Fr re 2 
————ere—OOoeeee OOS SS SSSR RENE Ie 


3a gq tam sataleeeda:iae Wt A oat eadanonem: 122) 
fifiaam: a wasqedet fifa fag ann 
deere faqgepime are fet 3 feaiee 


Maitreya continued : Having thus reviled Lord Siva (who has His abode on Mount 
Kailasa and) who remained unmoved without the least show of resistance, Daksa now 
sipped alittle water and indignantly proceeded to curse Him:—(17) “Yonder Bhava, the vilest 
among the gods, shall no longer get a share in the sacrificial offerings along with the other 
gods such as Indra (the lord of paradise), Upendra (Lord Visnu manifested in the form of a 
dwarf, so-called because of His being a younger brother of Indra) and so on." (18) Having 
pronounced this imprecation upon Lord Siva, though warned against such a course by the 
leading members of the assembly, Daksa left the place, highly enraged, and returned to his 
own abode, O scion of Kuru. (19) 


fama ai (ass PRT emer: | 
cama amay:sidfa@aerst ceo a a attewtearera «= fst: 1201 
q Uarnaylesa wMaasidge | yeaa: yore fag wa 1281 
Tey meaty an waqeeiadaat fadqd aacnefaunel: 1221 
Sem Use farearentia: Ua: | Alena: ASealAaa Sat TRTTSISPARTT, 1233 | 
fanatic 4 advent weitere 8 any salami 
PR: seta: gave weer ykoriam araiesaram: aged ates: 1241 
advent fem gat ygafaenadiacn: ifadcefsarm arrest faeces 1261 
Having come to know of this execration, NandiSwara, the foremost of Lord Siva's 
attendants, grew wild with rage and uttered a terrible curse on Daksa as well as on those 
(other) Brahmanas who had countenanced his blasphemy. (20) "This fool, who makes much 
of his mortal frame and bears enmity to the divine Siva—who has no vindictive spirit in Him— 
and looks upon the body etc., (which is other than the self) as his own self, shall have his 
face turned away from the Truth. (21) Attached to his home, the duties pertaining to which 
involve the practice of many a self-deception, in the search for carnal pleasures, and 
deprived of his judgment by attractive promises contained in the Vedas (such as the text- 
promising eternal happiness to those who perform the sacrifice called Caturmasya™ ), he 
remains engaged in elaborate rituals. (22) With his mind ever contemplating on the son-self 
as the self, Daksa has forgotten the true nature of his self and is (no better than) a brute. He 
shail, iherefore, be excessively fond of women and shall have his head forthwith changed 
into that of a goat. (23) This stupid fellow—who regards ignorance in the form of addiction 
to rituals as wisdom and has slighted Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe)—and those 
who follow him shall be born in this world again and again. (24) With their mind bewildered 
by the alluring, sweet and profuse odour (in the shape of the promises of happiness) emitted 
by the flowery texts of the Vedas, these enemies of Hara (Lord Siva) shall remain infatuated 
(for ever). (25) Eating anything and everything (making no distinction between what is worth 
eating and what is not) and devoted to learning, austerity and sacred vows only for the sake 
of their livelinood, the Brahmanas shall wander in this world as beggars, finding delight only 
in wealth, physical comforts and the gratification of their senses.” (26) 


"Aaa & a Aq: FS Vas 





Dis. 2 ] BOOK FOUR 297 


Be Be Be Be Br Br Be Be ee Be Be He Be He Be He He Br He Ke Be Ke Gr Ke Ge Ke Kr Ke Ke Kr Kee Ke Kee ERE KE Be BeBe ERK BERL ERK BeBe Be BRR BRE REE RE REBEL RE RE RE BPEL LORE ERR 





qed cad: wd spat fistHora a IST: SeageSsm «seleUs AIAN! 

ware ft A A a aM Gaga: i ureter eq weoreahuted: 121 

amit yee sermeniwentior: 1 fear fradenat ax fa aurea 12e! 

wa A mesa aq uftrari aq feet dame: urausaris: 1301 

w wi fe ceri fa: wen: wa: ia ge argdaepiomnot sarda: 1321 

gl WA We Ual acl waren fare ama unaqus aa at aa Baa 132! 
Hearing him thus pronounce a curse upon the Brahmana race, the sage Bhrgu uttered 
a counter-curse, which was difficult to revoke, being the punishment inflicted by a 
Brahmana:—(27) "They who observe vows sacred to Bhava and (likewise) those who 
follow there latter shall become heretics and act contrary to (the injunctions of) the true 
scriptures.(28) Only those who have cast all purity to the winds, are silly-minded and wear 
matted locks, ashes and bones shall get themselves initiated in the cult of Siva-worship, 
where wine and other spirituous liquor will be held in high esteem. (29) Because you 
denounce the Vedas, which lay down the bounds of propriety for men (following the conduct 
prescribed for the different grades of society and stages in life) and thereby preserve the 
society (from disruption), as well as the Brahmanas (the custodians of the Vedas), therefore 
(it seems) you have embraced the creed of heretics. (80) The path chalked out by the Vedas 
is the eternal and the only blessed path for the people—a path which has been trodden by 
the ancients and has the authority of Janardana (Lord Visnu). (81) Condemning as you do 
the Vedas, which constitute the supremely faultless and eternal path of the virtuous, do you 

take to the path of heretics, where that lord of the ghosts is the Deity." (32) 


WAT Sara 
Wea aad: Wd =: A waM va: | fam aa: feHfsisaat sa ara: 1331 
ast faygst: al waeaukaan dana veg aaer aad ait: 13x 
sageaya wt Ug ayaitad fered ad @ A AA AqEd: 1341 
sfq sitertad AER TRAST Sedat Adele cares AMT fedtatseara: 121 


Maitreya went on : While Bhrgu was thus uttering his imprecation, Lord Bhava along 
with his retinue left the assembly hall, a bit disconsolate at heart as it were. (33) The lords 
of created beings, O Vidura (a great archer), duly carried on the sacrifice for a thousand 
years—the sacrifice in which Sri Hari, the Supreme Being, was the Deity worshipped. (34) 
At the conclusion of the sacrifice they took their bath in the Ganga where it is joined by the 
Yamuna and, with their mind and body cleansed of all impurities, they all returned therefrom 


€ach to his own abode. (35) 


Thus ends the second discourse entitled “Daksa‘s Imprecation" 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


Pee SARA 


[S64] B. M. 12— 





Sy 


298 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 


SHARERSRREREERRAERSEDREEDAERSADERRERTESRTERRREREEEER NED Ie a heee Reema ieee: 3 
Bre 


BIA Taaseara: 


Discourse III 


Sati insists on joining the sacrificial festival at her father's 


WAY Sava 
wa fafgsdita arent a feearort: | aK: waa «8 Aelita e | 
Getafe ca san Masai senodda ade walsvadi 2 1 


Sr a ana «osfasmitya aligeaitad AA BARN waa! 3 | 
dq |oseda: ad ealdftqead:: | sed HaMaecasy AMT: | ¥ | 
quay Af Get seca ad aenaot edt fiqeaereras & | 
Bardi: adi feng sucdathaa: | farart: aNst Fepcnvsl: Garaa: | & | 
Gl meat cletatipausen: uf yaoi  eanhqemeaad i © | 


Maitreya resumed: While Lord Siva (the son-in-law) and Daksa (the father-in-law) thus 
continued to bear lasting enmity to each other, a very long time elapsed. (1) Now that Daksa 
was installed by Brahma, the highest of the gods, as the chief of all the lords of created 
beings, he was puffed up with pride. (2) Having performed a Vajapeya sacrifice, and insulted 
(by his overbearing demeanour) those who were most skilled in sacred knowledge, he (now) 
commenced the greatest of all sacrifices, known by the name of Brhaspati-Sava.* (3) In that 
sacrifice all the Brahmana seers as well as celestial sages, manes and gods were adorned 
with all kinds of jewels; and their wives too were similarly adorned along with their 
husbands.(4) At that time Goddess Sati, daughter of Daksa, heard of the great sacrificial 
festival at her father's from the mouth of heavenly beings who were passing through the air 
and talking loudly (of that festival). (5) She also saw charming spouses of demigods 
(Gandharvas and Yaksas) with rolling eyes, dressed in fine costumes and adorned with 
polished ear-rings and wearing gold ornaments round their necks, flying in their aerial cars 
with their husbands from all directions past her own abode. In her eagerness (to join the 
festival) she (thus) spoke to her Consort, God Siva (the lord of the ghosts). (6-7) 


agar 
Toe RECT Ssaifaat «= ameter: «3 fem 
aq a daiwaua am a aeftiant faa asta feic 
dem ube aa udfa: wea ufteta aefecera: | 
3 ad dea waaaitema aera utente ¢ | 
wa wed zq ude agg: feat a arm 
$aa 0 fakienvouat «= efdfecttaart «Sis STEALEATSTA_ 120 
aadasdaneaaran fata walt worn 
dae 4 Aiverafaa a dtr feat wa A aafarfrriee! 


* It is laid down in the Srutis that after performing a Vajapeya sacrifice one should next undertake what is known as 4 


Brhaspati-Sava— anraaigl Jeeta Asa | 





Dis. 3 ] BOOK FOUR 299 


Br Be Pe Bt Re Be BeBe Be Be Re eae Be Re Be KB BB Rr Be Ke Be Ge Re eR RRR RR RRR EAA AEA AAA AEAEAAAELAAEAAA 


Ta | Ward Varaeanfadisaead:  Ardaa ARAM: | 
area asthe: faitrnvs ufted aut faa: mecaarogi: 122! 
wma aden: faqrentdch era 2: aad Ag 
sem «=o otafvafa = tae tess «= het 123 | 
wm wae aed ad arcnreftrat acted | 
waissemistiserenaa «=| frefteat «= ATqyerot «= afer: 121 


Sati said: | hear a grand sacrificial festival has been set on foot at the residence of Your 
father-in-law, the lord of created beings. Let us also move thither, if You so desire, O 
Vamadeva; these heavenly beings are (all) going there. (8) My sisters will surely attend it with 
their husbands in their eagerness to see their kinsfolk. | too long to be there with You and 
receive the presents that will be bestowed (on me by my parents). (9) There | hope to see 
my own sisters, the esteemed of their spouses, as well as my mother's sisters and (above 
all) my own mother, whose mind is so full of affection for me, for all of whom my heart has 
been yearning for along time. And | shall also see, my blissful lord, the great sacrifice which 
is being performed by eminent seers. (10) (Undoubtedly) this wonderful creation, consisting 
of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) and brought forth by Your own Maya, appears 
in You. Nevertheless I, a pitiable woman, and ignorant of Your reality, long to see my native 
place, O birthless Siva (the ultimate source of the universe). (11) Behold, my birthless lord, 
other women (in no way connected with my parents), also richly adorned, going with their 
consorts in large numbers. The sky looks charming with their moving aerial cars, white as 
swans, O Lord with a dark spot in the throat (caused by swallowing a most deadly poison 
in the interest of the world* ). (12) How can the (mind and) body of a daughter remain 
unmoved, O Chief of the gods, on hearing of a festivity at the house of her parents? People 
go to the house of their husband, preceptor, parents and other near and dear ones even 
uninvited. (13) Therefore, compassionate as You are, be pleased to grant this desire of mine, 
O immortal lord ! Though possessed of infinite wisdom, You have located me in the (left) half 
of Your person (and accepted the appellation of Ardhanariswara); (therefore) do me this 


favour as entreated by me. (14) 





wa fifa: ffeaatieaniea: sear seat dele: | 
Geka adfie: atte ase at faggst ara: 124i 
The sage resumed: Thus importuned by His beloved spouse, Siva (the Lord of Kailasa), 
whois so loving to His relations, was reminded of the shaft-like words of reproach that Daksa 
had uttered in the presence of the other lords of created beings, and which were cutting to 
the quick. He, therefore, laughed and made the following reply. (15) 


STAN Tara 
aafed wate wet sre stetwarha | ay 
a Aaqaederresat Aaa ASAT 1261 
faenantfanauda: pe: Gat Tut: Ralaadade: | 
dt edarat waned: een a usata fe aa yaarieyl 
Ae 60 eee SeiteedaeereerarL | 


“Vide verses 40—43 of Discourse VII of Book Eight. 











300 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


See es Lesa e RESTS SESSURESTSESESERURSADRRRARED RENNER RNRNOR RARER AER E ERGO 3 


ASIALTA, asnlerartitaerd strfaayisraonarhaa: 1201 
aah cd firetge: sasféargt weaa cacti 
mat aa amitat cefeftticaer aaia adearfea: ee 


The Lord said : Ithas been well said by you, O good lady, that people go to their relations 
even uninvited; but this happens only when the latter's mind is not tainted with malice due 
to excessive arrogance and anger born of self-identification with the body. (16) The Pride of 
the arrogant is heightened and their mind perverted by learning, austerity, Opulence, a 
charming personality, youth and pedigree, which are the six embellishments for the noble 
but a curse to the most wicked; and deprived of their judgment, they fail to perceive the glory 
of the most exalted. (17) Considering them as one's own relations, one should never visit the 
house of such men of unsteady judgment, who view their visitors with a suspicious mind and 


with angry and frowning eyes. (18) One whose body has been mutilated with arrows by the’ 


enemy does not feel the same torture as he who has been cut to the quick by the abusive 
words of his own people having a malignant mind. For, while the former is able to sleep (on 
receiving proper treatment and nursing), the latter suffers from heartache day and night. (19) 


ah ade: osetad: assesamta qy aA | 
sata a OA Of: «soca «Neier: UR «Aa: 1201 
wae  eaissdthsa:  «ayhefy:  yeaafgerfaom | 
snaead 4 waafenigharat «We «SCS tT BARAT 2 I 


You are surely the most beloved and esteemed of all the daughters of Daksa (the lord 
of created beings) of exalted rank, my charming lady; yet you will not receive the attention 
of your father because of your connection with Me, which is a source of great torment to 
him.(20) He whose heart is burning (with jealousy) and who feels troubled in mind at the sight 
of the glories of those exalted souls who stand as a witness to the mind of a Jiva (embodied 
soul), is unable easily to ascend the supreme heights reached by them and merely hates 
them even as the demons hate Sri Hari. (21) 


saasstaonivearet  fadtat eae faa: que 
Tia: Ul Usa aaa wera a eerie 
aa faye ageaafeet ada oat yarurae: | 
Ga a die war ame adalat A amar faetad 123! 
ad Pitan a fadia tena cet aa fee acim a 
a faggegmd ate amar adearendfar: 12x 
ae seria ugat we waar a ad wfaera | 
aalada  Gsrraval adel A Ae ANA Bead 124! 
a AASPad ACM GRAS Ged Agee SAeacare Garaseaa: 131 
As regards exchange of formalities in the shape of rising from one's seat and advancing 
to meet a friend, respectful behaviour and salutation etc., O slender-waisted lady, !t !S 
properly done only by the wise, who do all this mentally with respect to the Supreme Person 
dwelling in every heart, and not to him who regards the body as his own self. (22) It !s the 
absolutely pure mind which is termed as ‘Vasudeva’, because it is there that the Supreme 


Person is realized in His unmasked glory. It is in (the shrine of) such a mind that | wait upon 
with obeisance Lord Vasudeva, who is beyond sense-perception. (23) Therefore, yOu 


> _ 


Dis. 4 ] BOOK FOUR 301 
Be Br BeBe Be BCR BeBe BR Be Ke Re Re Ke BeBe Re Be Be BERT Re Be Re BER Re RE Re Bt RE REBT Re RE REBT RE BORE ORE RE Be BER Be Be Re RE REBAR BE BEBE BE Re BEB BER Be BE Ke BEBE Be Be Be BEBE BEBE Me 


should never look at the face of Daksa—even though he is your father, your very 
procreator—nor of those who are devoted to him, because he bears ill-will to me and offered 
indignity to me by abusing me, O charming lady, when | visited the sacrifice performed by 
the lords of created beings, even though | did no wrong to him. (24) If you ignore my advice 
and go there, no good will come to you thereby. For, when a man who is held in high esteem 
suffers indignity at the hands of a relation, the affront forthwith causes his death. (25) 


Thus ends the third discourse, forming part of the Dialogue between Goddess Uma and 
Lord Rudra, in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SSSA DS 


BY Aqaseara: 


Discourse IV 


Sati burns herself with the fire of Yoga 
WAY sara 
Utara fad Wat: User War fade 
Uefeea: uftefen vatfrsaradt fafdadt feenssa ari g | 
UelegarsfrenagHar: eA AHMET | 
Tq warmed «sr  waeadddead waaay: | 21 
an far:aea adt faa ad aha Want a gad eal 
faaroneetutaqedtier Swonssaat atselneraat fra: 1 3 | 
ata giana adaet Prada: Agee: | 
aaatan afurmaea: Qasr Were: | x | 
at AificnlercencduIngurad aaa Mars: 
Thererigefrag ay aes faefgar Oo 
STASI sicdagtarare fanfiss faqtsr waa: 
ela: Heenan age nus aa aartaatd | & | 
aanrat dat a amsaisae faniat agenat wearer: | 
mt Wye wat a@ ae: Saqaver: uiteade 1 © | 
Qetaysaadada wat a wayeiNs alec 
at aa amd a a area faamidareat acti ci 
Maitreya continued: Having said this much, Lord Sankara (the Bestower of happiness) 
became silent: for He thought the death of His consort was inevitable in either case (whether 
she proceeded to her father's house or stayed behind). (As for the latter) she swung like a 
pendulum, (now) sallying forth in her eagerness to see her relations and (now) returning for 


fear of Lord Siva (the Source of the universe). (1) Vexed at the thwarting of her desire to see 
her relations and overpowered with emotion, she burst into tears and wept. Shaking with 








302 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Dis. 
es ere ee eecaa Tine hhaaenenebbkbwatnhienenntumnns, ree 
EEL :tC—<“<i‘ié;‘ :;*;*;‘S;!SSSSS ee 


anger, Sati (the spouse of Lord Bhava) looked at her peerless lord, Bhava, as if she woulg 
burn Him. (2) Thereafter, with a heart tormented by grief and anger and her judgment 
clouded by her womanish nature, and heaving deep sighs, she proceeded to her Parents’ 
home, leaving Lord Sankara, the beloved of the saints, who had fondly given her half of His 
body. (3) The servants of Lord Siva (who is characterized by three eyes)—Maniman, Mada 
and others—accompanied by His own personal attendants and Yaksas, followed her apace 
in thousands, placing Nandiswara (the chief of the bulls, the mount of Lord Siva) at their heaq 
and free from remorse (at their parting from the Lord, because they could not bear to see Sat 
going without escort). (4) Placing her on (the back of) the chief of the bulls, they travelled (as 
her escort), duly equipped with her Sarika (a thrushlike bird generally brought up as a pet 
by ladies of high rank), ball (to play with), looking-glass and lotus flower, white umbrella, 
chowrie and wreath etc., (as insignia of royalty) * and kettledrums, conchs, flutes and other 
accompaniments of music. (5) Sati (presently reached her destination and) entered the 
sacrificial grounds, where Vedic hymns were being chanted in every direction, giving rise to 
a keen contest (among the Brahmanas reciting the Vedas), nay, which were crowded with 
Brahmana seers and divinities on all sides and strewn with utensils of clay, wood, iron, gold, 
KuSa grass and hides. (6) Afraid of Daksa (the sacrificer), who treated her with disrespect, 
nobody bestowed any attention on her when she arrived there, excepting of course her 
sisters and mother, who gladly and fondly embraced her, their throats choked with tears of 
love. (7) Not addressed kindly by her father, Sati did not accept the presents or the exalted 
seat lovingly offered by her mother and mother's sisters; nor did she receive (with a glad 
heart) the enquiries of her sisters about her health, even though they were couched ina most 
appropriate language. (8) 

aresunt «dader ureat fir a aa qaded fart 

sled agaewetat «=Car «SST I 8 

we amtiama fr Rafe yuu 


Sasa ANT afer Oye eat STTetISPYUaTA: 1201 

Seeing that no share of the sacrificial offerings had been allotted to Rudra (Lord Siva) 
and that her father (Daksa) had shown great disrespect towards the omniscient Lord, and 
herself slighted in the sacrificial assembly, Sati (a lady in supreme authority) flew into a rage 
as if she would burn (all) the worlds with her fury. (9) Controlling by her command the hosts 
of ghosts (that had accompanied her and) who had sprung on their feet (to kill Daksa), she 
proceeded to reproach that enemy of Lord Siva—whose vanity had been tickled by his 
proficiency in the ritual—in accents faltering with anger within the hearing of the whole world 
(all those assembled there). (10) 

Maa 


4 aa oleaseicaraa: frameaat eeyat fare: | 
Wer, Wana math WA Yar add: welts eel 
am, utet fe qe aed werd chan ware fest 
TS Be agelnienat  neaaretyiaasarey 122 
TIstetea «= Ue Aetetret Surarcantey | 
eel HeNqEaaeaa ar edast: | dea ANAT 123 | 


ee ene 
* Lord Siva being one of the eight Lokapalas (regents of the quarters), Sati is depicted here as enjoying royal honours. 





Dis. 4] BOOK FOUR 303 


he Br BeBe Be Be eB Be Re BG BH Be BBR RR RR REAR RR BEBE RR RE REE RE RE RE Re Re Behe Re Re Be Be Re Re Re Be Re Re Re Re EERE RE RR REE ER ERE REET 
ae EN a PR FO aPogeMY wat Ad! 
Ularait aneeeaed ame af fra feraaz: 121 
acaredal Hedi TAstotaratad AeRaraanats: | 
wie dedia uiigistinest war gpa fagaea 12k! 


The worshipful goddess said: None other than you would antagonize Him (Lord Siva), 
who is unsurpassed in this world, to whom no one is dear or hateful, who is the beloved Self 
of all embodied beings, nay, who is the cause of all and is free from enmity. (11) People like 
you, O Brahmana, discover faults even in the virtues of others; but there are some pious 
souls who never do so. The greatest of all are they who are wont to magnify even the most 
trifling virtues (of others). You, however, have found fault even with such people. (12) It is 
no wonder that those ignoble souls who declare the material body—which is no better than 
a corpse—as the self, always indulge in maliciously reveling exalted souls. Such a behaviour 
befits those people, since their glory is obscured by the dust of feet of those exalted souls. 
(Failing to reach the heights of glory attained by such exalted souls, they try to hide their 
shame by vilifying these people). (13) You hate Lord Siva of sacred renown, whose 
command is inviolable, nay, whose (celebrated) name of two syllables (SIVA), uttered with 
the tongue even once and that too casually, immediately wipes out the sins of men (who utter 
them) ! You are a coursed indeed. (14) You bear enmity to that Befriender of the universe, 
whose lotus-feet are not only resorted to by the bee-like minds of exalted souls, thirsting for 
honey in the shape of the joy of absorption in Brahma (the Absolute), but also shower the 
blessings sought after by interested people. (15) 


fe at Rraremita 3 fageded weNetattacnla et: SARA | 
TaeaeHaedaahaanea «86=—_-yelifdefe «= - qeeuTagng 126 | 
wut faera frrenca 2 anifacdginiticecan | 


faa widinadt systema adt fags ea: 1201 
sdearaaiae «6 eat CT fereeatSO Patfetemvaifgur: | 
were, Atethg «6= feregrereat «=| ftaeiegxot «= etait 12 ¢1 
a aeqieMqada aft: @ wa ole Wat Tera! 
aa ufidanqert: yaR Ww ouwa at a at fatice: 1291 
ad ug a fama ae fafaenvafeeasa 
fafa dette gt am seftr wd aasfa izol 
Do not people other than you, such as Brahma (the creator) and others, who place on 
their heads flowers etc., dropped from His feet, know Him to be inauspicious, though bearing 
the appellation of Siva (all-auspicious)\—Him who lived in the company of fiends in 
Crematories, throwing about His matted locks and wearing on His person the wreaths lying 
there as well as the ashes (of funeral piles) and human skulls? (16) A man should shut his 
ears and leave the place where his master—a defender of righteousness—is being 
vituperated by unbridled men, in case he is powerless (to take the life of the reviler or to lay 
down his own life); or, if he has the power, he should forcibly cut off the vile tongue that 
indulges in such blasphemy, and then give up his own life as well (if need be). Such is the 
course of duty. (17) Therefore, | shall no longer retain this body, begotten of you, a vilifier 
of Lord Siva (the dark-necked) ! For the wise declare that one gets purified only by vomiting 
the impure food consumed through ignorance. (18) The mind of a great sage reveling in his 











304 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


BeBe ee Be Re Rr Re Re BE BRE BERT BeBe BeBe BEBE BEAL BEBE BE BEB BE Be Be Hr Be Be Be Br Be Hr Ke Br Be Me Se Hr He Hr Hr He Br Br Br Hr Hr Sr Sr Br Sr Br pennmanmnnenmes: 4 
i 


own Self does not (invariably) follow the utterances of the Vedas (in the form of injunctions 
and interdictions). Just as the movements of an immortal and a human being vary (while the 
one can tread on air, the other can walk on solid ground alone), even so the ways of the 
enlightened and the ignorant are not alike. Therefore, while holding fast exclusively to one's 
own duty, one should never cast aspersions against another. (19) Activity in the shape of 
performing one's religious duties (pouring oblations into the sacred fire and so on) and that 
consisting of pursuits carried on in retirement (such as the control of one's mind and senses 
etc.) are equally right, both being prescribed in the Vedas severally for the two types of men, 
the one characterized by worldly attachment and the other by its absence, as will appear from 
the fact that the two are found incompatible in an agent practising both at a time. (But even 
as the one duty is not incumbent on the other type of men) so no duty of any kind devolves 
on Lord Siva (who is the same as Brahma). (20) 


Tm a: vee: farmer a ager a gaat: | 
dea a latiSe Waris sTagqrafaddl: 122 1 
W606 TNC ATION = GT 
ast | Weedeater EET at eae 122! 
Ta weld Wa geet aati ser Agta: | 
Sac, ea UU ASL 1 23 | 


The natural gifts (mystic powers) possessed by us, O father, cannot be acquired by you. 
They are not extolled in sacrificial halls by creatures following the path of ritual and gratified 
with the food offered in sacrifices; for their origin is unknown (depending as they do on our 
will) and they are enjoyed only by the knowers of Brahma. (21) | have no longer any use for 
this body of ignoble birth, sprung as it is from the loins of one who has sinned against Lord 
Siva (the Destroyer of the universe). Away, away with it ! 1am ashamed of my relationship 
with a vile man. Accursed be the birth from him who offends against exalted souls. (22) When 
Lord Siva (whose banner bears the device of a bull) calls me (jocularly) by the name of 
Daksayani (Daksa's daughter)—an appellation derived from your name, | shall feel deeply 
piqued, and forget all mirth and smile. Therefore, | will forthwith cast off this corpse-like body 
begotten of you (so that no such occasion may arise). (23) 


WAY sara 
sae cay aed «faded fea wraareg | 
Ue we Umenedam Freier gett aarfeeriexi 
Pal aitaet fdr derqera ai arfiraena: | 
wee wre faanfa fed aus yaremntteda 124! 
Wi Wee vedi mde de: «96 aamifadageand. 
figtadt «career aadt «=O cet tg fronfwemom 126! 
wd: wisureanad wiefadadt A aa 
cael el «edeewe: ddl aa: sacar warleenfa.1201 


Maitreya went on:Having thus addressed Daksa in the sacrificial assembly, O Vidura 
(queller of enemies in the shape of lust, anger and so on), Sati sat down silent on the floor, 
facing the north. She sipped (some) water (by way of purification), wrapped herself with a 





Dis. 4 ] BOOK FOUR 305 
BRB BASES RSS SERRE RBS RE ABBR BEBE BR RL SL RR RR RRR RRR REAR LALLA ARAL EAR ABIDE 


yellow piece of linen, closed Her eyes and resorted to the device of shedding the body after 
the manner of the Yogis. (24) Having steadied herself in a squatting posture, she brought 
the Prana and Apana airs on the same level (at the navel) and forcing the Udana* air 
upwards from the mystical circle at the navel, held it in the region of the heart along with the 
intellect. Thereafter the irreproachable lady drew the air thus held in the region of the heart 
to the middle of her eyebrows through her throat. (25) Thus intending to drop her body— 
which had been lovingly placed on the lap more than once by Lord Siva (the most adored 
even of exalted souls)—as a mark of displeasure against Daksa (her father), the strong- 
willed lady summoned the presence of air and fire in her limbs through (deep) concentration 
of mind. (26) Thereafter Sati was so completely absorbed in enjoying with her mind the honey 
of the lotus-feet of her lord (Bhagavan Sankara), the Preceptor of tne whole world, that she 
perceived none else. She was thereby rid of the last traces of impurity (in the shape of the 
consciousness that she was a daughter of Daksa) and her body was soon ablaze with the 
fire produced by deep meditation. (27) 


qa G yfa algd wea welt ale: qAemsnad | 
ea fe came edt seagt ana adl yelfaar ec 
Set STAI RSTO: I 
Selaga «= afgnaisserstt «=O adt Ss AARea «_ ATasitaumedia 1291 
asa qlee sea a olnscaift dadtaarceta | 
wet wat Weelegaat A wedeadadsaed: 1301 


There ensued in the heavens as well as on the earth a tremendous uproar among those 
who witnessed this most extraordinary event : "Alas ! angered by Daksa (her own father), 
Goddess Sati, the beloved spouse of the most adorable Divinity (Lord Siva), has given up 
the ghost ! (28) Ah, look at the enormous wickedness of this lord of created beings, who is 
the father of all these mobile and immobile creatures, and slighted by whom Sati, his own 
high-souled daughter, gave up her life—Sati, who ever deserved honour at his hands ! (29) 
Possessed of ajealous heart and an enemy of the Supreme Spirit, he will incur great infamy 
in the world. People will say that this Siva-hater did not forbid his own begotten child when 
she was preparing to die because of the ill-treatment received from him !" (30) 


aqaad wt Gal GMM ica aael  eadahsacraqeM: 1321 

aaraaat att RANI UTE OW: La AST cia gaz BRI 

Seago | RAAT AaT SC SISTA | aa ATA ATT. AST: eel: 1331 

oraa: wal sam: Pele ier feet Aseatesstadsra 13x 

Sa srertad Ae TRAST Seca Aare Ades A ~Aqaiseara: ry 

While the people were observing thus Sati's attendants, who saw the wondertul Self- 
immolation rose with uplifted weapons to kill Daksa. (31) Seeing the vehemence of their 
Onrush, the worshipful Bhrgu poured oblations into the fire known by the name of Daksinagni, 
reciting the text of the Yajurveda possessing the efficacy of killing those who are out to wreck 
a sacrifice. (32) While the sage Bhrgu (the priest officiating at the sacrifice) was pouring 
oblations, heavenly beings called the Rbhus, who had attained to (the sphere of) the moon- 
god by dint of their austere penance, rose (from the sacrificial pit) in thousands with great 





* For a clear conception of these airs, vide the foot-note below III vi. 9 (p. 175). 








306 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 


SRR RRR RARER ARAL AR ARR RR RR AR BR RR Be RL Pe A Re BE Be Be Br BH Br Br He Br Br Br Be He Br Mr He Hr He He Sr Br Vr Hr Se Br Pr Br Br eres ory, 
Br 


force. (33) Beaten by these (divinities), who were armed with firebrands and resplendent with 
the spiritual glow investing a holy Brahmana, all the Pramathas (attendants of Lord Siva) 
along with the Guhyakas (Yaksas, attendants of Kubera, the god of riches) ran away in 


various directions. (34) 


Thus ends the fourth discourse entitled "The Self-immolation of Sati" 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


3IQ USAseara: 


Discourse V 


Virabhadra wrecks Daksa's sacrifice and beheads him 


HAT Sara 
Val Wal Mat yweadaendal sama ANE! 
euaeat ai  daaamifufiafad memo @ | 
Se: dedlsue: a geifestet afeafeaerifasn 
Spa se: edie gat Wikre faagast at yiai 2 
ddisitladial Walrad  aeeaigiten  fradant 
atleast wedge: capureaet  fafaeternrae: | 2 | 
a fe ain wreeoe ageie warm wre: | 
eo SF A CAC | CA 
Siqd Ua pied wt a taeda uftamn faq 
Wl «6 daissaanagiget «NdeI Ce: Ss TALI 4 
sda: @ iq  eaudeyet Aalwettaasa | 
SI Ye Medd «=I. aTINOTTae: | & | 
Maitreya continued : Lord Siva's fury knew no bounds when He learnt from Narada that 
Sati (His spouse) had burnt herself to death on being slighted by Daksa (a lord of created 
beings) and that the host of His own attendants had been driven away by the Rbhus, who 
had appeared from Daksa's sacrifice. (1) Sharply biting His lips in rage, Lord Siva (who bore 
a heavy burden of matted locks on His head) pulled up one of those clotted locks, which 
shone brightly like a flash of lightning or as a flame of fire and, springing on His feet all at 
once, laughed with a deep roar and dashed the lock against the ground. (2) From that lock 
sprang a colossal being (Virabhadra by name) whose (tall) figure touched the skies, who 
was possessed of a thousand arms and, dark like a cloud, had three eyes bright as the sun, 
fierce teeth and matted hair shining like flaming fire, wore a garland of skulls and was armed 
with various uplifted weapons. (3) When he prayed with joined palms, "(Command me) what 
to do!" Lord Siva (the lord of the spirits) said, "You being My part manifestations, O valiant 


Rudra, lead My warriors (against Daksa) and dispose of Daksa and his sacrifice.” (4) 
Enjoined thus by the wrathful Rudra (who is anger personified), he went round (as a mark 





Dis. 5 ] BOOK FOUR 307 


Br Br Be Br Be Be Br Br Sr Br Ke Be Be Br Hr Gr He Ke Be He Br Be Ke Hr He Hr Hr Hr Br Hk BeBe BBR BER BBB RR BB BR RRR REBT RR BERET BORER BE RE BE RE BE BEBE BLE BE BEBE BEBE BEBE BERR 





of respect) the all-pervading Lord, the adored of (all ) the gods (and departed). At that time 
he thought himself, by virtue of his irresistible force, as capable of braving the might of the 
most powerful, O dear Vidura. (5) He thundered most terribly and, lifting his trident, which 
was capable of destroying even Death (the destroyer of the universe), ran (towards Daksa’s 
abode), followed by the attendants of Sri Rudra—who were (all) roaring violently—the 
anklets about his ankles making a jingling sound (even as he trod on the earth). (6) 


Sates I: Wee: sega sedter wr 
wa: fetid wiesisyfeft fam firoras aeq:10 | 
am + ala a fe aa cea: swreimafesilatl eraeue: | 
Tat A Herd sé Hal wl clase fe yea geal c | 
wafatien: faa signfem saffoet gimeee ae 
Aaeaatay qieaqut | SI: «Yat Ae aeeATaATMLI @ 
Tea Aster: BVOC aaadentsrs: | 
late FA ecTaal aT USSR area aeey 1 Ro | 
sane 6 ae fed Wea | 
| wea fe aoa  faena: eet 
Seeing dust in the northern quarter, the priests officiating at the sacrifice, the sacrificer 
(Daksa), those assembled there and all the (other) Brahmanas and their wives thought on 
the other side:"What can this darkness be? Whence has this dust come? (7) Winds are not 
blowing and there are certainly no robbers; for (king) Pracinabarhi, who rules with an iron 
rod is (still) alive. Nor is it the time for cows being hurriedly taken back (from the pastures). 
Whence is this (cloud of) dust (then)? Is the world preparing for its doom (just) now ?° (8) 
Troubled in mind, Prastti (Daksa's wife) and the other ladies observed, “This is nothing but 
the (evil) consequence of the wrong perpetrated by Daksa (the lord of created beings), who 
before the very eyes of his (other) daughters slighted his innocent daughter, Sati! (9) (Or 
it may be the fruit of the offence committed against Sri Rudra, the god of destruction) who 
dancés at the time of (universal) destruction, throwing about the tuft of His matted hair and 
extending His banner-like arms equipped with uplifted weapons, when the lords of elephants 
presiding over the quarters are pierced by the prongs of His trident and the quarters rent with 
His thunder-like peals of laughter. (10) Nay, possessed of a dazzling splendour and filled 
with anger, He assumes an unbearable aspect by His knit brows, and the whole group of 
constellations is scattered by His frightful teeth. Having angered Him can any one fare well 
even if the individual provoking Him is the creator himself ?° (11) 


aQadanereaars Sr Seer aerate: | 

sae: deat waa fe wat a ale 1e21 

aaa SaRTAAAN We 80-s AMT qeal aches: | 

fas: fireigentianrt: waisatatiquanead 123 | 
frere: svat udienet amt! aq anteenet a diet Aemag 12x 
Sea gArAaT AHS | PUSIAaL «  —- cfetightgafetaen: 124! 
Tae «WaT ST SR, NTA Westferry 126 1 
mf aay AM dias: WATT avs: YAOI et wT Aaleisweld 1201 








308 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Di 
Sea SS SEER NESSES SEERA EREER ARSE EEREESEERR ESR EERERRERAE RRR E RRR ER RHE ER ET S 
OS SSS 


While the people were saying many such things with perturbation in their eyes, there 
appeared on all sides in the heavens as well as on earth again and again thousands of jj}- 
. omens of the worst type, causing fear even to the strong-minded Daksa. (12) By this time 
O Vidura, the followers of Rudra, who were (all) armed with various uplifted weapons and 
were dwarfish in stature, some red-brown and other tawny of hue, and had bellies and faces 
resembling those of an alligator, ran up in all directions and surrounded that Spacious 
sacrificial ground. (13) Some broke the beam resting on the eastern and western pillars (of 
the sacrificial hall), while others destroyed the apartment reserved for the wives of the 
sacrificer and the priests (to the west of the sacrificial hall) as well as the assembly-hall (in 
front of the sacrificial hall), the cottage (in front of the assembly-hall) where clarified butter 
and other substances poured into the sacrificial fire are stored, the hut occupied by the 
sacrificer himself and the kitchen. (14) Some smashed the sacrificial vessels and extin- 
guished the sacred fires, while others urinated in the sacrificial pits and snapped the cotton 
threads marking the boundaries of the sacrificial dais (in the north). (15) Some molested the 
hermits, while others threatened the wives (of the sacrificer and the priests) and still others 
seized the divinities who were sitting close to them, even though they tried to run away. (16) 
Maniman bound the sage Bhrgu; Virabhadra, Daksa (the lord of created beings) himself: 
CandiSa, the god Pusa (one of the twelve sons of Aditi who preside over the sun month by 
- month) and Nandiswara seized Bhaga (another god presiding over the sun). (17) 


Gd Wats epI dae: afedime: ica: yet mAafwdtenensa ic 

Wet: Gaeta SAAN wa Va: | WNGes Wala alseaapay aalerrieei 

aa AX war Ula sar yal Se Gewese a: Woda lol 

WUISUddeds Hiesa AM ae: 1am wafer  aAtsedealarad: 1221 

Simin aaa Rraemor Mhtartifecat agg Aleleld AaHetel 1221 

WeaeM-an aaa acre Rt: fae uae cet agar 123 | 

oI aad at wat a ufdaiasmmamn: mea mHenrmtechesr: 12%! 

Uigaletel At HA aM Bade! AdsidaaneaMaMmaatr afgada: 1241 

Weladhatetherataunaraatad: ldeaastd ateat sifge Wrenn 126 | 

Sia APEP Ad ASR TAS Sede Ageia GaAs AA TSHISEAT: 141 

Seeing this (outrage) and being most severely pelted with stones by these (attendants 
of Siva), all the priests officiating at the sacrifice as well as those assembled there, including 
the heavenly beings, ran in various directions. (18) The worshipful Virabhadra (a part 
manifestation of Lord Bhava) pulled up the moustaches and beard of Bhrgu, who was 
_ pouring oblations into the sacrificial fire, holding the sacrificial ladle in his hand, and who had 
laughed (at Lord Siva) in open assembly, (proudly) displaying his moustaches. (19) Lord 
Virabhadra angrily knocked down Bhaga to the ground and plucked his eyes inasmuch as 
he had in the assembly (of the-lords of created beings) countenanced Daksa in his 
calumniation of Lord Siva by blinking. (20) Even as Lord Balarama knocked * down the teeth 
of the king of the Kalingas (during the wedding of Aniruddha, Sri Krsna's grandson), SO 
Virabhadra dashed off the teeth of Pisa, who had laughed showing his teeth while Siva (the 
most adorable) was being vilified (by Daksa). (21) Setting his foot on Daksa’s breast (after 


knocking him down), the three-eyed Virabhadra proceeded to cut off his head with a sharp- 
edged weapon but failed to sever it then. (22) Virabhadra, who was no other than Lord Siva 
iaisic dane te ene melee ee eee 


* Vide verse 37 Of Discourse LX! of Book X. 





Dis. 6 ] BOOK FOUR 309 
PARR REE SR RG RRB RRR RRA ALR BRILL ARR AR RRR RE RARER RAR EREDAR ARE 


(the Destroyer of the universe), was filled with great wonder when he found that no weapon 
or missile could even cut Daksa's skin that way, and pondered for along time. (23) Observing 
the way In which animals were being slaughtered for the sacrifice, Virabhadra severed the 
head of Daksa from his body in the same way, treating the sacrificer as an animal to be 
sacrificed. (24) There arose a shout of applause from the ghosts, spirits and fiends, who 
extolled that achievement of Virabhadra; while others (those belonging to Daksa's party) 
raised and outcry against the same. (25) Full of anger, Virabhadra threw Daksa's head as 
an offering into the sacrificial fire called Daksinagni; and, setting fire to that sacrificial edifice, 
left for Mount Kailasa (the abode of the Yaksas, Kubera's attendants). (26) 


Thus ends the fifth discourse entitled "The Destruction of Daksa's sacrifice" 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


GIS SESESSD 


ZI UBIseara: 


Discourse VI 


Brahma and the other gods proceed to Kailasa and appease Lord Siva 
WAY Sara 
aq tan: ad Sarit: wafer: | qoufsamearmeakae: 12 
Aisatiadaigt: akdara Wael: | Maa AWE AleetaAaea | 2 | 
SAH Qadstanaasa: anes fagen aA memeaiad: | 3 1 
darnud fay: sme aitafa pamfal aaa aa a Yala WA ayaa! x | 
sata qa pdiaiearst wa A atest Tet Ug: 1 
WaTeaes Ufaegerrar famsrearé SJetTSRAETAST_| & | 
STR «= Silfadaearel «Sle: aul: pad aA afer 
amy ta fran fada emma ge fag gem:i§ 1 
AW A alt aa gawd’ a ees was aa 
fag: sat aeddaal aqeimaaa wm sua fated 9 | 
Maitreya went on: Worsted by the forces of Rudra and stricken with fear, and having 
all their limbs mangled and broken by (the blows of ) their tridents, Pattisas (a kind of 
Spear),swords, maces, iron clubs and mallets, the hosts of divinities along with the priests 
Officiating and assisting at the sacrifice (approached and) bowed to Brahma (the self-born) 
and narrated the story to him in all details. (1-2) The worshipful Brahma (the lotus-born 
creator) and Lord Narayana, the Soul of the universe, who had foreseen this, did not attend 
Daksa's sacrifice. (3) Hearing their story, Brahma said, ‘On the part of those wishing to get 
Square with a person possessed of great power, who has given them cause for offence, such 
a desire does not generally conduce to their welfare. (4) You were, on the other hand, 
actually guilty of offence againstLord Siva in that you deprived Him ofa share in the sacrificial 


Offerings, to which He had a rightful claim. You, however, (go and) invoke His favour by 
lasing His lotus-feet with a guileless heart; for He can be speedily propitiated. (5) If you 








310 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA is. 6 


Dj 
Soop ee ea Sess Sa RE SAE SANRSWOR ESSN ERTS WANCRSEDERARORRERARRDAHENERENRWERDeRheea OS: 
ere 


wish the sacrifice to be revived (and completed), make haste to crave the forgiveness of that 
Divinity (Lord Siva), who was stung to the quick by the abusive words (of Daksa) and has 
now lost His beloved spouse; for the world with its guardian deities will be nowhere if He 
continues to be angry. (6) Neither | nor Yajfha (the deity presiding over sacrifices) nor (any 
of) you (the other gods) nor the sages, much less any other embodied beings know His true 
character or the extent of His strength and power. None would feel inclined (under the 
circumstance) to contrive any means (other than clasping His feet) to placate Him who is 
(absolutely) independent: (7) 
a semesa gure: wafeaa: faqi: ae: | 
aa wiwafacd arse: morassat fa wWit:1 cl 

Sareea aaa Mae taly : y: | ap fepaarerdcanitidd Gel | | 

araraforaa: qyeainetdiatetatd: | AAO AAT: 1201 

AMMA aaU arena: \waut faecdiat vac: fagetframiee 

TWakehchlfwedt Haretiotadtesat | Ufad henvert aids cforms. 1221 

SP RIE CIC SIFGIE Mga: | asafa «= agforafa «= Prehe 1281 

Having thus enjoined the gods, and accompanied by them as well as by the manes and 

the lords of created beings, Brahma (the birthless creator) went from his own realm (the 
Brahmaloka) to Mount Kailasa, the chief of the mountains, the beloved abode of Lord Siva 
(the Destroyer of the three cities). (8) Mount Kailasa is inhabited by gods endowed with 
supernatural powers from their very birth or who acquired them by the use of specific herbs, 
by recourse to austere penance and spells or through the practice of Yoga, and is ever 
crowded with Kinnaras and Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and Apsaras (heavenly 
dancing girls). (9) With its summits consisting of jewels of various kinds and variegated with 
minerals of every description—which are clothed with trees, creepers and shrubs of various 
species and infested with wild beasts of every kind, nay, which contain many a rill of limpid 
water and are spotted with many a cave and eminence—it affords delight to the wives of 
Siddhas (a class of heavenly being endowed with supernatural powers from their very birth), 
that sport there in the company of their spouses. (10-11) The mountain is resonant with the 
screams of peacocks and echoes with the melodious humming of bees blinded by 
intoxication. Nay, through the shrill notes of its cuckoos and the warbling of other birds and 
by its wish-yielding trees with their towering boughs it seems to call new birds, raising its 
arms; nay, through its (moving) elephants it seems to be in motion and through its 
(murmuring) rills it appears to speak. (12-13) 


Ten: Uist  aroslaaisai aa: wmMedes cAlfaerraani: 12x 
ad: aeasy || ATT: | Ulcer: gre: tees 141 
urloraaaa sy ARUHsMtara: | Herenfechiiusy Macias Asst 18 | 
UA aA teeta: lashiefata: gt wets: wai: 120! 
STATA: Brreneehge: | gaonfafiaeter Uist «=| Auyenterch: 1221 
HUcIAechelead Ad legs: Late He | Hele Tqrelaantadey 128! 
Wi: aay: Tishitsaeedeh: Tad: ater  veftrifeariaty: 1201 
HU aAHAcaa ass FHA: | Haase ord oot STE, 1221 
ude Aca Pe: AMQVadile | factaa yaa faaen faara aq: 1221 





Dis, Cdenennnnseesesceeenssnntessssersio soe nn srassesensensvessuenseinenee 
The mountain is adorned with (celestial trees such as) Mandaras and Parijatas, as well 
as with (other trees such as ) Saralas (a species of pines), Tamalas, Salas and Palmyras, 
Kovidaras, Asanas and Arjunas. (1 4) Itis further beautified with mango trees, Kadambas and 
Nipas, Nagas, Punnagas and Campakas, Patalas ( trees bearing the trumpet flowers), 
Asokas and Bakulas, Kundas (a species of jasmine) as well as Kurabakas (trees bearing the ~ 
red amaranth flower), golden lotuses, creepers bearing cardamoms, Malatis, Kubjas, 
Mallikas and Madhavis. (15-16) Nay, its beauty is enhanced by breadfruit trees. Udumbaras, 
the holy fig trees, Plaksas (the waved-leaf fig trees), banyans and bdelliums, birches, annual 
trees (such as the banana, which are cut down after they have borne fruit), betel-nut trees, 
Rajapugas (a species of areca-nut palms) and rose-apple trees, date-palms, hog-plums, 
Amras ( a species of mango trees) and so on, Priyalas, Madhukas and soap-nut trees 
and other varieties of trees, and clusters of bamboos—both of the hollow and solid 
types. (17-18) It is further graced with swarms of birds sweetly warbling on the margin of its 
ponds rich in their beds of lilies and lotuses of various kinds. (19) It is infested with deer, 
monkeys; boars, lions, bears and porcupines, Gayals, Sarabhas (a species of eight-footed 
animals now extinct), tigers, Rurus (a species of black antelopes), wild buffaloes and other 
wild beasts as well as with Karnantras, Ekapadas (a species of one-footed animals) 
Aswamukhas, wolves and musk-deer; and the strands of its ponds look charming with the 
clusters of banana trees surrounding them. (20-21) It is hemmed in by the river Nanda (the 
holy Ganga), whose waters have been hallowed by the touch of Sati (the deceased consort 
of Lord Siva), who bathed in it. The gods felt astonished to see (the beauty of) Mount Kailasa, 
the abode of Lord Siva (the lord of ghosts). (22) 
Gea a wameat am a qiqiad dina aie ax aa uss 1231 
TI Meera BA aka Mad: Oe: | delareremisnsanda Ula 12% 
at: utes: eamaed wftwad: | wtshd qa: fasret ferre taenigiat: 1241 
| faqarsta rarer: Weeaat TST Ast: 12E | 
There (on that mountain) they saw the celebrated and beautiful city of Alaka (the capital 
of Kubera, the lord of the Yaksas) as well as the garden named Saugandhika, where can be 
seen a species of lotuses bearing the same name ( and singularly noted for their 
fragrance).(23) Along the outskirts of the city flow the two rivers Nanda and Alakananda, both 
of which have derived utmost sanctity from (their contact with) the dust of the feet of Lord 
Visnu (which are the abode ofall sanctity). (24) Descending from their aerial cars, O Vidura, 
celestial women, exhausted by their amorous dalliance, take a plunge into these streams 
and sport therein, sprinkling their mates with water. (25) The water of these rivers gets 
coloured by the saffron washed (from their bosom) during their ablutions, and (tempted by 
its delicious fragrance) elephants drink it, even though they have no thirst, and give the same 
to the she-elephants also to drink. (26) 
SCS CMEC ICUICFIGise adhe lapt qestatitidan Gt adisqard 1291 
feat ade at ati a aI ga: aeeeel = FraTeHeresa: 1221 


THUS ATTA usa, | HOSAHOMS PREUSHCTRA 128 1 
SAPS SE areca Larar | «quastteitunt «= Aged: 1301 
Seiad are | serernfentt: ism fargeager ot ommeqaded 1321 


Crowded with hundreds of aerial cars made of silver, gold and most precious jewels, and 








312 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 6 


LRLELALEARKAALKAAKARALRALKAAKAAAARLKEL HAL KAKAABAANAKLKKNKAHW MM HHH HAHAHA KKM HH Ke Ke He He Ke He Hr Hr Hr Arete SUUIS. 
Brvtr 


inhabited by the wives of Yaksas, the city looked like the firmament overcast with clouds 
accompanied by lightning. (27)- They overpassed the capital of Kubera (the lord of the 
Yaksas) as well as the aforementioned garden called Saugandhika, which looked charming 
with its wish-yielding trees, laden with fruits, flowers and leaves of variegated colours. (28) 
The notes of cuckoos and hosts of other birds in that garden added to the melody of the 
(humming of) bees and it was spotted with ponds containing lotus beds, the most favourite 
resorts of swans. (29) By the breezes wafting the perfume of its sandal-trees, whose (soft) 
bark was scratched by wild elephants (rubbing their bodies against it in order to relieve their 
itching sensation), it flamed the passion of Yaksa women again and again. (30) (Going 
further) they saw a number of extensive wells containing beds of blue lotuses and provided 
with stairs of.cat's-eye, which were frequented by Kimpurusas (another class of demigods): 
and not far from them they sighted a banyan tree. (31) 
Q asada: deldiaeuad: i vdeo fatsencafsia: 1321 
deraeranra Waa GT: | egy: Rranrata Glas Mardhy 1331 
Graal: Wd: Prdesze| SIAM WEN a wal Ween ax 
faaraaranraerarierd AH aed «faded ae AS 134 | 
fee A ACAMS WAsdlStciA! Seq TAMIVSM Asai aD fai i3E 
suas ada gai sel PAMATLI ANG Yala Yosd AVA aani3zy! 
Pat aacl wet wel a Wai ae WRBsaemdd  dhysar 3c 
s rat Grorfir — awe ; | 
Geta Wal Asal Aq Weed: wry: 1321 
a Gaara Gieaantaradeate: | 
sami faeces: «0a fate: v0 
aut 4 fag 4onefdita =a waded dleotfea 
Wepd: We WisWEt PANN  wWealaaiey: se 
The tree had a height of one hundred Yojanas (or eight hundred miles) and its boughs 
extended to a distance of seventy-five Yojanas (or six hundred miles) on every side. It cast 
a permanent shade on all sides and thus warded off the sun; yet it contained no nest. (32) 
Beneath that tree, which induced great concentration of mind and was the (happy) resort 
of those seeking liberation, the gods beheld Lord Siva seated like Death free from 
anger.(33) Possessed of a most tranquil personality, He was being waited upon by highly 
realized and peaceful souls, Sanandana and others, as well as by His friend, Kubera (the 
lord of the Yaksas and the Raksasas). (34) That supremé Lord, who is the disinterested 
friend of the whole universe, remains engaged in the practice of worship, concentration of 
mind and deep meditation (in order to set a noble example to others) and does penance 
which is conducive to the welfare of the world out of affection (for all). (85) On His body 
possessing the (reddish) hue of an evening cloud He wears the marks so dear to ascetics, 
viz., a coat of ashes, a staff, matted locks and deerskin, and the crescent moon (on His 
forehead). (36) Seated on a mattress of KuSa grass, He was expounding the truth relating 


to the eternal Brahma to (the celestial sage) Narada, who was putting questions to Him, 
while (other) worthy personages also listened. (37) Placing His left lotus foot on the right 





thigh and the left SLU) Coli the left knee * and with a rosary of Aksa seeds coiled round His 
(right) wrist, He sat with His right hand formed into what is known as the Tarkamudra t+ 
(generally adopted by those teaching wisdom to their disciples). (38) With their palms joined 
in prayer the sages as well as the Protectors of the world bowed low to Lord Siva—the Sage 
ranking foremost among those given to contemplation—who sat absorbed in the joy of 
oneness with the Absolute and leaning on a wooden Support generally used by Yogis. (39) 
Seeing Brahma (the Self-born) arrived (there), Lord Siva, whose feet are reverenced by the 
lords of immortals as well as by Asura chiefs, rose (from His seat) and greeted him by bowing 
His head, even as the most adorable Lord Visnu (appearing in the form of the divine Dwarf) 
bows to Kasyapa (His father and a lord of created beings). (40) So also the hosts of other 
Siddhas as well as the great Sages, who were devoted to Lord Siva and sat around Him, 
bowed to him. Greeted (by them all), Brahma (the self-born) smilingly addressed Lord Siva 
(who wears the crescent moon on His head and) who was still bowing to him. (41) 


FENATA 
wrt ark fare sdt afte: 1am: fae a ut auger freaar ise 
aaa  wWeaddsagaa: wea: | fast gee ona steguiael ae iat 


wa enidgafiama  aaur aur wafer 
aaa wlensaads Adal arene: est saa: xx 
a au usengemi wd: wool ae @: at ari 
Sager =a diteaqeut fagda: ha dea metfe isl 
Brahma said : | know You to be the Ruler of the universe; for You are the same as the 
undifferentiated Brahma, the cause of both Sakti (the Divine Energy or Prakrti) and Siva (the 
Spirit or Purusa), who are severally the womb (source) and seed of the creation. (42) 
Carrying on Your sport through Siva and Sakti, who are essentially one, O Lord, itis You who 
create, protect and swallow ( withdraw into Yourself) this universe, even as the spider 
evolves (from its mouth) the cobweb, preserves it and then takes it back into its mouth. (43) 
Itis You who evolved the (institution of) sacrifice through the instrumentality of Daksa for the 
preservation of the three Vedas (which yield both religious merit and wealth); and by You 
have been fixed the bounds of propriety which the Brahmanas who have adopted sacred 
vows duly respect. (44) O blissful Lord, You confer (the enjoyments of) heaven or even final 
beatitude on him who performs benevolent deeds, and assign the frightful inferno to the 
Perpetrator of evil deeds. But howis it that in the case of some individuals the fruit of certain 


acts is quite the contrary ? (45) 
=a a2 wa waantiaent ibe ceatln da | 
i ah WAL 1G | 
sets ee aueren:  Wiedatftiregstistrere | 
garters aaa walget: vol 


ae adel PeReTHATaaT qeder wera: §« yerrger: | 
der the name of 'Virasana’ in works on Yoga, as the following verse will show : 


* This posture is referred to un . + 
Uhlan ich fasqeaiery, BIg - z i — 
t The Tarka-Mudra, more popularly known 28 the Jnana-Mudra, has been described as follows 
hea fae: aire : 1 ward an Wg ethgalct 7 s ther fingers after joining them together—this 
“Joining the tips of the thumb and the index finger and sr the other ting 
ell . « 
Position of the hand fe what the knowers of Mantras call Tarkamu 


) 
: 
: 
” 
: 
; 
! 
| 








314 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6 


PRALAALAARARALA AA EAA ALLA LEAL A LL RE  LAELEBEEREREEBEREEE EEBE BE BEBE RE BEBE BE BEBE BBE BEBE BER BERLE BEBE BERR ROR te he by 
—eeeeeSeaeeaoayeeeoaesmsw—=s=”—0— OOS enn nn nn ne nner ccna ee ne a RF 


Haha dA Wawa Pal A aMesal caaeichd HAL IC! 


Indeed anger does not generally overpower—even as it overwhelms the ignorant—the 
noble souls who have surrendered themselves to Your feet, who behold You in all living 
beings and who are inclined to see all living beings in their own self as identical with them.(46) 
Let not one (an exalted soul) like You kill them whose mind perceives diversity and whose 
eyes are fixed on the ritual, nay, who have a malignant mind and whose heart is ever burning 
(with jealousy) at the sight of others’ prosperity and who, being naturally disposed to hurt 
others' feelings, prick them with abusive words, and are (thus already) doomed by 
Providence. (47) On them whose mind is bewildered by the Maya (deluding potency) of Lord 
Visnu (whose navel is the seat of a lotus), so difficult to overcome; and whose eye is 
(therefore) fixed on diversity, pious souls only shower their grace because of their 
compassionate nature; they never.use their power against something which (they believe) 
has been wrought by their own (adverse) fate. (48) 


Wa Us: WA Aaa aedangeaht: aAKee | 

dal Salata onda: qe chditeleta TAT 18 I 

Pare wa Aedes wat sed: | 

a aa unt da abr ce: Hakan aa aat fritad vol 
SACEIAAANSA «= STelTaTOTt «| AT: 1 BAN: VAalOT Ved GN ais Gelacd 142 | 
aM VATATUTIAas VTaETAAlM: | VACATE ARISE T1421 
UW a St UNS Aches Ala VAM Beas AMS 143! 

sft Saad ARM URASA Beda Avera Vasa AA FSSA: 16 | 


Omniscient as You are, Your judgment has not been clouded by that Maya of the 
Supreme Person, which is so difficult to get through. Therefore, my lord, be pleased to 
shower Your grace on these people ( Daksa and others), whose judgment has been impaired 
by Maya and who have accordingly fixed their mind on the ritual. (49) O Lord presiding over 
destruction, revive the sacrifice started by Daksa (lord of created beings), which has been 
wrecked by You and could not, therefore, be consummated—which was due to the fact that 
the unwise priests did not offer You Your share, to which You had a rightful claim inasmuch 
as itis by You that a sacrifice is made to yield the desired fruit. (50) Let the sacrificer (Daksa) 
come to life (again); let the god Bhaga get back his eyes; let the sage Bhrgu's moustaches 
and beard sprout again and let the god Pulsa's teeth reappear as before. (51) Further, let the 
gods and priests whose limbs have been broken by weapons and stones be whole again at 
once by Your favour, O Rudra (anger personified). (52) Let that which is left of the sacrifice, 
offerings be Your share, O god presiding over destruction! Let this sacrifice, O Rudra, be 
consummated today with Your share, O Destroyer of sacrifice. (53) 


Thus ends the sixth discourse entitled "The Appeasement of Rudra” 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


Gee eI 





Dis. 7 ] BOO 
os BBB BEBE BEB BER BB BBR BBR Br Pr By dy secrare FC eee Sr Br Br Sr hr Br Be Be Or Hr Sr Pr HL Or PAR 


BIA AWyatseanrs: 


Discourse VII 


Completion of Daksa's Sacrifice 
HAT Sara 
sep = aT fer | area Teste Seer serafata 1 et 


Maitreya , esumed : Thus supplicated by Brahma (the unborn), Lord Siva (the father of 
the universe) felt much pleased, andwitha hearty laugh said, O Vidura (possessed of mighty 


arms), “Listen !" (1) 
1 SST aura a 
are STAT Tyerda | caarenfayt qe yt wari zt 
SeaTac waa «A: | finer Beta at Gaffe wT: 1 3 
wg ame chested fey ite: sepqaaigt A a saci a: x | 
TRIM: YON eat qdenea: | vaceadasat TAA TMA | & 


Sri Mahadeva said : | never complain of nor do | recollect the misdemeanour of fools 
dominated by the Lord's Maya (deluding potency), O lord of created beings. | have meted 
out punishment to them (justin order to teach them a lesson). (2) Let Daksa (a lord of created 
beings), whose head has been burnt, have the head of a goat above the neck. And let the 
god Bhaga look on his share in the sacrificial offerings through the eyes of Mitra (another god 
included in the list of the twelve Adityas presiding over the sun). (3) Let the god Pisa, who 
eats flour alone, chew the same with the teeth of the sacrificer and let the (other) gods have 
all their limbs restored to a sound condition now that they have assigned to Me the remains 
of a sacrifice. (4) Let theAdhwaryus* and the other priests ( who have lost their arms) use 
the arms of the ASwins (the twin gods who are reputed to be the physicians of heaven); while 
such of them as have lost their hands may use the hands of Pusa; and let the sage Bhrgu 
have the beard and moustaches of a goat. (5) 


HAY Sara 
dal walter yar saat Atepatlan ukqerahrend ae Akrcaeangay | & | 
Tat Higaraarraad BATS: Tela: | yore «Tiassa «ag: 11 | 
faera ancdeaia a dele WAM Wa: 1 ee: HA Hla aattaaan: Rr 1c 1 | 
Geferars « farefet cat ealftrefaga: | wer: TA satel cag aT YS <1 | 
Saeastarcnlererea sarata: | Rrataelenla tates taele SATA: 1201 
et AAA: | AUST ASSAM TNA Yat FL 1 | 


PIA Dua: Walsg@ied: Tet: | Aka fraser sretet seat: 1221 
Maitreya continued : Hearing the words of Lord Siva (the Most Bountiful), on that 


t there) forthwith exclaimed, “Well said | Well said! with 
hae orn all the crea aaa er Ae ae as well as the sages invited Lord Siva (who 


their ified.(6) Thereatt = apse) 
showers the eure on His devotees, to grace the sacrifice) and, taking with them 


uild the altar, to prepare the sacrificial vessels, 


ificial ground, to b 
easure the sacrificial g duties, he is required to repeat the texts of the 


~e function of an Acie nd so on. Whilst engaged in these 


{0 fetch wood and water, to kindle the fire an 
Yajurveda. 








316 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 7 


Be Rr Ber Be Br Be Re Br Bee Be Br Br BE Ae Br He Be HBr Be Be Br He Be Ae AE Be Br Sr Ke Wr Br We Pr Me We Mr hr Br Br Ar Br Br He Br Sr Be Wr Br Sr Br ssnsuvensankesaesesareteoda 
LT oe 


the bountiful Lord and Brahma (the creator) went once more to the site of the sacrifice. (7) 
Having accomplished all that Lord Siva had commanded them (to do), they joined the head 
of the sacrificial animal (goat) to the trunk of Daksa. (8) On the head (of the goat) being joined 
(to Daksa's trunk), Daksa, who (now) received a kindly glance from Rudra, immediately rose 
as though from slumber and beheld Lord Siva (the Delighter of all) in front of Him. (9) Then 
Daksa (a lord of created beings), whose mind had been tainted by ill-will towards Lord Siva 
(whose banner bears the emblem ofa bull), (now) became free from malice by virtue of Siva's 
(gracious ) look, even as a pool becomes clear in autumn. (10) He felt inclined to offer praises 
(to the Lord) but could not do so on account of affection and grief as he (now) recollected 
his deceased daughter and his throat was choked with tears. (11) Though overwhelmed with 
love, the wise Prajapati (Daksa) controlled his mind with (great) difficulty and proceeded to 
extol the Lord with sincere devotion. (12) 


Ga sald 

WAI Bel Vaal Hal A qUseaar ala yal aeha sss: | 

A aay A al Wana qa RA pa Wa Yaady 123 

faaeaadeR Wad: GH fas aalissmaranlad Was aA | 

Agana UA Adare ula ures: wafra faat syeitaus: 12x 

asa Aafatedadaan aura feral gefnfatraera aa | 

Bale UddAedA eae SHMSSSAM A WTA, Mahe TT Iku | 

Daksa said : Oh, You did me a great favour in that You meted out punishment to me (in 
order to correct me), even though | slighted You. You two, Sri Hari and Yourself, have no 
disregard even for fallen Brahmanas; how, then, can You ignore those who have taken 
Sacred vows? (13) (Appearing) as Brahma You evolved first of all out of Your mouth 
Brahmanas rich in learning, austerity and sacred vows for preserving (the knowledge of) the 
Spiritual Truth (through realization and instruction). It is therefore, O Supreme Lord, that You 
protect the Brahmana race in all crises, wielding the rod of punishment (to correct them if they 
go astray), even as the herdsman protects his cattle, staff in hand. (14) May that Lord who, 
though insulted with abuses piercing as arrows in open assembly by me—ignorant as | was 
of His reality—overlooked that fault (of mine) and saved me from falling down through the 
vilification of the Most Adorable, by casting His gracious look (on me); be pleased with His 
own (benevolent) act (since | am utterly incapable of repaying His obligation and thus 
winning His pleasure). (15) 
WAY Sara 


anata A Ulead AUN Adhd: | aod Aaa aAroeakamiaty: 126! 
ss t feu fisieo:iqtest fram didediqed eel 
steagunissderaat «ast «= ferarreaad | fever ferege aeatt ae setae: 18C1 
del MIA ast aan feat cai qwast saridedador eras 128! 


Maitreya went on : Having thus sought the forgiveness of Lord Siva (who showers the 


7 


sarsntsnneecnsanertsseesssssoeesrsnnontsee tennneesanuauaneneeeauannenenneet ce savawaneceeeee 
desired blessings on His devotees) 
had the ritual recommenced by the 
pollution caused by) the touch of th 


and obtained leave of Brahma (the creator), he (Daksa) 
Soaseate eae and others. (16) For the removal of (the 
ie 7 matnas (attendants of Rudra) and with a view to the 
tinuity of the sacrif 5 
eeradeéa beter wens Tees Brahmanas offered (to the sacred fire) the oblation called 
aoe wended for Lord Visnu and placed in three separate recepta- 
cles.(17) Even as the sacrificer (Daksa), O Vid 
the Lord) with a guileless mind 3a); dura (lit., a ruler of ment)! contemplated (on 
his hand, Sri Hari appeared in pee fh a hss Wilitaentgat cea Coc on 
, On before hi ipsi 
present there by His own billance, whch tee ee ata splendour ofnoss 
forthwith borne (to that assembly) by Tarksya (Garuda), who has the two types of Samas or 
metrical hymns (viz., Brhat and Rathantara) for his wings. (19) Swarthy of hue with a girdle 
of gold (and a golden piece of cloth wrapped about His lions), He was adorned by a crown 
shining like the sun; while His (lotus-like) countenance was graced with locks dark as bees, 
as well as with ear-rings. With His (eight) arms that severally bore aconch, a lotus, a discus, 
a shaft,.a bow, a mace, a sword anda shield and were (ever) eager (to protect His devotees), 
and which shone (with gold ornaments), He looked like a blossoming Karnikara tree. (20) 
With Goddess Laksmi (His Spouse) lodged on His bosom (in the form of a golden curl of hair 
known as the mark of Srivatsa, and adorned with a garland of sylvan flowers, He enraptured 
the whole world with His winsome smiles and glances. Fans and chowries, which looked like 
swans, were waving on both His sides, and He shone splendid with a moon-like white 
umbrella (spread) over His head. (21) 
AORTA AI Maa ad VTA: | sor: Ua «= AelsaAachT: 1221 
adsial ede: Ualigl: Paes: 1 qa  wdetfeqger  saqwreltesnr 1231 
aaatara ge Ate aeayared: aaa yor Bt Halzelated 12x 
gat | Welder aCfegsT Sak TL 
Graded del FY Sie sad: 9 cpeeiies: 1241 
Seeing Him arrived near, all the hosts of divinities and other beings under the leadership 
of Brahma (the creator), Indra (the lord of paradise and the ruler of the gods) and Lord Siva 
(who is possessed of three eyes) instantly rose (from their seats) and bowed low to Him. (22) 
Their splendour obscured by His brilliance, they stood dumbfounded and struck with awe; 
and with their palms joined over their head they approached Lord Visnu (who is beyond 
sense-perception) in a prayerful mood. (23) Even though their mind and speech had no 
access to His glory, Brahma and others began to the best of their ability to glorify the Lord, 
who had manifested His form in order to shower His blessings (on those present there). (24) 
Gladly extolling the Lord with joined palms and a concentrated mind, Daksa sought the 
protection of the Lord, the supreme Teacher of the Prajapatis (the progenitors of the world), 


ifices and was surrounded 
who is the Enjoyer as well as the Bestower of the fruit of (all) sacri 
by Sunanda Rance and other attendants, and who had (graciously) taken the excellent 


receptacle of presents (from Daksa's hands). (25) 
qa sad 
Us ATOM AAA sro wat ATarL | 
fea yeooadia aera «aU | SAA: 12! 
ee ee eee 
ed into a kind of cake. 


“Am d rice round 
Bee a ddressed here as a ruler of men. 


"Being of royal descent, Vidura Is 4 








318 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 7 


LRARARAALAA AHA AAA AAA LL LL BR BR Be BEB HB BER BRE BE BH HT BBE He HE BE He Br BB Be BH Be BH Be Br Be Br BB Br Be Me BH Hr Br eH Hr oy a, 


Daksa said : In your own glorious being You are pure Consciousness, undifferentiateg 
and fearless, beyond all the states of mind. You (ever) stand free, having negated Maya: but 
when, assuming Jivahood by the same Maya, You abide in that Maya, You appear as tainteg 
(with passion etc.). (26) 


Ba A: 
aad aA a aqamaaa esa wdvaaneieat wnafacm: | 
qaiueauie facet wd  aadnficanceraen: 1201 


The priests said : With our mind foolishly attached to the ritual as a result of the 
imprecation uttered by Nandiswara (the chief of Rudra’s attendants), O Lord untainted 
by Maya! we know not Your true character. We have known only that form of Yours which 
is known by the name of sacrifice, which yields religious merit and is the theme of the 
three Vedas and for conducting which the sphere of each particular deity has been 
defined. (27) 

UGE HW: 
SUMAN 4 seaRlaisdaeteas faraiqercrteraun: | 
FSI GOI Binalasqareal: Welhet We Heal Aft HMNTGS: 1221 


The superintending priests said : Tormented by desire and oppressed by the heavy 
burden of body (which is regarded as the self) and house (which is called one's own), this 
company of ignorant folk has been traversing the path-of transmigration, which is devoid of 
any shelter and difficult to tread on account of great hardships, where the fierce serpent of 
Death ever lies in wait (to devour them), nay, which tantalizes the way-farers with the mirage 
of sensuous pleasures, andis full of pitfalls in the form of pairs of opposites (Such as pleasure 
and pain, heat and cold etc.), and which is fearful on account of carnivorous animals in the 

. form of wicked people and Is surrounded by the wild fire of grief. When will this crowd resort 
to Your feet for shelter, O Lord affording protection to all ? (28) 


eK SU 


da ae avemafadehandt ata afficameuetondsia | 
ae tadtea ufacernisafag soft A Wo aracaaAeUT 1281 
Rudra said : Your charming feet, O Bestower of boons ! confer on those who are 
actuated by some desire all the blessings sought for in this world; nay, they deserve to be 
worshipped with reverence even by hermits who are not attached to enjoyments. If ignorant 
folk dub me as one who has cast to the winds all the rules of decorum—me whose mind is 
fixed on Your feet, by Your supreme grace | pay no heed to it. (29) 


WIC 
aaa §89Netaediaten «= eNaaetqyaeatea | AT: 1 
Te Bit da ae aa Pisa Wale War WUATAaY: 130 | 
_ Bhrgu said : Brahma and other embodied beings, who have been deprived of Self- 
Knowledge by Your incomprehensible Maya (deluding potency) and sleep in the darkness 


of ignorance, are unable to know even to this day Your reality, which permeates their own 
self. Therefore, be gracious to them, since You are the friend, nay, the very Self of Your 


suppliants. (30) 
| 
Tiered «= Maiisat «= uereiame: «= eet «= arate 





Dis. 7 J BOOK FOUR 319 


SRR R RRL BBB BER Re Be Re HA RR AEB Be Re RE AAR ARERR RAE RRARRRAR 


ae MA WT arse Aaa cafahent aaa 1321 


Bone pa oe reality is not what the Jiva perceives through the senses, which 
oa a 5 ihe sbe x ‘ preciensiics Of objects, since You are the very Ground of 
TS cls Ol Sense-perception andthe isti 7 
ilusory world of matter. (31) senses, and, therefore, distinct from this 


Sx Sa 
d \) ; 3 L 
quafgeerureagesfreusequsashz: 1321 
Indra said : This personality of Yours, O immortal Lord, which has manifested the 


universe and is distinguished by eight long and stout arms, holding weapons in readiness 
to exterminate the enemies of gods, brings delight to our soul and eyes. (32) 


Wed Hq: 
asad Wa asa ta yet faera: aqui aaratar 
T Wed WRIA aeafeaeat gat Gifs 1331 
The Priests’ wives said : This sacrifice, which was evolved by Brahma (the lord of 
created beings) as a means of worshipping You, has been wrecked today by Lord Siva, who 
was angered by Daksa. Threrefore, O Embodiment of sacrifices, hallow this sacrifice of ours, 


which has been robbed of all joy and festivity and wears the (desolate) appearance of a 
crematory, (by casting a look at it) with Your eyes, lovely like a pair of lotuses. (33) 


IY HY: 
sMrad a waq fadisd acremissaca fe wd ara 
fay ad sadatiett 2A wad anqadd ari3vi 


The sages said : Singular are Your doings, O Lord, in that while You perform deeds 
Yourself, You are not affected by them. You do not think much even of Laksmi (the supreme 
goddess) whom everyone worships for the sake of prosperity, even though She Herself 


remains ever waiting on You. (34) 
PAE HF: 


sei 0 HUNTSMAN «— aT: «Ss BRNaTaTAareL: | 

qadisamat 2 Wa qa 7 fieemid seaeAaca: 124! 
The Siddhas said : Scorched by the wild fire of afflictions and oppressed by the thirst 
hant of our mind has plunged into the river of pure nectar 
hinks no more of that forest conflagration nor comes out 


ned (oneness with) Brahma. (35) 


TIAA 
; & weiter qe aa: airara Bret arden alle 4: | 
asi sea «oaitdla: HART AMT FEA: 13q1 


2 acl evar id : Welcome is Your visit (to this sacrifice). O Lord; be 
The sacrificens witeisay Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity); may 


of Sri 
Uiacious to. me. Hallo Veune Spero Laksmi, protect us. Without You, O supreme 


You and Your beloved Spouse, God eye 

ae ll its limbs, does not present a 
Rul i acrifice, though complete In a 
charming ete fan a manwhoisleft without a head, a mere trunk, though perfect 
In all other limbs. (36) 


for sensuous enjoyment, this elep 
In the shape of Your stories and t 
Of the river, like one that has attal 








320 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 7 


Br Be Be Br Be Br Be Ver Br Bre BBB Be BB Be BB Be Br Be AB AY RB Ber Ae Be BAe Be Br Me He Wee Be Br Me Be We He Br Hr Br Br Br Ke Br Hr peeeeneneweskrareend 
as: fe A dtu yest aad a4 aan 
° \ 
Tat «wet Mader fe ywaqaed us: usiftiaifa wd: ise 


The guardians of the spheres said : Can You be seen with our senses, revealing as 
they do this unreal (illusory) world of matter—You, who witness things from within our heart 
and by whom all this phenomenal world is seen ? It is Your Maya (conjuring feat), O infinite 
Lord, that though the sixth (transcending the five elements), You appear invested with a 
material body (consisting of the five elements). (37) 


QNPERT A”: 
Sarat «asaiseagdeafa sat fagmdiaa ygeara sie: | 
stata VAMAA AM aA AAAS ATL TSTTT Ae 1321 
Seana herhereraty, daa SSMEMAUAISSAATAT | 
Vadeasenda 86a = ss fafaitaseaqunent = AA: 1391 
The Masters of Yoga (Sanaka and others) said : No one else is dearer to You than 
he, O Lord, who sees no difference between You, the Soul of the universe, and himself. 
Nevertheless, be gracious. O Lover of Your devotees, to them (as well) who resort to You 
with exclusive devotion as to their master. (88) By Your Maya, which exhibits a large variety 
of Gunas (Sattva etc.), due to the destiny (of the Jivas), You give rise to a sense of diversity 
(in the people) with regard to Your Self (by assuming a multiplicity of forms such as Brahma, 
Visnu and Siva) for the creation, preservation and destruction of the universe, although in 


Your own (absolute) state You have cast off from Your Self all motions of diversity as well 
as the three Gunas (which are responsible for the same). Obeisance to You. (39) 


wed fide walt a gai feonra a aes ae aaa a ixol 
Brahma (Veda Incarnate) said : Hail to You, who take upon Yourself the quality of 
Sattva (goodness) in order to yield Dnarma (righteousness) and the other objects of human 
pursuit, and are at the same time destitute of all attributes, and whose real nature neither | 
nor even others know. (40) 
SAeaTa 


aise «8 «ait «= ee a te TETHAL| 
aq aia usfad a usie: fas afi: sorisi arixe 
Agni (the god of fire) said : With my flames brightly kindled by Your effulgence | bear 
(to the gods) the oblations soaked in clarified butter in every good sacrifice. You are Yajna 
(sacrifice) personified as well as the Protector of sacrifices. You are fivefold in character (in 


the form of the five varieties* of sacrifices) and are duly worshipped with the five kinds of 
sacrificial formulas 7 occuring in the Yajurveda. | bow low to You. (41) 


Ga Hy: 
Wi nem epee fagd adareiea alee share | 
aM, 28 freee fayhrcencmeta: a Vateents: afer af yeaa a: 1st 


* The five varieties of sacrifices are : Agnihotra, Darsa, Paurnamasa, Caturmasya and Pasusoma.. 
+ The five kinds of sacrificial formulas mentioned in the Srutis are :-— 


(1) sare, (2) arse, (3) as, (4) 4 wee And (5) age, 








The gods (in a body) said : At the end of t 
this creation It was You, the first Person, who re 
of serpents) on those waters ( 
way of whose realization is s 
celestial beings naturally end 
have appeared before our e 


he (previous) round of creation and before 
posed on the excellent bed of Sesa (the lord 
that Submerged all the three worlds). The selfsame You, the 
Ought after in their heart (even) by the Siddhas (a class of 
Owed with the eight mystic powers such as Anima and so on), 
yes today and protect us, Your dependants (servants) ! (42) 


Tea any: 
ofararet ca ahene we see xan RUE: | 
alstis frafte ae fay at fret ait ana axa 1x3 
The Gandharvas (celestial musicians) said : These Marici and other sages as wellas 
the hosts of divinities such as Brahma (the creator), Indra (the lord of paradise), and others 


with Rudra at their head, are but rays of Your part manifestations, O shining one. We ever 
make obeisance to You, infinite Lord, to whom this universe is a mere toy-box. (43) 


(TAMER HY: 
arene aoa ent warefifs aifrecat: Sa: | 
fapraigsaeiod sete aaenagahian se See xx 


The Vidyadharas (a class of demigods) said : (Even) after attaining the human body, 
a means of realizing the (highest) object of human pursuit (viz., Moksa or final beatitude), 
the foolish Jiva (embodied soul) regards it as his own, nay, his very self and, though 
reproached by his own senses, that have strayed from the path of virtue, he longs only for 
the unreal (illusory) pleasures of sense. He alone who quaffs the nectar of Your stories is 
able to shake off completely the infatuation of his mind. (44) 


MAN Hq: 
a med teed ea: aa a fe a: aetoi a 
a Weeds aad eat suet Se BMA sed ag: sul 


a wie aetna alt dt uiueacHdone | 
cafe afaaie age a safe: at aha wet AA: v1 
The Brahmanas said : You are the sacrifice; You are the offering; You are Yourself the 

fire (that consumes the offerings poured into it). You are the Mantra (the sacred text recited 
at the time of pouring the oblations), the sacrificial wood (with which the fire is fed and kept 
alive), the (sacred) Kuga grass and the (sacrificial) vessels. And You are the priests 
Superintending, and officiating at, the sacrifice, the sacrificer and his wife, the deity (sought to 
be propitiated through the sacrifice), the act of offering oblations into the sacred fire, the 
oblation offered to the manes, the juice extracted from the Soma plant (used as a eee 
the gods), clarified butter (also Routes into ne sacs S e aS Seneary oO eeoes 
Sacrifici i earing as the mig ; : 
Out sihicaaninectihe sean ave tusks—even asalordly peashioty would lift ees Pe 
roaring and being glorified by the Yogis. Nay, the vee oo aati (46) Therefore be 
are both the institution of sacrifice and the vow to peor scree) was interrupted and 
- 9racious to us, whose noble undertaking (in the shape MST P 

Interruptions in sacrificial performances disappear 


Who were lonaing for Your sight. on 
when, O Pe au name is chanted by men. Hail to You ! (47) 








322 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 7 


SEE NER RSS REREER ERR EREROREREREDSSREARERERERDRSDEROEDELEEDED SA REREREERR ERE RREO TT 
\ 
WAY sara 
St aa: caiadat sa eaankicqi aidan eieet daa ane ixc 
War BA APA Bale WaMMIYAR leat AMA STs saa sare ixe) 


Maitreya resumed : While Lord Visnu (the Controller of the senses and) the Protector 
of sacrifices was thus being extolled, the wise Daksa, O blessed Vidura, renewed the 
sacrifice that had been wrecked by Virabhadra. (48) Propitiated as it were by His share of 
oblations (in the shape of Purodasa offered in three receptacles, vide verse 17 above), O 
sinless Vidura, the Lord who is the Enjoyer of all oblations, being the Self of all, accosted 
Daksa and spoke to him (as follows). (49) 


SATA TATA 
We AM A WA Wid: HRV UMLisnat sass  Waenfagraa: io! 
Sea AAfaea Piss BOTA fest: | Ger ta wel fad ae Gat feather 142 
Tat Nevada acs umamindestt a wa 9 Aeaaisqaeata 1421 
am Gat wee r-awaniey wfc uneqaahsg pet Wa YF AN: 1431 
FAMNTAHMaM BA A waa a fermi advert se A waaferresia 14x 


The Lord said : The supreme cause of the universe, | am also Brahma (the creator) and 
Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe). | am the Self, the Lord and the Witness (of all), self- 
effulgent and unqualified. (50) Embracing My own Maya (deluding potency), consisting of 
the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), itis | who create, protect and destroy the universe and 
have assumed (diverse) names (such as Brahma, Visnu and Siva) appropriate to My 
functions, O Brahmana! (51) Itis in such a Brahma (the Absolute), the supreme Spirit, who 
is one without a second, that the ignorant fool views Brahma, Rudra and other beings as 
distinct entities. (52) Just as a man never conceives his own head, hands and other limbs 
as belonging to anyone else, even so he who is devoted to Me does not regard his fellow- 
creatures as distant from himself. (53) He who sees no difference between Us three 
(Brahma, Rudra and Myself)—who are identical in essence and the very selves of all living 
beings—attains (everlasting) peace, O Daksa. (54) 


WAY Sava 
Wi 8 owMadissies: seafatteh sift Hdl WA eaqMadisastg 144 | 
e Gd GA A warenacaiied: | wdoteaars SIRE CIC i 
Baa Pekar: Geataayes Ad: 14s 1 
AAT AaAMet  Wralauaai ent wa afd act fread fea aq: 14y 


Maitreya went on : Thus enlightened by the Lord, Daksa ( the chief of the lords of created 
beings) worshipped Sri Hari through the sacrifice sacred to Himself (viz., the Trikapalesti), 
and then the other gods both through the principal and secondary types of sacrifices. (55) 
With a concentrated mind he also waited upon Lord Rudra with the share due to Him (in the 
form of the remains of the sacrifice) and (even so) upon the other gods, including those that 
drink the Soma juice and those that do not, through the rite called Udavasana (which is 
performed at the end of a sacrifice); and, having (thus) concluded the sacrifice, he then 
performed along with the priests the sacred ablutions known by the name of Avabhrtha. (56) 
And having blessed Daksa—who had by his own greatness attained supernatural powers— 
with devotion to righteousness the gods ascended to heaven. (57) 





Having thus cast Off her pr evious body, Sati, daughter of Daksa, was reborn through 
Mena, the spouse of Himavan (the deity presiding over the Himalaya mountains) : this 
is what we have heard. (58) Just as having lain dormant (during the final Dissolution), the 
Divine Energy, embraces the Lord (at the dawn of the next creation), Ambika (mother Sati) 
sought union once more with her beloved Spouse (Lord Siva), her only resort, exclusively 
devoted as she was to Him. (59) This story of Lord Siva (the Source of Bliss), who wrecked 
Daksa's sacrificial performance, was heard by me from the (great) devotee of the Lord, 
Uddhava, a disciple of the sage Brhaspati (the preceptor of the gods). (60) The man who with 
a feeling of devotion daily listens to and repeats this (most) sanctifying story of Lord Siva— 
which confers renown and longevity and wipes out a multitude of sins—shakes off all sin, 
O Vidura ( a descendant of Kuru). (61) 


Thus ends the seventh discourse entitled "The revival of Daksa's sacrificial performance", 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


GIRS OD 


STATI SATA: 


Discourse VIII 


Dhruva's departure for the woods 
HAT saa 

Watt 8 Ane eee: | Ac Ter, Hea wWiaaayeatcta: 1 e 1 
yee sqaissdtent wat a wae! rae eT ay eeiestyeso: | 2 

at wauacor fafa TEMA | asa mag feat a agekh: ae cies: 1-3 1 
cent afirret wi qe wT Braids fret Set are Peaetat 1 y 
aN || WAIST: sofrereFeTeTAE | PH: GAARA TA LAAT TL 
Bad: aida det Wahid: apece | areraee TART AT: 1G | 
Maitreya continued : Sanaka and his three brothers (Sanandana, Sanatana and 


anatkumara), Narada, Rhu Harmsa, Aruni and Yati—these sons of Brahma (the creator) 
a), Als ; ; 


ey had vowed themselves to a life of perpetual 
did not enter the life of a householder, SIne® My ialeetiee d), who was the wife of Adharma 


Celi 5 ale spirit presiding 
t ou” aie (he re enrighteousness, another son of eels ecaieees a Ane 
destroyer of enemes), to Dambha (the spirit presiding: Ove y 
ofr enem 3 ; 





_ 


324 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA | 


LERLRRRRERRRREEEDSROEE ROARED RARER EER ER SAREE aE E BE Boh fbf tt th twin t eth tR mie 8 
Bre 


female spirit presiding over deceit); and Nirrti (the demon presiding over the South-west) 
who was issueless, adopted the couple (as his son and daughter-in-law). (2) Of these two 
(Dambha and Maya) were born Lobha (the spirit presiding over greed) and Nikrti (the female 
Spirit presiding over wickedness), O Vidura (.a man of great wisdom); and of these latter 
came into being Krodha (the spirit presiding over anger) and Himsa (the female Spirit 
presiding over violence), from whom again, were sprung Kali (the spirit presiding over Strife) 
and his sister Durukti (the female spirit presiding over abusive speech). (3) Kali (in his turn) 
begot, through Durukti, Bhaya (the spirit presiding over fear) and Mrtyu (the female Spirit 
presiding over death), O Vidura ( a noble soul); and of these two were born Niraya (the Spirit 
presiding over hell) and Yatana (the female spirit presiding over the tortures of hell). (4) 
(Thus) briefly have | told you, O sinless Vidura, about the family of Adharma (which leads 
to the dissolution of the universe). By hearing this genealogy, which sanctifies a man (by 
helping him in eschewing all these), thrice repeated, a man shakes off the impurity of his 
mind. (5) Well, | shall now describe the line of Swayambhuva Manu of sacred renown, sprung 
from a part (the right half) of Brahma, himself a ray of Sri Hari, O scion of Kuru. (6) | 


flasdrarael «= Ide: «= A | aTaRaeT Hea Laat wa: feat © | 
Ma sae Gita: defeat: i gefa: sat vata at wa 1c. 
Priyavrata and Uttanapada, the two sons of SatarUpa’'s lord (Manu), were (ever) intent 
on the protection of the world, endowed as they were with a ray (of the protective energy) 
of Lord Vasudeva. (7) Suniti and Suruci were the two wives of Uttanapada, of these, Suruci 


(the younger one) was the more beloved of her lord, but not so the other one ( Suniti), whose 
son was (the celebrated) Dhruva. (8) 


Uhel West: GANSU led isd aes Ya Wea et 
am fanidant dq aucmdedad ganqidefa: quadt wa: Aelarefantdar 1201 
T aa quditiwa 9 varnigndd ia qeltt vet ae Hanae Fora: 1°21 


Teast ad Acasa! a aq wart Ga qevse AAA: 1221 
qaaISKea US MaTqaeuT SA a Alea adhesfa FuTaAH 1231 


On a certain day, while fondling Suruci's son, prince Uttama, whom he had seated on 
his lap, the king (Uttanapada) did not welcome Dhruva, who too sought to climb to his lap.(9) 
To Dhruva, her co-wife'’s son, thus striving, Suruci, who was exceedingly proud (of the king's 
attentions), spitefully spoke (as follows), the king (quietly) listening :— (10) "O child, you are 
not fit to ascend the royal throne, inasmuch as, though sprung from the king's loins, you were 
not conceived by me. (11) Alas ! you are yet a child and surely know not that you were borne 
in the womb of another woman; that is why you aspire for an object so difficult to attain. (12) 
Propitiating the Supreme Person through austere penance, seek (rebirth through) my womb 
by His grace if you covet the king's throne.” (13) 


HAT Sara 
Ad: daca: a Golrhiceg: UAT Sal ausedl AAs: | 
feat fae faat Waar SIM Ag: Bee AHRM eX! 
qd aed eaten gifteas sq sen! 
fara dakar «OC CCsfteret So arefed Ss eT eu 
aaa eC ecIanft «aaeda = aon 
at Raed: edt aes aM  aremmonqaye 126 





Dis. 8 ] BOOK FOUR 325 


Br Br Be Br Be Br Be Ke Be Be Be Se Be Se Kr Be He Se Se He Ke Ge Ge Ke Be He Kr He He Ke Be Ke Ke Be Kee Ke Gee BCE ER Bee Le Be Bee Kee Ber Ke We We Ke Be Re ERE BER Be Be Be Ke Be Be BeBe Be BEBE Be Be BEBE RE BeBe 


ati weit «6 ghttter «= uaugad) «= @enne «0 SIT I 
AMG Wt Wy wet ys GA aang aaa 120! 
wa | Geenftfat ward aq ate st Weta: | 
wet ges faesdt at wf at alefreafaaitiec! 





qa deaf 6am So frat Meee Uefa: 
seiae = grat © tht RTI 1221 


aa aca Waa qaatafeaeresag ta | 
saa «= reife «6 ae STs 1221 


Ta dd: Uduemetae eae a yn saa 
a yet ogee «= Baa Ss fT 123 1 


Maitreya went on : Pierced by the poignant remarks of his stepmother and hissing in 
indignation like a serpent beaten with a staff, Dhruva left his father, who kept gazing mutely, 
and went away crying loudly into the presence of his own mother. (14) Suniti lifted up in her 
arms the child, who was sobbing with quivering lips, and was sore distressed to hear from 
the mouth of the (other) inmates of the gynaeceum what his co-wife had said. (15) Scorched 
by grief as a wild creeper by the forest fire, the young girl lost heart and cried. Her eyes, which 
were graceful as a pair of lotuses, were filled with tears as she recalled the (poignant) 
remarks of his co-wife. (16) Seeing no way out of her sorrow, the girl heaved a deep sigh and 
said to her child, "Entertain no evil thought about others, dear child. For a man reaps (in this 
life) the very suffering he has inflicted on others (in a previous existence). (17) Suruci (your 
stepmother) has truly said that you were borne in the womb, and brought up with the milk 
of, my wretched self, whom the king feels ashamed to accept as his wife, nay, even as his 
servant-maid! (18) Therefore, dear child, abide ungrudgingly by those words, which, though 
uttered by your stepmother, are nonetheless true, and adore the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu 
(who is beyond the range of sense-perception), if you aspire to (ascend) the royal throne like 
Uttama (your half-brother). (19) It was by worshipping the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu, who 
assumed the quality of Sattva (harmony) for the protection of the universe, that Brahma, 
(your great grandfather) attained to that most exalted position which Is an object of reverence 
even to those who have conquered their mind and senses. (20) Even so your grandfather, 
the worshipful Manu, secured both earthly and heavenly bliss as well as final beatitude— 
which is so difficult to attain by any other means—by worshipping the Lord with single minded 
devotion through sacrifices with liberal sacrificial fees. (21) Take refuge, my child, in Him 
alone, who is so fond of His devotees and access to whose lotus-feet is sought after by men 
keen to get liberated; and, imprinting His image on your mind, purified by devotion to your 
duty and exclusively attached to Him, adore theSupreme Person. (22) | find none other than 
the Lord with lotus-like eyes, who can wipe out your sorrow. Even Sri (the goddess of beauty 
and prosperity), who is eagerly sought, dear one, by (all) others, (ever) seeks after Him, 
holding a lotus (in place of a lamp) in her hand. (23) 








3926 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 8 


anes SENN NASA SASS RNA NSRUARSAEARSARADORERENRORRONESERREDEREME TEN TO 
nay Sara 
Wa siead aquevaaitd aa: | dAaererissa acm fag: aI 12x) 
anexteaenud wear da featiar ap yeas ufo ore fafera: 1241 
Sa ast: AAA AAVSAASMM! Tels el AA AAMMes: 1261 
Maitreya resumed : Hearing the words thus addressed by his mother (Suniti), which 
were conducive to the object sought after by him, Dhruva fully controlled his mind by force 
of his reason and sallied forth from his father's capital. (24) When Narada heard of this and 
learnt what the child intended to do, he (met him on the way and,) touching the latter's head 
with his purifying hand, said (to himself), wondering :— (25) "Oh the spirit of the Ksatriyas: 
-who cannot brook insult ! Though yet a child, he has taken to heart the stinging words of his 
stepmother !" (26) 


Mg Sa 

TTA ad GAS aly UAH wea: HARA Umea sHleatleg iro 

famea fasamst’ a weadledda: 1 Gat aleqad feet aemte frorendfe: 121 

URqeridendt Wao yea:idameafed  aragtetaeit ga: 121 

39 Walesa atmaceafiaaade a a Gai amie ad aq izot 

Wa: ued ada Pasties: 1a fagireadst  disarrearfert 13° 

ad mada Reaeeda fene: | aide War ales Meat Aqafwea 1321 

qa ae tafafed a aa Wee-aal: one dieaecdt ane: ungesia 1331 

Tuntierde femeqnet Wneamit  aAMiehasa TARTAR 13% | 
Narada said : We do not find anything conducive to your honour or ignominy at this 
stage, dear son, a child as you are, fond of play and other things. (27) Even if you have 
developed the sense of honour and ignominy, there are no diverse causes of discontent for 
a man other than ignorance; for whatever he reaps in the world follows from his own (past) 
actions. (28) Seeing the ways of God, therefore, a wise man should rest contented, dear son, 
with whatever is placed within his reach by Providence. (29) Besides, He whose grace you 
seek to win by means of the discipline taught by your mother is accounted by me as hard 
to propitiate. (30) Sages fail to discover His path even though they seek for it with the help 
of abstract meditation coupled with rigorous self-discipline (in the form of Devotion etc.,) 
carried on in a detached way through numberless births. (81) Therefore, let this futile 
pertinacity of yours cease; you may strive (for that end) when the time for practices (such 
as Devotion and so on) leading to final beatitude comes. (32) Reconciling oneself to that 
which is decreed for that being by Providence in the form of joy or sorrow, an embodied being 
reaches the end of darkness (in the shape of mundane existence). (33) A man should be 
pleased at the sight of one who is superior in qualities, should have tender feelings towards 


one whois inferior in accomplishment and seek friendship with one who is on a par with him; 
by doing so a man is never overwhelmed with afflictions. (34) 


Yq Sara 
Bisa WN WTA Wate aed! dela: Haat gat qdafsaeeed a: 134 
sata «Asfaditet atest URAEs | deer eddtatt fax saa afe 136! 
ué fayetiens foritet: me act 41 qgrafiagiisteedantetea, 1391 
qi Wad, Wad ase: aMisa: ifaqened ato feel smidischad 3c! 





Dis. 8 BOOK FOUR ~ 327 


Br Br Br Be Br Ge Ke Sr Se Hr Be Be Hr Br We Be Hr Be Be He Ke Hr Ke he Be Ke Sr Kr Ke Ke Ke He Ke He He Kee Re Be Ke Be Ke Be He Ke Ke eee Re We Be Ree Be Be EBERLE REE BEBE BORE BEBE BE BEBE RE 





Dhruva said: Your venerable self has graciously shown a remedy for those whose mind 
is disturbed by joys and sorrows—a remedy which cannot be easily found by people like 
us.(35) Yet in the heart of my insubordinate self, who has inherited a violent martial spirit— 
a heart which has been cleft by the shaft-like taunts of Suruci (my stepmother)—the precept 
has failed to make any abiding impression. (36) Be pleased, O holy sage, to tell me a good 
path, keen as | am to attain to a place which is the highest in all the three worlds and which 
has not been attained to by (any of) our forefathers or anyone else. (37) You are surely no 
other than the son of the worshipful Brahma, who for the good of the world roams about like 
the sun, playing on his lute. (38) 

HAT Sava 


Saeledaienua WTaTANGal | Sid: Wale A ales AgleadqHwaa 1381 
Maitreya resumed : The worshipful Narada was pleased to hear the aforesaid words 
(of Dhruva) and full of compassion, replied to the child in the following excellent words:—(39) 
ARG sdid 


wratied: wean: aa fsa AlWaM areal WA AsaUNEMT Ixol 
THUAN A Soa Bt: | UHAd RA BRU waaay ive 
add Ws Ut A aad Bhai qua ngad aa aifted freer ze: 1x2! 
Sldayaed der aie: ae fra i palfant aaa: caieqaree: 1x3! 
sora «= faat SI eeae aMefeeniteaeaaal «SUT STL Xx 


Narada said : The course pointed out by your mother is the one leading to your highest 
good. Lord Vasudeva (Himself) represents that course (means); (hence) adore Him with a 
mind exclusively devoted to Him. (40) For him who seeks his own good in the shape of what 
is known by the names of Dharma (religious merit), Artha (worldly riches), Kama (Sensuous 
enjoyment) and Moksa (final beatitude), adoration of Sri Hari's feet’is the only means to that 
end. (41) Therefore, God bless you, dear child, seek the holy bank of the Yamuna covered 
by the sacred spot of Madhuvana (the tract of land lying round Mathura, the birthplace of Lord 
Sri Krsna), which is ever hallowed with the presence of Sri Hari. (42) Bathing three times (in 
the morning and evening as well as at midday) in the blessed waters of the Kalindi (Yamuna) 
and after finishing one's proper duties one should spread a seat (of Kusa grass etc.,) and 
squat thereon (in a suitable and easy posture). (43) Having gradually cast off the impurities 
of one's life-breath, senses and mind by means of the threefold Pranayama (breath- 
exercises), one should (then) contemplate with a steady mind on Sri Hari (the Supreme 


Preceptor) as below :—(44) 
sere TATHAGATA GYt Aiea GSE IS | 
aut THUTAT SAUNA | TTA AAT FUT Woy Heunviay 1¥e | 
fas erat yet aaAifoa| WgaeaeMermaT as I¥9 | 
feet guste aacahami aheaawrita  ditatgtaarad 1x1 
chisiteneradaed ere OES CUCM ECCI UC MEG MEE CICS COT Gh aa 
usa aatostoar farenarat Arad | CaeHViiIMaA HAAR 14o | 


RATA TAA MTA, \freatewet wat aeesri4el 
wa ammadt =e Gud wad wife wat qi waa a add 1421 








EEE 


328 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8 


BERT Ke Bee eRe Se KOR Re eR RC MRE RRR RE ERO RT ROR Re RE RRR RR ROR RRR Re RR RR RR Re ROR RR RR Re Ry We We We We We We Ke We Me Ke We Hee We We Be He 
We 


With an ever cheerful face and eyes, He is always disposed to shower His grace (on His 
devotees). He has a shapely nose, charming brows and lovely cheeks and is the most 
enchanting of all the gods. (45) (Eternally) youthful and possessed of charming limbs, He 
has rosy lips and reddish eyes and is the (sole) resort of his suppliants. Nay, He is supremely 
delightful, fit to protect all and an ocean of tenderness. (46) Bearing (on His breast) the mark 
of Srivatsa (a golden curl of hair) and swarthy as a cloud, He has all the features of an 
extraordinary personage and wears a garland of sylvan flowers (about His neck). And His 
four arms are distinguished by aconch, adiscus, a mace anda lotus. (47) He wears adiadem 
and a pair of ear-rings and is adorned with armlets and bracelets; His neck adds to the beauty 
of the Kaustubha gem and He has a piece of yellow silk wrapped about His loins. (48 
Encircled (at the waist) by a girdle of many strings, He has a shining pair of gold anklets, is 
most charming to look at wears a serene aspect and brings delight to the mind and eyes. (49) 
He stands in the mental horizon of those who worship Him, His feet—resplendent with a row 
of gems in the form of nails—installed in the pericarp of their lotus-like heart. (50) With a 
steadied and concentrated mind he should visualize the Lord, the foremost of all bestowers 
of boons, as smiling and casting a loving glance at the devotee. (51) The mind of aman who 
thus contemplates on the Lord's most blessed form is soon immersed in supreme bliss and 
never gives up the meditation. (52) 


SAY UA WU: waa A AWM aA AAA Wo GAM Gealt GEL 143 | 
‘3 AAI wad argea4wa’ | 

Wa eae pale sed aga:iaual fafaddetdernmfanmiadiux 

Hee: Qatimictdisnemene: Taso Fa wy IKaI: 

os sandiqa faersaiay arate siya Ya: Mrat adetahtaarayy uel 

Srwolaacahte hare STATA | aheraagelnraeeyeisay = 1491, 

URaat wad waa: ydafad:iat Aaeedda 3 seosda iuci 


Also hear from me, O prince, the most secret formula (which should be muttered along 
with the meditation and) by repeating which for seven days and nights a man is able to 
behold the Siddhas moving in the air. (53) The Mantrais: ‘‘ ss =aut sad arqcara’’ (Obeisance 
to Lord Vasudeva). While repeating this sacred formula, a wise man should perform the 
Lord's worship with the help of material substances, using various articles with due regard 
to the differences of place and time. (54) He should worship the Lord with undefiled water, 
(sylvan) flowers, wild roots and fruits etc., sprouts of approved plants, barks of.trees and with 
(the leaves of) the Tulasi (the basil plant), so beloved( of the Lord). (55) Having secured an: 
image of stone or any other substance, he should worship the Lord through the same or 
(else) through the medium of earth, water and so on, and with his mind and speech duly 
controlled, he should subsist on a limited quantity of wild fruits etc., and remain calm and 
collected and absorbed in contemplation. (56) He should also, mentally survey the soul- 
stirring deeds the glorious Lord will perform in the course of the manifestations He assumes 
according to His pleasure by His own incomprehensible Maya (creative power). (57) One 
should offer to the Lord, who stands revealed in the form of a Mantra, all the articles of 
worship prescribed for Him by the ancients, while repeating this very Mantra (consisting of 


twelve letters). (58) 
Wi wed AA ada BU war Ukadaon wna vfoaattadar 14s! 
qaaaiet 8a 8 86Maada: 1 sat fegrafad aegnifey efeqr 10! 
feats «  oaeart 286 yeetid )«=6feacaeaa «usta fered 168 | 


Being thus waited upon with body, mind and speech through loving worship according 
to one's choice, the Lord heightens the devotion of men who adore Him in the right way and 
in a guileless spirit, and bestows on them the boon of their liking from among Dharma 





Dis. 8 ] BOOK FOUR 
gta eETORUERS ERNE DELETE ER EG TG Ee ORETASERE TERE ERE Rha benE REE ERERRenErehh eek eaee 


(religious merit) and the other objects of human persuit. (59-60) If the devotee is averse to 
sensuous enjoyment, he Should wait upon the Lord Himself with an intense practice of 
Devotion carried on uninterruptedly for the sake of final beatitude. (61) 


same Ue sory ay yonie: iat meat que  eteorefeler 1 E21 
aatat oma aferatapisag GM: | afeardornt ws Gare sar a3! 


Thus instructed (by the sage), the prince (Dhruva) went round the sage (as a mark of 
respect) and, bowing low to him, proceeded to the holy tract of Madhuvana, adorned with 
the footprints of Sri Hari. (62) When he had left for the forest so suitable for austere penance, 
the sage (Narada) made his way to the gynaeceum (of King Uttanapada); and when the king 
had offered him worship (in the form of water to wash his hands and so on) and he was 
comfortably seated, he spoke to the king (as follows) :—(63) 


RG SATA 
wr fe eae det Wea uftqer fH ar a fed aed ant aia daa: ex 


: Narada said > With a withering face what are you brooding over so deeply ? | hope 
neither your luxuries nor your religious merit nor again your wealth has suffered any 


diminution ? (64) 
UMA 


Gat A Meh AeA Alone | alfad: wsad: GE Ae aera: 1641 

Tas at AMM Ge: lard Wa afed ufsermarasry 1s 

Sal A aa ahd eifretaea ass Seunssemard aaaaaE: 16191 
The king said : Uxorious and merciless as | am, O sage, | exiled my son, a child of five 
years, who was very noble and wise, along with his mother. (65) Wolves, O holy Brahmana, 
may not eat up the helpless child, who may be lying (somewhere) in the forest, fatigued and 


famished, with his lotus-like face faded. (66) Oh, just imagine the wickedness of my uxorious 
self, who did not greet the child while he was climbing up my lap with affection, extremely 


vile as | am ! (67) 
ARG 3sdd 


a om Ye: Sard tay faerad i aenaniaa Niger Fe BI 1eCl 
qat af per cramer sy: weft Us aa faqeded iat 
Narada said: No, sorrow not for your child, who enjoys the protection of the Lord, Oruler 
of the people, and whose glory shall pervade the (whole) world; for you know not his 


greatness. (68) Having wrought an achievement which even the protectors of the world find 
it difficult to perform, the glorious child shall return before long, O king, enhancing your 


reputation. (69 


HAT SAA 
sft aaffon shh faq sardtafa: | Usteetttared Gada rarer 1190 | 
confafie: wamerqarer fawrat aenfet: © WHERGETERIT | PETA 108 | 
faoars 4 BRAT HTT: | Iq AT Preiselerefe_ 1102 | 
fait? a amr ard we westal fer | quartet: itt: qaratsrtatery 1193 | 
ait . aqt aaase Steet = SaARelHEOTTaHTEMT 19x 
caf: a ut wet aes varqual fraaret = arercarenad 119% | 


[564] B. M. 13— 





a 


330: SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


BeBe Re Re Br Be Br Be Be Be Be Br Be Br Me Br Be Hr Re eB Be BE Bi BeBe Be er Be Re WEE BI Be BeBe Me Kee Kee Rr ye Ree BB See HO. 8 
Sire 


waa ae faget FUCS: | ATI, Hel Vash AR VrypRares: ie | 
aad Aa steer aa yore arsed wa AtsleitfsreraaTT i} 
amen Healelat TAAGSAA | Hal ARAN aa renisenfiar ioc) 
qermied = Ufa «= dagefrditfsat ae 
waa 0 taTeifasafeiseat «0 ans (ass: «Se iss MIR 
daa «=6ofawareat «oat SO eeagqaaeren—SOséfétzeT 1 
wll feagramuifeat yet aelHaet: ao aaditicot 


Maitreya continued: On hearing the message of Narada (the celestial sage), Uttanapada 
(the ruler of the world) remained exclusively engrossed in the thought of his son (Dhruva), 
neglectful of his royal fortune. (70) There (at Madhuvana) Dhruva bathed (in the Yamuna) 
and having remained without food that night and thus purified, he waited upon the Lord with 
a concentrated mind according to the sage's instructions. (71) Eating the Kapittha (wooa- 
apple) and Badara (jujube) fruit, just enough to keep his body and soul together, at the end 
of every three nights, the prince spent one month in worshipping Sri Hari. (72) And likewise 
during the second month the child adored the all-pervading Lord, feeding on withered blades 
of grass and leaves etc., every sixth day. (73) He spent the third month waiting upon the 
glorious Lord through Samadhi (abstract meditation), taking water (alone) every ninth 
day.(74) Having (fully) controlled his breath, he fixed his mind and meditated on-the 
(Supreme) Divinity during the fourth month too, inhaling the air every twelfth day. (75) 
When the fifth month commenced, the prince stood motionless like a post on one foot, 
contemplating on Brahma (the Absolute) with his breath fully controlled. (76) Withdrawing 
his mind, the substratum of the senses and their objects, from all other objects, he fixed it 
on the form of the Lord enthroned in the heart and perceived nothing else. (77) All the three 
worlds (the earth, heaven and the intermediate region) began to shake as he meditated on 
Brahma (the Supreme), the ground of Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence) and 
the other categories, the Ruler of both Pradhana (matter) and Purusa (the spirit). (78) When 
the prince (Dhruva) stood on one foot, the earth, pressed by his great toe, leaned to one side 
at that spot, even as a boat with a lordly elephant standing in it leans right and left at every 
step (as it moves on water). (79) As he contemplated on the Soul of the universe as no other 
than himself, stopping his breath as well as (the function of) his senses, all the worlds as well 
as their guardian deities resorted for protection to Sri Hari, for they felt much agonized for 
want of breath. (80) 

Ca Hy: 


aq fae wmeq cma  atarcenhanaraenm: | 
fae dat aferiieaiat sat ad ai Bt eva icel 
The gods said: O Lord! we had never known before such (a sudden) stoppage of breath 


in the case of all living beings, mobile as well as immobile. Rid us, therefore, of this calamity 
since we have Sought protection with You, who afford shelter to all. (81) 


STATA 
m YS ae at aeeteadae sitaa wer 
aa fe a: ofa  sietermafedfa ara icet 
ofa ateriad AEM UAE Seas ager Ysaaseniseaa: | 2 | 





Dis. 9 ] BOOK FOUR 331° 


Be Be Be Be Be Be Hr Be Be He He Hr Br Vr Ke Fr Ke Be Ke He Ge Hr He Be Ge He Ge Ke Ke Ke Ke Be He Ke He HECK He HCE eG ee Be Be He KBE REE RE RE RE RE RE BERBER BEBE RE RE LEREERERE RE BERT RE 





The Lord said: (| find that) Dhruva (son of king Uttanapada) has identified his self with 
Me (the Soul of the universe); this accounts for the (sudden) stoppage of breath of all of you. 
Hence be nctafraid and return each to your own adode; | shall (presently) deter the child from 
his penance, which is (otherwise) hard to resist. (82) 


Thus ends the eighth discourse, forming part of the Story of Dhruva, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


BIQ Aga seara: 


Discourse IX 


Dhruva returns home after receiving a boon from the Lord 
Saad 
qa Waeaya sent pdeam:  saghafasaz 
Beenie ad weet uetdtd wyeafecaet aa: 1 2 | 
a oa fam <amfanedam eae waka afeaami 
frifet asdataser afe:fert caaei aaafi 2 
aga TATA: famtaaradte faqaet ausad | 
engqr 46osuaaq.0OsSfaafeaninspafrare «6s siftarfaeai 3 | 
a oda # faaanmmaee etal ade a wate: | 
aia saat aaa wat ae Aaa Hai! x | 
a a dea sfanfeat fe cai aftacaeafota: | 
d fH Uvlal ssaATUNISAcaL Uksdtrestaa gafafa: 1 & | 
Maitreya went on : Thus rid of their fear, the gods bent their heads low to the Lord (who 
took very long strides during His descent as Vamana or the Divine Dwart in order to measure 
the three paces of land granted to Him by the demon king Bali) and returned to heaven. The 
Lord (who in His cosmic form appears with numberless heads) also thereupon flew on the 
back of Garuda to Madhuvana with a longing to see His devotee (Dhruva). (1) Dhruva saw 
that the form, brilliant as a flash of lightning, that was revealed in the lotus of his heart by an 
intellect sharpened by the ripeness of Yoga (concentration) had suddenly vanished, and (on 
opening his eyes) he beheld the same figure standing without. (2) Struck with awe at His 
Sight, the child (Dhruva) greeted Him by prostrating his body likea log on the ground. He 
gazed at Him as if he would drink Him with his eyes, kiss Him with his lips and clasp Him 
with his arms. (3) Sri Hari, who is enthroned in the heart of all and was (equally) present in 
that of Dhruva too, (readily) perceived that the child was eager to extol Him but knew nothow 
to do it and stood (before Him) with joined palms. Hence He graciously touched his cheek 
with His conch, which is no other than Veda (appearing in a concrete form). (4) Instantly 
blessed with divine speech conferred (on him by the Lord) and having realized the truth of 


the individual soul as well as of the Supreme Spirit, Dhruva, who was destined to have an 
eternal abode (in the shape of the pole-star) calmly and devoutly proceeded to glorify the 





“= 


332 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 9 


VEKTACKKL AKC KK LKHKKHKLKLKLKLAMHMNKH KAHN KH LKONHKHM ARKH rarer Serer rere errr Serr ee Tre eeee IS. 
Brkt tr tr gy 


Lord, whose great renown is universally known. (5) 
| HA Saray 

asd: sfaea an arate saul dsilaaafamakrer: wer | 
WMT RIUM MOTAM Wiad Yea qari « | 
Temata wate «= AaTeraequrenn «= Weare | 
Vediaed «Gerry ada aeq fasmagqafeufai © 
wert agers fad Gade sa Wa waa: | 
qaadat da weg faedda caafaar medal c | 
qi faqsaqana ara a a2 al varegafaniaumed: | 
sifd aetads guaaratsta aaosist Pras zor < t 
a Rditeqydl da Wea asst at SL! 
a sein waateraie ara at ye fe aeataetearadat fanart | 20 | 
“ip Ug Naedl afl A sagt Yer AedMASRMT | 
isaedyees Adel AB  wWaarHwagagrad: 1221 
a A Meaiat adie ud a urae: gqaaeaiefaden: | 
a waar  wvadauenfacutreameecdgy HATS: 1221 
frrelerigsreathqueacerreattens: ufeferd aaefeerrr | 
eq wiasaa ad eck AM: a um afl aA aa ate: 1231 
eerd Udelae As Yet wad GAM Metaadaaees | 
Tamers Pa wad suis aatiext 
a manmaegiaae sien Keer saifeqeat sateseier: | 
aeieakamatsia mesa set Rercraferrat arta sree 184 | 
afer, fawgidal diet udea faeneat fafaerarna siqgedia. i. 
dgel faavantennaaaearrenatacnnae sel 126 | 

Heart 9 fe wundeta weueitagee: qearigd | 

saan waar aku dar ata aAdHaeHiaisar 1291 


Dhruva said: Hail to You, the Glorious Person, the Wielder of all potencies, who, having 
entered my inner self (heart), awaken by Your glory my dormant speech and other organs 
such as hands, feet, ears, the tactile sense and so on. (6) Itis You alone, O Lord, who, having 
evolved the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence) and all these other pheno- 
mena by Your own potency called Maya, consisting of the three Gunas—which are capable 
of assuming multitudinous forms—enter them as their Inner Controller, and presiding over 
the illusory senses (which are mere transformations of the three Gunas) appear as many, 
though really one, even as fire appears diversified in relation to different pieces of wood. (7) 
Through the vision conferred by You, O Lord, Brahma (who sought refuge in You) viewed 
this universe like one who has just woke from sleep. Howcan the soles of Your feet, the resort 
of even liberated souls, be forgotten by him who is conscious of Your benevolent acts. O 
friend of the afflicted ? (8) Their mind has surely been beguiled by Your Maya (deluding 
potency), who worship You—a veritable wish-yielding tree, capable of freeing one from (the 





Dis. 9] BOOK FOUR 33 
saettaeeChthONeehth esos het nhisneenrenetnheesnveunetnnnnbnnnannnntnrarh heen re sare 


bondage of) birth and death—for other purposes and hanker after the pleasures of sense, 
enjoyable by the body (which is no better than a corpse), and which can be had by living 
beings even in hell. (9) The bliss which is enjoyed by embodied souls through meditation on 
Your lotus-feet Or by hearing the stories of Your devotees is not found even in Brahma (the 
Absolute), who is blissful in essence. How, then, could it be enjoyed by them (the gods) who 
are hurled from the aerial cars smashed by the sword of Death? (10) May | enjoy the intimate 

fellowship, O infinite Lord, of exalted souls, possessed of a pure heart and constanily 
devoted to You, So that! may easily cross the terrible ocean of metempsychosis, full of great 
perils, drunk with the nectar of Your (delectable) virtues and stories. (11) They who have 
cultivated the close fellowship of men whose heart is captivated with the fragrance of Your 
lotus-feet, O Lord with a lotus sprung from Your navel, think no more of their mortal frame, 
which is extremely dear to all, much less of those connected with it, viz., their sons, relations, 
house, wealth and wife. (12) O birthless one, | know only Your grossest (cosmic) form, full 
of animals, trees and mountains, birds, reptiles, gods and demons and human beings, 
consisting of gross and subtle elements and brought about by many causes, such as the 
Mahat-tattva and so on; | am not aware, O supreme Lord, of Your other Self, higher than this, 
which transcends all speech. (13) You are the same as the Supreme Person, who atthe end 
of a cycle (at the time of universal dissolution) reposes with none beside Him save Lord 
Ananta (the serpent-god Sesa) and on his very coil, withdrawing all this universe into His 
belly and with His eyes turned inward (buried as He is in Yoganidra or the sleep of Samadhi). 
Nay, it is in the seed-vessel of the gold lotus representing all the fourteen worlds and sprung 
from the ocean of Your navel that the shining Brahma (the creator) appears ! | bow to that 
Lord. (14) You are the eternally free, all-pure and all-knowing Self, the immutable, most 
ancient Person, possessed of all divine attributes and the Controller of the three Gunas 
(modes of Prakrti). Witnessing by Your unobstructed vision the different states of the mind, 
You appear as Visnu (the Deity presiding over sacrifices) for the preservation (of the 
universe) and are altogether distinct (from the Jiva). (15) It is in You that the manifold 
potencies of opposite character, namely, Vidya (the power of omniscience) and so on, 
constantly appear in unbroken succession. You are no other than Brahma (the Absolute), 
the cause of the universe, indivisible, without beginning or end, purely blissful in character 
and changeless. | take refuge in You. (16) In the eyes of him who constantly adores You as 
an embodiment of supreme bliss (seeking no other object), Your lotus-feet, O Lord, are the 
Only true blessing as compared with other boons (sovereignty etc.). Nevertheless, my 
Master, just as a cow that has recently calved nourishes its calf (by its milk) and protects it 
(against wolves etc.,) You foster even wretched (interested) devotees like us, impatient as 
You (always) are to shower Your grace on them. (17) 

Sad 


senEA Wa a Ane efi Fal «Wa Nhtaelenstete 1221 
Maitreya resumed : Thus extolled by that sagacious child, who cherished a noble 
purpose, the Lord, who is fond of His devotees, cheerfully received its praises and spoke as 


fo 
llows. (18) 5 
Sag 2 aad ee wreeenidmre wa a gray gad ie 
aera wa aewfrey gafafti aa zealot vatitat aenatfedy 1201 
Neat Taman Ueeencaanferl eats: HeAU: Vent AAA aS aatcha: | 
ana afauitat Ward Addit: 1281 








334 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


SARS SNR R SSR SERRE ERE E REESE ERT EREREESEEEEEEEEEESER ERODE Enon mER mee eK Eee S: 9 


Sheet qd ad fo aa ai emicera: | vefiaredtorea Varteatedrsa: 122 | 
aewmddan AB Waa q AA: | staat at Aral aay al saeala 1231 
SBI At Aged Ga: Genoaat: | Yaa Derfara: Wel ara Ai aerheaa 12x 
ad Wala AI Paelerqtend | sakes adl aAradd Ta: 12u) 


The Lord said: | know the cherished desire of your heart, O Ksatriya boy. Although it 
is difficult to attain, | grant it, O child of commendable vow. May prosperity wait on you. (1 9) 
| bestow on you O blessed one, that effulgent and lasting abode which has not (so far) been 
attained to by others. The entire stellar sphere—consisting of planets, lunar mansions 
and (other) stars—stands fastened to it even as oxen employed in trampling corn are bound 
to a post in the middle of a threshing-floor. It survives even those who live for a whole day 
of Brahma (i.e., even after the dissolution of the three world—earth, heaven and the 
intermediate region); nay, the stars presided over by Dharma (the god of piety), Agni (the 
god of fire), KaSyapa (a lord of created beings) andthe seven Rsis, the Venus and other stars 
too revolve roundit, ever keeping it to their right. (20-21) (Even here) when your father retires 
to the forest after handing over ( the dominion of) the earth (to you), you will rule over the 
globe for a period of thirty-six thousand years, firmly established in righteousness and with 
your senses (faculties) unimpaired. (22) Again, when your half-brother, Uttama, loses his life 
in a hunting expedition, his mother (Suruci) will enter a forest fire while searching for him in 
the forest, he being the only subject of her thought. (23) (You know) Yajnha (sacrifice) is My 
beloved form. Therefore, worshipping Me through a number of sacrifices, in which liberal 
fees will be paid (to the officiating priests), and having enjoyed true blessings in this life, you 
will ultimately fix your thought (exclusively) on Me. (24) Thereby you will ascend to My abode, 
which is adored by all other spheres andis situated even higher than (the abode of) the seven 
Rsis (the Ursa Major), attaining to which one does not return (to this mortal world). (25) 


HAT SAI 
Safad: A Wards: wai aoa wad aA WaNTgastaa: 1261 
ast danerst faut: medarrafe sea Pencattator arfasitarssnmegey | 29 


Maitreya continued : Thus glorified (by Dhruva) and having promised to him (an abode 
in) His own realm, the Lord, who bears the emblem of Garuda on His banner, rose to His own 
abode, while the child stood gazing (in wonder) (26) The child was not very pleased even 
after attaining his cherished object—which had been obtained through the worship of Lord 
Visnu's feet, and had quenched (all) his desires (once for all)—and returned to the city (the 
capital of his father). (27) 

fagt Sara 


qeou aa ud SA aaaAaaA Treat, | 
wea attract aa ma AAA Afarc_ 12S 
Vidura said : How is it that Dhruva (who knew the real value of things) felt as if he had 
not realized his object, even though he had secured in the course of a single life (a title to) 
the supreme Abode of Sri Hari, the Lord of Maya (Prakrti), which is so very difficult to attain 
and is earned solely through the worship of His feet ? (28) 


AAT SATA 
Od: AIeM aranlete faa ALA! teraknaedie 89 cerTaga fear 129 | 


Maitreya replied : His heart having been pierced with the shaft-like words of his 
stepmother and their memory still fresh (in his mind), Dhruva did not seek Mukti (final 





Dis. 9] BOOK FOUR 335: 


ee? Br Br Fr Re Br Br BeBe Se Be Be Re BeBe Br Re Re He Re Re Be Ke He Ke Ke Re Be He hr he Fy 


BERR BERR RRL BEBE BE RRR RR RRR RE ERE RE RERE RE REE REE RE RE REE RERERE REE RERERE RE BER 


beatitude) even trom the Lord of Mukti; that‘is why he was filled with remorse (when the 
bitterness was gone through the sight of the Lord). (29) 


AI SaTq 
SL vaya uae fig wae wedtae: | 
ATER wel = Wreditgerarqdenoa: YwaeAtd: 130 | 

el TA WAI wera used wafse: WEN Te aed 1321 

HlGbeahl ea: Unifeatefeegfa: tat aeeeretet «© aefeerrerta: 1321 

cat HTeaTgust sae sa firaemi aa faasaraf aquaria 133! 

mated cat fafa magi ware seed Aue SeTeTeL I 

Vaksarareise Va anafaasa: 13x! 
BNR tesa Aterraml & frfert aa gameaftorqeaa = wettemeTPrarera: 1341 
Dhruva said (to himself) : Even after securing, in the course of (mere) six months, the 
asylum of His feet, whose truth perpetual celibates like Sanandana (and his three brothers— 
Sanaka, Sanatana and Sanatkumara)—have been able to realize through abstract medita- 
tion practised through many lives, | have receded from them, my mind being fixed on 
diversity. (30) Oh, look at my folly ! Alas ! how unfortunate | am that, having reached the soles 
of His feet, who is capable of ending the cycle of birth and death, | asked for something which 
is bound to perish. (31) (It seems) my judgment was perverted by the gods, who (evidently) 
could not bear to see my rare good fortune inasmuch as they are sure (one day) to fall (from 
their elevated position). That is why | refused to believe the true words of Narada, most 
wicked that | am. (32) Clinging to the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) and (hence) taking-a 
perverted view of things, |, burnt with jealousy, mistaking my own brother for an enemy— 
although (from the point of view of the spirit) there in none other than me—just as a sleeping 
(dreaming) man sees the projection of his own self in the form of a lion, snake and so on and 
gets afraid of the same. (33) Like medical treatment in the case of one whose life has come 
to an end | asked in vain for this (sovereignty of the world). Having propitiated through 
austere penance the Soul of the universe, who is (so) difficult to please and is capable of 
ending the cycle of birth and death, | asked of Him only worldly fortune (which is conducive 
to rebirth), hapless that | am! (34) Alas ! like a pauper seeking unhusked grains ofa universal 
monarch, |, whose stock of merit had been depleted, foolishly asked for worldly power and 
pelf (that tends to swell one's pride) at the hands of Him who was ready to grant me the joy 
that constitutes one's own essence. (35) 
WAY sara 


1 a Yee Uenfacal Wise Valea Smt: | 
asoha daereaqasdaert  adaasat 9  weltayea: 1361 


Maitreya began again : People (devotees) like you, who take delight in the dust of the 
lotus-feet of Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation) and whose mind remains sated with 
Whatever is got without any effort, seek nothing for themselves beyond the privilege of 


Serving Him. (36) 
SVAN TARA AMSA UST A Al WAUA Pel AA 1Z91 
se aladt aadddata alia: | atdiedeiasital at saree 3c 
wei wel MTA TM: Hogs wearer: 13¢1 





—_ 


336 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis 


SRERRERER EEE ERREEEROREREEREEERRTERRERERERRERAR RETREAT TRE RRO RE MME hh HERO! 2 
itis 


WMggemet  seereor 8 aufH: 1 Aart |= gerqUinresmlaoiae: tx} 
Gila: defasma safest wanyfedisiea fafeent aefgadarfismag: ive) 
qd aaa Bad AA Wii sae = Fauna  wfaee: ive 
Uassat ceal deicnvert: sa! fagetreahrdaiedRereseray 1x3 
Star qeH te Sddaaathes: | aaa Sie TATA: Ixy 
When the king (Uttanapada) heard that his son (Dhruva) was coming back, he did not 
give credence to the news any more than one would believe the story of anyone's returning 
to life after death (and said to himself,)" How could a wretched being like me have such good 
luck ?" (37) He (however) put faith in the words of the celestial sage (Narada) and was 
(forthwith) overwhelmed with intensity of joy. Highly pleased with the man who had brought 
the news, he rewarded him with a costly pearl necklace. (88) Eager to see his son, he 
mounted a car decked with gold and drawn by excellent horses and, surrounded by 
Brahmanas, the elders of his race, ministers and kinsfolk, sallied forth from the city, while 
conchs were being blown and kettledrums sounded, Vedic hymns were loudly chanted and 
flutes played upon (even as he drove in the car). (39-40) Adorned with gold ornaments, his 
two queens, Suniti and Suruci, too mounted a palanquin and proceeded along with prince 
Uttama ( Suruci's'son). (41) The king, whose heart had been pining for his son for along time, 
hurriedly alighted from the car when he saw the boy coming near the garden, and quickly 
went up to him. Overpowered with affection and heaving deep sighs, he folded in his arms 
Dhruva, who had been absolved of all his sins and freed from all bondages by the touch of 
Lord Visnu's feet. (42-43) His great ambition (of seeing his son safe and sound again) having 
been realized, the king smelt Dhruva's head (out of affection) again and again and bathed 
him with his cool tears (of love and joy). (44) 


afer faq: urerarittisntratara: 1 zara arent sitet aed: Asai: iu 
Ged «= Aes eadandeeiukyeae silefa = srerrsaqet «fret KG 1 
qa saat wear Wiener: aad anha ant faa sa waive! 
Sas yaswMadty  wilaget | ssasteusaHaata Weeed: 1¥C1 
Gita sat sas fa qaqisaqa were aagerifada ix 
Wea Gala Aa: aioe: fara: i aafefrermarat di dicqal ag: 140 
a Balas Us fesar a aa siideri wfacceisst wel vier aus ya: 142! 
sada FA Wa. WOafdet | aegqeafaat aikt Wel rq: gear 142! 


Having bowed at his father's feet and received his benedictions (in return), and being 
kindly spoken to and received with honour by him, Dhruva, the foremost of noble souls, bent 
his head low to both his mothers (Suniti and Suruci). (45) Lifting up the child fallen at her feet, 
Suruci (Dhruva's stepmother) pressed it to her bosom and in a voice choked with tears said, 
"May you live (long) !" (46) Just as water flows down to a low level of its own accord, so all 
living beings submit to him who has pleased Sri Hari through virtues like friendliness (to all) 
and so on. (47) Both Uttama and Dhruva experienced a thrill of joy when, overwhelmed with 
love, they hugged each other and shed a flood of tears again and again. (48) Suniti, Dh ruva S 
mother, was relieved of her agony as she hugged her son, who was dearer (to her) than life, 
and felt gratified by the very touch of his body. (49) Milk incessantly flowed, O valiant Vidura, 
from the breasts of Suniti (the mother of a hero), bathed as they were at that time with her 
tears of joy. (50) The people (of the city) felicitated the (senior) queen (Suniti) and said, 





Dis. 9 ] | BOOK FOUR 337. 
BRB SRR RES BBB BRR BRB BEBO BE BeBe BeBe BeBe BERR RRR BCR REPRE IRAE RE RRR RRR AR 


"Luckily enough (for all of us) your son, who had long beenjost, has been recovered and has 
(thus) wiped out your agony. He will in course of time rule over the terrestrial globe. (51) You 
have surely adored the Lord, who puts an end to the suffering of the suppliant, and by 
constantly contemplating on whom the wise have succeeded in conquering death, which is 
so very difficult to conquer." (52) 
wera St a AMIE AU: | amen pul we: eqamitshaaregqer 142 | 
wa CATARACT: | ES: ees: qatar alee: ux 
IAEA ATT THT: lap iterate: | adloeh: 1441 
MEAT: WMiprsatase: | Adaiscapa strafgarferarety: 1481 
qeeraeasant Uetaa| wITad: «= - YT eTUgeclfetstaa, 1 Uo | 
yera Ula get aa aa oURfea: | fagedeeragatgermenfa «= GCI 
; : AGATA aca ralentara: ad: l TUM ER Na Tifaatecadt fd: 1&2] 
Placing Dhruva, who was thus being fondly caressed by the people, on (the back of) a 
female elephant along with his (younger) brother (Uttama), the king (Uttanapada) joyously 
entered the city (of Barhismati), acclaimed (by all). (53) The city was decorated here and 
there with plantain trees and young arecas containing bunches (of fruits and blossoms) set 
up with charming alligator-shaped festoons tied to them, and was adorned at every entrance 
with jars full of water with lights burning on them and leaves of mango trees, pieces of cloth, 
wreaths of flowers and strings of pearls hanging about their necks. (54-55) It was graced on 
all sides with defensive walls, gates and mansions decked with gold and with their fops 
shining like the glorious pinnacles of aerial cars. (56) Its quadrangles, streets, attics and 
roads had been cleaned and the city sprinkled with sandal water. Again, it was scattered with 
fried as well as unfried rice, unbroken rice, flowers, fruits and (other) offerings. (57) 
Everywhere the virtuous women of the city showered on Dhruva, as they saw him on the 
road, white mustard seeds, unbroken rice, curds, water, blades of Durva (panic grass), 
flowers and fruits, uttering their benedictions (on the child) out of (pure) affection; and 
hearing their sweet strains, Dhruva entered the palace of his father. (58-59) 


vemfrardaa «oa dea Nadal one fad fea aaatefa eaadisol 
ua: ama: seal ea wanahtesar: | sireaath Aeretfor aa Wear soeH: 1621 
at wnleepeny vemaeadg diate sit MeAaeaM: 1621 
saa wai want fafeared: | qoifsegite-mtameae: 131 
ara  aqeielarat: «Wal egpaerit: | PHS H esl seHleane: lex 


Fondly caressed by his father, Dhruva lived in that excellent palace built of most precious 
Stones, like a god in heaven. (60) It was furnished with best of ivory (soft and white) as the 
froth of milk and provided with coverings of gold, and contained costly seats and other 
furniture, made of gold. (61) In its walls of crystal and emerald shone lights in the shape of 
bright gems placed in the hands of beautiful female figures carved in precious stones. (62) 
Within the premises of the palace there were pleasure-gardens charming with different 
species of celestial trees, resorted to by warbling pairs of birds and humming bees drunk with 
honey. (63) It also contained extensive wells with steps of cat's-eye, containing white and 
blue lotuses and water-lilies and inhabited by swarms of swans and ducks, ruddy geese and 


Cranes. (64) 








338 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


SARERRERAERAARERRASEEROREERDSEOROREE EERE ERSRERERRE SERRE ERED ER SHEN R RR eAR UT 10 
fre 


Se Ueiie: sMe wa ALI Aa areas we fast umicy 
dletteaad ad a Sehdlat A AAA! SqeHIs Us Ad wh ya: ufaqice) 
sa a sadam faarafe: iad far: sifasferenet arise 


ofa Sead A IA St Seca Uae Yoana AM aawiseara: 1¢ | 


The royal sage Uttanapada was highly amazed to see (with his own eyes) the most 
wonderful glory of his son (Dhruva), of which he had (already) heard (from the mouth of 
Narada). (65) (Later on) the king made Dhruva the sovereign of the entire globe, when he 
saw that the prince had not only come of age, but had also won the esteem of the ministers 
and the devotion of the people. (66) And perceiving himself advanced in age, the king was 
(now) disgusted with the pleasures of sense and departed for the woods, contemplating on 
the essential character of the Self. (67) 


Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled "The Coronation of Dhruva" in Book 
Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SPST LATS 
GIRS SIS 


AZ earaseaa: 


Discourse X 
Uttama’'s death at the hands of the Yaksas and 


Dhruva's encounter with them 


WAT Sara 
weadden fee 8a yal aaa wi aM age seca |e | 
sora wala at: UA Ala: | Gace Aisaasistad | 2 | 
seed 8a 8 8aelre led: Wasraat aaa af AAT 1 2 | 


Maitreya continued : Dhruva married Bhrami, daughter of Sigsumara, a lord of created 
beings, and the couple were blessed with two sons, Kalpa and Vatsara. (1) Through his 
(other) wife, lla, daughter of Vayu (the wind-god), too.the mighty Dhruva begota son, Utkala 
by name, and a daughter, a very jewel among women. (2) Uttama (Dhruva's half-brother), 
however, who was yet unmarried, was killed in the course of a hunting expedition on the 
Himalaya mountain by a Yaksa, who was stronger than he, and his mother (Suruci, Dhruvas 
stepmother) followed him (to the abode of Yama). (3) 


qa qa set cHlodapenfdd: sit Vera Wa: GUase | x | 

Teale feet ust eatqerfadrt! cast fanacgioat ut aged! & | 

aan Mg Fede: A eases! aifenaa: SAS SAMA | & I 
Overcome with anger, indignation and grief at the news of his brother's death, Dhruva 
mounted his victorious car and marched against the city of Alaka (the abode of the Yaksas). 


(4) Proceeding in a northerly direction, the king (Dhruva) saw in a valley of the Himalayas 
the city (of Alaka) crowded with the Guhyakas (Yaksas) and inhabited by spirits and ghosts 





Dis. 10 ] BOOK FOU 


(the attendants of Lord Rudra). (5) The stout-armed Dhruva blew his conch, causing the 
heavens as well as the quarters to resound, and the women of the demigods, O Vidura, were 
greatly alarmed at the sound and cast a bewildered look. (6) 


wet Fema afer autemerver: | sreemeafirenfiaqeaaer: ren 
I Tea a STS Mere: | Uke aerate, arUtfeafiafeata: 1c 
a 4 CERT: | Tel wa fel tet Aerie we ae ai 2 | 
ash Ser: © reeaeifrarem: ae arog feet wfraita: 1901 
ae: Saito: egqearad: | weapetfutiitiarers: ate 128 
saa sept: att ager seorreteniteanaaarht AMES 1221 
sirarmne: A del weatiot yfonia saeqaaea atau aa fit: 1231 
Celene fe waa wisd wa: wat wa: quvasia ext 

a yaiseessada  dtenfea went: eu 


Impatient at the blast, the mighty and great warriors among the demigods sallied forth 
from their stronghold with uplifted weapons and proceeded (against Dhruva). (7) As they 
rushed towards him, O valiant Vidura, Dhruva (the great car-warrior), who was armed with 
a fierce bow, hit them all at once with three shafts each. (8) With the arrows planted in their 
brow, they all thought themselves vanquished and applauded that feat of his. (9) Intolerant 
of his valour like serpents, who cannot tolerate being trodden on, they in their anxiety to 
achieve twice as muchas he had done simultaneously struck him (with six arrows each). (10) 
Full of rage and eager to return his volleys, the Yaksas, numbering one hundred and thirty 
thousand, rained on him as well as on his car and charioteer iron clubs, swords, lances, pikes 
and axes, javelins, double-edged swords, Bhusundis and arrows with many-coloured 
feathers. (11-12) Screened with the thick volley of weapons, even as a hill is covered with 
a torrential shower. Dhruva (the son of Uttanapada) could not be seen at that time. (13) That 
very momentarose a plaintive cry raised by the Siddhas who had been witnessing the scene 
from heaven: "Drowned in the sea of the Punyajana (Yaksa) host, this sun of Manu's race 
has set !" (14) Then, in the midst of the roaring of the Raksasas (Yaksas) * who were 
proclaiming their own triumph on the field of battle, Dhruva’s car came into view, like the sun 


from behind (a cloud of) mist. (15) 
aqfiepiatest  fardt edeetistet = semgtearitenitartre: 1261 
ae a aah fra aaifor cera! eramiiataarerar firtiaarat aat 1291 
aed: upenaat farthisrequse: | nofatanetaltdwaaay: 121 
araaenitts Weeaa: | streqaredt «= Ta) Wapeifearateut: 1291 
Twanging his celestial bow and inspiring terror into (the heart of) the enemies, Dhruva 
tore to pieces their host of missiles even as a blast disperses an army of clouds. (16) Piercing 
the armour of the Raksasas, the sharp arrows discharged from his bow disappeared into 
their bodies as thunderbolts into mountains. (17) Strewn allover with the heads adorned with 
beautiful ear-rings, thighs resembling gold palmyras, arms graced with bracelets as well as 


with the necklaces, armlets, diadems and costly turbans of the enemies, who were being 
mowed down with the shafts (of Dhruva), the fields of battle, which ravished the mind of 


heroes, looked very charming. (18-19) 


* Here as well as in the subsequent verses the Yaksas have been promiscuously referred to as ‘Raksasas' and ‘Asuras 


obviously because all these species are akin to one another and the population of Alaka was a mixture of all these. 








340 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


LQKKRKAKAAA aaa aaa SERE KARA EENARORREEOR EEE RO RANE NERA REET Ee OS: 1 0 


emafast «= Sat UTS, «= aieTom: §=— atfteterebararch: 1 
aTat faqauraaat fagga rafasnifsageran Sa 120} 
Sean: A aalssddifad Aeqa Ahead AMA: | 
qa fagaata =ataar fest a aifaat aa faentfld aa: 1201 
sa aeigora: 9 want aa: ater sftarrerfsa: | 
qa «Mea NedkaRd amet fea wilsaqqad 1221 


Hosts of other Raksasas, who had escaped death, yet who had most of their limbs cut 
off with the arrows of Dhruva (the foremost of the Ksatriyas), fled from the field of battle like 
troop-leaders of elephants disturbed in their sport by the king of beasts. (20) Not finding then 
anyone left with a weapon in that extensive field of battle, Dhruva (the foremost of Manu's 
race) felt inclined to behold the city of the enemies, yet he refrained from entering it (and 
said,) "No man can know the intention of those skilled in enchantment !" (21) Addressing his 
charioteer as above, Dhruva (who rode in a wonderful charjot) remained on his guard, 
apprehending renewed opposition from the enemy, when he heard a (loud) noise like the 
roaring of an ocean, and further beheld in every direction the dust raised by a blast. (22) 


AArsed AA Udieha Add: i faapedied fee araacefraa 1231 
agg. Sentargagqarauqadea: | Fatah HAM AAASAT 12% | 
dd: wsexad fikag: addtiesr Teukamfeergaen: arenafeur: 1241 
SSIS: Ara aAaadsha warfare: 1 srsaeraq ss Ae: PageMENsA Fara: 12Gt 
eqs sdf: gaat addl Wal seale Aelgle: Heard sa MATT: 1201 
Uefa AAT aaa | Aaa ATT ATTA: 1221 
qe sammie  araafieenm! fera qe Waa: BARA AAA: 122 


In an instant the sky was overcast on all sides with a canopy of clouds accompanied by 
flashes of lightning and alarming claps of thunder in every direction. (23) They rained torrent 
of blood as wellas phlegm etc., pus, ordure, urine and fat and before him fell headless trunks 
from the sky, O sinless Vidura. (24) Then appeared a mountain in the air and there rained 
on all sides maces, iron clubs, swords and Musalas (a particular type of arrow), as well aS 
showers accompanied with volleys of stones. (25) Serpents ran up to him hissing with a 
thunder-like roar and discharging fire from their eyes in rage, and there came rushing In 
herds mad elephants, lions and tigers. (26) Assuming a threatening aspect as at the time of 
universal dissolution and roaring deeply, the terrible ocean approached on all sides deluging 
the earth with waves. (27) By their conjuring tricks, peculiar to the demons, the Yaksas, who 
are noted for their cruel disposition, displayed many such phenomena which inspired terror 
into (the heart of) the pusillanimous. (28) Seeing the conjuring trick employed by the Yaksas 
against Dhruva—a trick which was so very difficult to counteract—a number of hermits that 
had assembled there prayed for his welfare (in the following words). (29) 


WIA Hq: 
SiMe Wie age 2a: fautaaaratter facet 
aarmeaaiaaa fart arg! oleisse att eeragyay igo! 





Dis. 11 ] BOOK FOUR 341 
SRR LD BB BBB Be BBB BRAD AT BREAD BB ER AA BRE PERRET AARP ARAL 


ad AaMad FEN UAE afeca Taek case: [Zo] 


The hermits said : O son of Uttanapada may the almighty Lord Visnu (the Wielder of 
the famous Sarnga bow), who relieves the agony of His suppliants, wipe out your enemies! 
By uttering and hearing His very Name people easily succeed in this very life in conquering 
death, which is so hard to Overcome, O dear Dhruva. (30) 


Thus ends the tenth discourse in Book Four of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


4 = S 
GSS SIS 


ST NeHTeaM SATA: 


Discourse XI 
Swayambhuva Manu intervenes and persuades Dhruva to cease fighting 


WAY sara 

Pera Tedtaqiot «aa «6a: dedsaquesa = _ aemererorfafie 2 | 
aaa «=o ude @renfaition: | fest fetafdex Sen ated ae 2 1 

weia 8 agi a: «= Gavi: )9=_ HeeaaTa: | 

far:ga sifafagigses amt ad stare: frafter: 1 3 | 

deraa: «= set Presta: «= uaa «= STI: 1 

aaa «oat |= sagem: «9 qaviqaegthu’ Ss gaea: | ¥ | 

a am Yatwenrad qt  fipasaefertenter| 

fara Cesar edit: 1 & | 

Tw 8 FaaMeidier 8 deeararreisacta =|: | 

sie 460 aes famat SC aietaa: 3 efit: 1 & 

Maitreya went on : On hearing the prayer of the sages, who spoke as above, Dhruva 
sipped some water and (after washing his hand) set to his bow the missile that had been 
evolved by the divine sage Narayana. (1) While the missile was being fixed to the bow, the 
illusory appearances conjured up by the Guhyakas (Yaksas) forthwith vanished in the same 
Way as nescience and its progeny (egotism and so on) disappear at the dawn of wisdom, 
O Vidura. (2) Even as he fixed on his bow the missile evolved by the sage Narayana there 
flew from it arrows with shafts of gold and feathers resembling the wings of a swan, and 
penetrated the enemy ranks like peacocks entering a forest with a terrible noise. (3) Assailed 
On the battle-field with those sharp-edged arrows, the Punyajanas (Yaksas) felt much 
enraged and with uplifted weapons darted against Dhruva from all sides even as serpents 
would rush at Garuda with their hoods drawn up. (4) As they ran towards him on the field 
of battle he tore off with his arrows their arms, thighs, necks and bellies and despatched them 
to that highest realm (Satyaloka, the abode of Brahma), which recluses attain to, carving 
their eave rough the sphere of the sun. (5) Dhruva's grandfather, Swayambhuva Manu, was 


i ing killed i bers 
ion to see those innocent Guhyakas being killed in large num 
by DER wate wae Sountee on a wondertul car). He arrived (on the scene) along with a 





 —a 


342 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 14 


aaa a eee cba aabbansececnaasahiaeearsbeeeabaeancensnintenane! 
Prt rere, 
number of sages and spoke to the son of Uttanapada (as follows). (6) 
Wea 
31 4 acifaaant adlenor UMA 1 aa Ques MaMaaeaaARTa: | 9 | 
Tegel ad 9 pAdafefertl ae 8 8=89—|- AQUaaTTTATRSTRISHPATETA | C1 
TAPAMNE «TaAS sett wi wgeenad AMF wT < | 
Ta amt fe aeat witerahai aaa UTS 1201 
aayaawad ada et Wari seq quae faite varies! 
a a Beda ama:i at aad pda Gal Aa 1221 
fafaaat meu da uafaesraqg| aned a aale wWIaM Gareiela i238 
waa waft yee: Mec: faq state sa Pratorpetia iext 


Manu said : Have done, dear child, with this sinful rage, a gateway to hell, swayed by 
which you have slain (all) these innocent Punyajanas. (7) The carnage of innocent demigods 
which you have embarked upon is not becoming of our race, dear son; for such an act is 
denounced by the righteous.(8) Indeed for the fault of one many have been killed by you 
because of their connection with the offender, highly perturbed as you were by the death of 
your brother, whom you loved so dearly, my darling. (9) That one should destroy living beings 
after the manner of the beasts, taking the body-which is external to the mind—as one's own 
self, surely this is not the way of the righteous, who are devoted to the Lord (the Ruler of our 
senses). (10) Having adored (in your very childhood) Sri Hari, the abode of all living beings, 
who is so difficult to propitiate, regarding all creatures as your own self, you have secured 
(for yourself) that supreme realm of Lord Visnu ! (11) Constantly abiding in the thought of Sri 
Hari and esteemed even by His devotees, how did you perpetrate this reprehensible act— 
you who ought to instruct others in the ways of the righteous ? (12) Itis through forbearance 
(towards our elders), compassion (towards our inferiors), friendliness (towards our equals) 
and even-mindedness towards all living beings that the Lord, the Universal Spirit, is 
thoroughly pleased (with us). (13) On the Lord being thoroughly pleased a maan is rid of the 
three modes of Prakrti (Sattva etc.,) and of their evolute, the subtle body, and becomes.one 


with the all-blissful Brahma. (14) 
wa «fe | cet etararesrfaaiegerarkte gull 
Wa sada at: feta: waa wa al qreditmusem Ara UI: 126! 
Rie 86 datdifeeio: 9 qeadia: | amrennite fad an sofa oread 129! 
Q@ Gieae wa aieseat Wroaren fasrndtd: | 
aianda eae wast fayz waa  efdaeniec 
AStASd: HAAleMeneela: ISA BAA  BaRaqeardH 19! 
qa a quaisa faua wa at are yailfedardt: aa oT: | 
A 8 Maaeateastean = aM (TTC CTT: 1201 
STS «= Siete «= fay: | Saat vied: RN aera facererat 122 
wad aed want qaiuh wie at ta Ga: amraqamt 122! 
AWiaa facta ad ol Aca Masta 123 | 


a 
The male and the female are products of the five gross elements developed in the form 
' of a gross body and from their copulation spring up other men and women in the world. (15) 





is. 11 
Teel BOOK FOUR 343 


Be Be Be BEEBE BER BERBER BER BBR BE BEBE RE BRE Be Be Re HEH he Sr br oe 


#r BERR RR RARE RRR ARAL LEAL EAE 


Thus Tinegelt creation and preservation as well as the dissolution (of the universe) from 
a eae uae Inthe equilibrium of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) brought about 
bye CICS Own Maya (deluding potency) O king ! (16) As for God (the Supreme Person), 
who is (ever) free from the three Gunas ( modes of Prakrti), He serves only as an occasion 
for the transformation of these Gunas. It is due to Him that this universe, consisting of both 
cause and effect, (ever) remains in a state of flux even as iron is set in motion (by the 
presence Of a loadstone). (17) The Lord's energy is divided (in the form of the creative, 
protective and destructive powers) when the equilibrium of the three Gunas gets disturbed 
under the force of His energy known by the name of Time. That is how He creates this 
universe, though remaining a non-doer, and dissolves it even though a non-destroyer. The 
Lord's energy (in the shape of Time) is indeed hard to conceive. (18) Itis the same immortal 
Lord who as the Time-Spirit puts an end to the world, though endless Himself, and is the first 
Maker (of the universe), though Himself without beginning. Itis He who creates the universe 
by begetting one individual through another and dissolves the same by destroying the 

destroyer Himself through Death.(19) Equally entering all created beings as Death, the 

Supreme Being treats none as His own or as His enemy. Like particles of dust following a 

blast, all living beings follow the course of the Time- Spirit subject to their own destiny. (20) 

The all-pervading Lord, who ever remains in His own natural state, cuts short as well as 

prolongs the life of a living being, a creature of its destiny, though Himself immune from 

such changes.(21) Some (the followers of the Mimamsa school of thought) speak of Him 

as Karma (ritual), while others (the Carvakas or materialists) call Him by the name of 
Nature, O ruler of men. Some refer to Him as Kala (Time), others (the astrologers) as 

Destiny, while still other people give Him the appellation of Kama (Desire). (22) No one, 

dear son, knows (even) the intention of the Lord, who is neither open to sense-perception 

nor to any other means of cognition and who is the fountain-head of manifold energies 

(such as Mahat-tattva or the principal of cosmic intelligence). Who, then, can know the 

Lord Himself, one's own origin ? (23) 


a da we wade eam: | fanaa Gat ca fe aRUr ies 
a wa fas gala a waata ea aint ateearad ordi: 1241 
1 CC® GC GEL Faves: | SAA AAA Beh: Ya A aft SA 12e | 
qa yangd dd ed waleritfe wre 
ae afs faggat wha mat am a safe qeatad: 1201 
gq: ugast adi @ faa ae: aurea aaer fant 
ai nase seaman Of afl ue freteat: 1221 
aaa STA alate Sqr Frome | 
sramaakass «= fer, | afeafag | HaHa 12<1 
a QaNTRY Wel WAR AGATA SOTA aT 
ats frame uat aaaererate fateate warehiit SA 1301 
does fe ug 2 WG FaMT THU AMA YAM Usa Fess 1 RR 
SATE Saeech afer TIA ERTS TRoSAVANIGA: 132 | 
+ fiftermaeaaet laste, Was, Wiguitceafid: 1331 
as eo Te ct eat a 


q Kubera, the Bestower of riches), my child, who slew 


f 
Itis not these Yaksas (attendants O 





a 


344 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 14 


SEB Re RR RE RR Re RB RRB BEB EBB BER BAY Be Bee BB Be Be A Be BB BB Br Be BY Br Be Br Br Br Be Hr Br Hr Br He He Hr Hr Hr Br PS 
Sr tre, 


your brother. It is God alone, dear son, who is responsible for a man's birth and death. (24) 
It is He who creates the universe and it is He again who preserves and destroys it 
Nevertheless, being free from egotism, He is neither attached to the modes of Nature no; 
to the functions (of creation etc., discharged by Him). (25) United with His own energy known 
by the name of Maya, He evolves, protects and withdraws into Himself (all) living beings— 
He who is their Ruler and Protector, nay, their very Self. (26) With all your being, dear son 
resort to that Divinity alone, who is death itself (to those who are not devoted to Him) anq 
Immortality (to His devotees), who is the ultimate resort of the (whole) universe and to whom 
(even) the creators of the world (Brahma and the other lords of created beings) bear offerings 
even as oxen, controlled by a string passed through their nostrils, bear loads (for their 
master). (27) Cut to the quick by the (taunting) words of your stepmother, you left your (own) 
mother when a (mere) child of five; and, retiring to the woods, you succeeded in propitiating 
the Lord by means of your penance and by controlling your senses, and secured (for 
yourself) an abode higher than the three worlds (the earth, heaven and the intermediate 
region) ! (28) With your eyes turned inward, seek, dear Dhruva, that Supreme Spirit, who 
fondly stays in a mind free from animosity, who is devoid of attributes, one (without a second), 
imperishable and ever free, and by whose presence this phenomenal world of diversity, 
though unreal, appears to exist. (29) Then, by practising supreme devotion to the immortal 
Lord, who is the Inner Controller of all selves, who is pure and absolute Bliss and is 
possessed of all powers, you will gradually succeed in breaking asunder the hard knot 
of ignorance in the shape of (the notions of) "I" and "mine". (380) By dint of your vast 
learning, O king, curb your anger—which is the greatest impediment to (the attainment 
of) every blessing—even as a disease is controlled with the help of a medicine. May God 
bless you. (31) A wise man who seeks (to attain) for himself the state of fearlessness 
should never allow himself to be overpowered by anger; for people are terribly afraid of the 
man whois swayed by it. (32) You have committed a (great) offence against Kubera (the god 
of riches), the friend of Lord Siva (who lives on a mountain), in that you killed the Yaksas, 
though under provocation, thinking that it were they who had killed your brother. (33) 
Propitiate him soon, my child, through submissiveness and polite words before the anger of 
exalted souls (like him) should destroy our race. (34) 


Ta wea: demae aadanicafafed: arngiate: wut sat 134 
Sit ASM ad ASG GRASS Grecia Aap WelegiSeAs 12 2 


Having thus admonished his grandson, Dhruva, and greeted by the latter, Swayambhuva 
Manu returned to his city along with the sages (who had accompanied him). (35) 





Thus ends the eleventh discourse in Book Four of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


DISSE SID 


; 
: 
s 
: 
; 


Dis. 12 ] 
OOK FOUR 345 


Br BeBe BEBE BEBE RE Bt BeBe BEBE BE BEBE BeBe He Be He He B 
SERSSERERD ERR RE RE ER EREE KR CeR eee enn ee MERE E EERE EEE 
SID Flea sea: 
cy 


Discourse XII 
Kubera confers a boon on Dhruva, who ascends 
to the abode of Lord Visnu 


HAY Say 
AATTA ANA ates: CaS weEpAaeM |e 


Maitreya continued : Having come to know that Dhruva's anger had been appeased 
and that he had desisted from (further) bloodshed, the worshipful Kubera (the god of riches) 
arrived there, glorified by the Caranas (celestial bards), Yaksas and Kinnaras, and spoke to 
Dhruva, who stood (before him) with joined palms. (1) 


F1q Sad 

wt ot: abraare ofiqeisia Aster i aed — firamereendt CRUAAT: 1 2 | 
1 Varadan wat wet aaiane wa fe wat sya: 1 3 | 
ae areal dame fel asian sefaudati x | 
Teo YA AN A Water adumemeaa aa yereafasery | & | 
wa wMtiaeavad wakesa ah fared een Womesseaaan | & | 

quite wma ya ard areaaestaatisad 2 | 

a SMa aA ame WAI! 

The god of riches said : O Ksatriya prince, | am highly pleased with you since at the 
remonstrance of your grandfather (Swayambhuva Manu) you have renounced the feeling 
of animosity, so difficult to give up, O sinless one. (2) (As a matter of fact), it was not you who 
killed the Yaksas nor did the Yaksas slay your brother (Uttama). The Time-spirit alone is 
responsible for the birth and death of living beings. (3) Like the dream-consciousness, the 
false notion of ‘I' and ‘you’ arises in man through ignorance (of his essential nature) and as 
a result of his self-identification with the body; and it is due to this notion that he has to suffer 
bondage as well as miseries. (4) Therefore, God bless you, Dhruva, go and worship for the 
sake of freedom from birth (and death) the Lord—who Is above sense-perception and yet 
manifest in the form ofall living beings, whose feet are the only object worth resorting to, who 
puts an end to birth (and death) and who, though united (for the purposes of creation etc.), 
with His own energy known by the name of Maya and consisting of the three Gunas (Sattva, 
Raj dT is vet devoid of it (in His absolute aspect)—treating all living beings as 

Jas) and Tames oy ‘tatinaly ask of me, O king, a boon which is foremost 
your own self. (5-6) Freely and unhesitaungly 


pies i boon (from me); for 
i ada, you being (eminently) fit to receive a 
ue Fal earl “ea ona ai are so near the feet of the Lord (who has a lotus sprung 


from His navel). (7) 
Hay SAA 
q wea amt alfa gat Hetaitadt «Herat: | 





SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12 


Pe Sr eRe Ke Be Ke Ke He Ge Ke Be He Be Be Be Be Gr He He Be Br Ke Hr Ke Br Ke Hr Fe Fr 


SUA RRRNESeaAaeAER REA RE NER ERAAL EASE SE ERARAR SEDER SESS SSS OSEAN SS SS ESESESSARSRES RO 
at a aasafeat aft a maa ge |< | 
aer Waa UA at aaeiteeta: | ueadismad AIST BYE Need |g | 
‘. MAMOIGA 120 | 
aor «9a we fireffefenct: 1 xefenereamaT | aH : 
ereisad diitet wine acaie yey Tavafert Faye | 
XG =f i wed deacon aaa At Mat ST: kz 
achnafared wart fiafruse at: quaared Sofa TTY NAT 1 Ra 
Wd ad ae Terao rasa: | frentatac Akal «= GATETET OTA 1 8 I 
waa of fae cranfeaneft | sfaenfacerrerct array, IRI 
eae «| Senge UAaeya CET: | 
WSs Toktaetaea Homa sere FereTTeT | 86 | 
Maitreya went on : When the great-minded Dhruva, an eminent devotee of the Lord, 
was egged on by Kubera (the king of the Yaksas) to ask for a boon, he sought to be blessed 
with constant remembrance of Sri Hari, with the help of which one is easily able to cross the 
ocean of worldly existence (which is an outcome of ignorance, and) which IS SO difficult to 
get over. (8) With a glad heart Kubera (the son of Idavida) conferred on him the boon of 
constant remembrance of the Lord and thereafter vanished before his very eyes; and Dhruva 
too returned to his own capital (Barhismati). (9) Then he propitiated, through (the perform- 
ance of ) anumber of sacrifices attended with liberal fees (to the officiating priests), the Lord 
of sacrifices, whois the reward of ritual acts—performed with the help of material substances 
(clarified butter etc.), sacrificial activity (the work of the priests) and the deities (Such as the 
fire-god, Indra and others) worshipped in the course of a sacrifice—as well as the dispenser 
of their fruit. (10) Maintaining an ardent flow of Devotion to the immortal Lord, who is the Inner 
Controller of all and yet who excludes all, he saw seated in himself as well as in all (other) 
beings the same all-pervading Lord. (11) The people looked upon him as their own father— 
him, who was thus possessed of a lofty character, devoted to the Brahmana and tender to 
the afflicted, and who preserved the bounds of propriety. (12) Exhausting (the stock of) his 
merit through luxuries (permitted by the Sastras) and neutralizing evil by practising self- 
denial (in the form of charity and the performance of sacrifices etc.), he ruled over the 
terrestrial globe for thirty-six thousand years (the span of life ofa god).(13) Having thus spent 
a long period as a means to (the attainment of ) the three objects of human pursuit, (viz., 
religious merit, worldly prosperity and sensuous enjoyment) with his senses fully controlled, 
the high-souled Dhruva (eventually) made over the throne to his son (Utkala). (14) 
Regarding this universe—which is NO more real than a dream or a hallucination caused by 
ignorance—as super-imposed on his own self by Maya (illusion), and realizing his own body, 
wives, progeny and kinsfolk, as well as his army, rich treasury, gynaeceum, delightful 


pleasure-grounds and (his dominion over) the sea-girt terrestri 
and al globe as 
Death, he left for Visala (the forest of Badarikasrama, the modern Sacintna eee 6) 2 





Dis. 12] BOOK FOUR 347 


Br Br Br Br Br Be Be Gr Be Br St Be He He Br Hr Br Ge Se Ge Kr He Kr Ge Be Ke Ke Kr Br Hr Ke He He Ke ee He Ke Ke He Hr HH Ke Ke Gee eRe Kee Be KGAA AAA AA AAT AE EAA AAAA EE 
; 2 A it 7 ; fe ; > 1 
feraraas zy ' r 
Tal qardat faticenigaarepusel 120] 


fag Meares ra yer: aeqafeaegdcna: | 
aH 0a = qurmefes: oo orderenafafa «©6=_ decenfos: 1221 
a PUMeiMMasadca aeglaics TAAAAH A | 
Qreraquga afer TE: USRAIAAA A 1221 
There (at Visala) he purified his mind by taking a plunge in the sacred waters (of the holy 
Ganga) and, after steadying himself in a squatting posture, controlled his breath (through 
the process of Pranayama). Then, having withdrawn his senses (from the outside world) with 
the help of his mind, he fixed it on the gross (cosmic) form of the Lord, and meditating on it 
till the distinction of subject and object altogether disappeared from his mind, he was lost in 
Samadhi (abstract meditation) and abandoned the thought even of that (cosmic body). (17) 
Maintaining an unceasing flow of devotion towards Lord Sri Hari, he was bathed in a stream 
of blissful tears again and again. His heart melted (with emotion), a thrill ran through all his 
limbs, and rid of self-identification with the body, he lost consciousness even of his own 
individuality. (18) While in that state, Dhruva beheld an excellent aerial car descending frony 
the heavens. Like a rising full moon, it shed a bright lustre all round as well as above and 
below. (19) He further saw therein two foremost divinities, swarthy of hue, possessed of four 
arms and-eyes resembling:a pair of red lotuses, clad in a beautiful attire and adorned with 
crowns, pearl necklaces, armlets and charming ear-rings. They were still in the prime of 
youth and stood leaning against their maces. (20) Concluding them to be attendants of Lord 
Visnu (of excellent renown), he sprang onhis feet, and forgetting in the flurry (of the moment) 
the prescribed course (of worship), (simply) bowed to them with joined palms, uttering the 
names of the Lord (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) and thinking them to be His foremost 
attendants. (21) Sunanda and Nanda, the two esteemed attendants of Lord Visnu (who has 
a lotus sprung from His navel), approached Dhruva—whose mind was set on Sri Krsna's 
feet, and who stood with joined palms, his head bent low in humility—and smilingly spoke 


(as follows). (22) 
MW WM Us THs A area Asafed: aia: agate  wvarcandhucd 1231 | 
qakaestigaar waa aso: iuetae aad Ad Al wracdeiexi 
Gea fame fd aa aqqaissm faaed uo! 
amfags  ddaicarnueat aeelar: ukara claret 
amie «oa fagieteas aféfai onits saat aed afget: ae aa i2ci 
UdgnAsyaadAsete ater | SaeNTAAAeN SE aAeta 1291 
Sunanda and Nanda said: O king; God bless you, listen attentively to our words—-you, 
who succeeded in propitiating the Lord through (your) penance while yet a child of five ! (23) 
We two are attendants of the selfsame Lord, the Wielder of ths famous Sarnga bow and the 
Sustainer of the whole world, and have called here to take you to the Lord's abode. (24) You 
have secured (an abode in) the realm of Lord Visnu, which is exceedingly difficult to attain 
to, and which even the seers (the sages presiding over the seven stars known by the name 


of the Great Bear) are unable to reach and only look up to from below. (Come with us and) 
take up your abode there. Planets, lunar mansions and other stars, including the sun and 











ae 7 
ee ee 


348 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 12 


Br Rr Br Be Ke Be Be Be Be Be BeBe Ae He He He Br Hr Hr Be Gr Be Br Be Br Be Ge Be Hr Hr Fr 


AAA AAAAEEAET eR REAR EAA EAA A EEL ELLIE 


ing i ir right. (25) Take up your residence in 
the moon, revolve round that realm, placing It on their right (2 
that supreme Abode of Lord Visnu, which is worthy of adoration fo: all the worlds and has 
never been attained to by your forbears or even others, dear Dhruva ! (26) Be pleased to 
mount, O long-lived one ! this excellent aerial car, despatched (for you) by the Lord, the 


foremost among those enjoying the highest renown. (27) 


pace: 3 opdeget = FA SOTA SIAAIAATSAT 1 2S | 
“ian fsa udaatiad digas deleted fausa fener ie! 
aaeue: «UN HTT Fea We cea sete TEL I 201 
del equal AgaguTTaea: | WAAL: TY: Ud: HAAGEA: 13k 
Maitreya resumed : On hearing the above words of the two chief servants of Lord 
Visnu—words, which dropped nectar (as it were), Dhruva, a beloved devotee of the Lord 
(who took wide strides in order to rob Bali of his sovereignty of the three worlds) performed 
his ablutions, finished his daily routine (of devotions) and adorned his person and, having 
bowed low to the sages (residing in that hermitage), he drew forth their benediction. (28) 
Having worshipped and gone round (from left to right) that excellent aerial car and made 
obeisance to the two divine attendants, and endowed with a (divine) form shining like gold, 
he felt inclined to mount it. (29) In the meantime Dhruva (the son of Uttanapada) saw Death 
arrived (there) and, having set his foot on the latter's head, stepped into the wonderful 
car.(30) At the moment kettledrums as well as drums and tabors etc., sounded (of their own 
accord), the chief among the Gandharvas (celestial songsters) loudly sang and showers of 
flowers rained (on Dhruva). (31) 


@ a Melnaniea ail saat ga: | sraenet fat dat area fafasaq 132 
st aafad qa aaa qietiasiamraddd gl ama wWesd 1331 
WA ca selahes: uf anit: gt: | sanldaront east Hae: HAR Wer 13x 
Reet aaa dishwater ue gqenfaftent: carer 13 | 
a USM Gea dddl clara wq ffs wi 
TAA «USE sshd MT aha | Ashram 136! 
Viet: AA: Wel: WAYS: | Araeareqaenaa aaa: 1319 | 


ties he was about to soar for the divine realm, Dhruva recalled his mother Suniti, and said 

. ase t shall | have to proceed to the inaccessible heaven, leaving my poor mother 

aS ih 17 (32) Having read his mind as depicted above, the two foremost divinities showed 

ste ining lady going ahead (of Dhruva) in another aerial car. (33) Greeted at every stage 

one a eee et pers ieee Mees applause from their aerial cars, he saw 
after another. (34) Passing beyond the three worlds (th h 

the intermediate region and the celestial world) as coca 

well as beyond (the region of) th 

seers by the route of the gods, Dhruva, who had i : aan 
ods, DI ’ attained the eternal state, e II 

aap te prepare Boa yOu, lying er further. (35) That realm of Lord Visnu Aeiuae At 
7 ; Nay, even the three worlds (referred to above) mere | 

a a el 

a They we Be lacking compassion for (other) living beings have oe eae hee 

alone reacn it who ceaselessly perform benevolent deeds. (36) They who are cal 1 and 

collected and look upon others with the same eye, nay, who are pure (of body and maine) ae 


pis. 12] BOOK FOUR 349 


ge Be Br BEBE BEBE BEBEBESERE SE BEBE SESE BEB BeBe Re Me BEM BeBe Ht KEKE EERE RE ee RCE Re eRe Re RE RE KER RR Re Re He Ree Re Be BRERA RE REAR RRR LER BER BEBE RE BRERA 





complaisant to all living beings and who look upon the devotees of the immortal Lord as their 
only kinsmen easily ascend to that Abode of the immortal Lord. (37) 


sare: «Gal Ya: PETE: | arya et Gerforare: 3c! 
Tefemstae <atfrst = aerarfeaL! afer waft eer Nemftra Wat WT: 1381 
afar faster anel wnarafi: | Weta Ader Witch PASMAGTATATL 1X0 | 
In this way Dhruva, son of Uttanapada, who solely depended on Lord Sri Krsna, shone 
as a gem of the purest ray Serene, forming the crown of the three worlds. (38) Fastened to 
this realm, the stellar sphere vigilantly revolves round it, O Vidura (descendant of Kuru), even 
as the oxen (employed in trampling corn) revolve round the postin the middle of a threshing- 
floor with great speed, remaining attached to that post. (39) Witnessing his glory, the 


worshipful sage Narada chanted the following (three) verses in the sacrificial session called 
by the Pracetas, playing upon his (famous) lute. (40) 


ARG Sara 
Toit: ufaeadareasmaa qe at afd 
gregaria deafet Aafinrd sata fe Fa: 1%2I 
aq: uUugaat Weenaehiaa ad aaa aati 
at valegesha wy fa ase: ocatarixe 
a: eraraee fet Te feSr-areavtely aug: | 
weusast «= seid: «9 ee «Ss AaMaTa SS e131 
Narada said : Even Brahmana sages (the expositors of the Vedas), though knowing 
the means, fail to attain the consummation reached as a result of his austere penance 
by the son of Suniti, who was so devoted to her husband. How, then, can rulers of men 
attain to that state ? (41) Achild of five years, he retired to the woods with an aching heart, 
pierced by the shaft-like words of his stepmother, and, doing my bidding, won (the favour 
of) the Lord, who, though unconquered (by others) is overcome by the virtues of His 
devotees. (42) Can anyone who is born of Ksatriya parents on this earth aspire to attain 


on his analogy even in many successive years the exalted state won by Dhruva—a state 
which he attained to even as a child of five to six years in the course of a few days 


by propitiating Lord Visnu ? (43) . 
HAq Sara 


Used wa auplsete Aa AaeleaWasd AA Ad 1sxi 
Ti AIMS Wa BR Vediae Met ahre seremeador is! 
NadaPgal wl guraraa saa AA, | qaaknsireta SATA: SE | 
Teirasat dist sq: sete WON: 1 aat astediegeat AG aa AAA Ive! 
waa: atiadera: wnad fsa ae a qeelnel yaa ad wed Xe 
Uluiarat fadtareat glesat savisuar | erat cada degetischicasta ar 1xet 
Maasai Aequitas: | ASSAATAAISSH Aas sit faeait 140! 
WAAMaA OA RETICAL | Teel CaRTATTEd 142 | 

s um acted gees gaa fendiageario: | 

frais: mtereift arte a fae aot at ST 1421 

ef stRETTaa TEEN URS Hkaret ages erat ay SresMSeAA: 1221 








ee 


350 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13 


Ree Kee Re Ke KKK Be He HR Ae Ke Har 
BeBe Be Pete Be be Be ee te te eee RARER ALLA TA RARE AER LTR SST = 


Maitreya took up the thread again : | have thus told you all that you seer on this 
spot about the life-story of Dhruva of exalted renown, a story valued so much by noble 


souls.(44) It is conducive to wealth, fame and longevity, is (most) sacred and full of great 


ings. Nay, in bestows heavenly bliss and even the eternal state; it is highly 
errnardable otic fit to be heard (even) by gods and wipes out ones ane. ve i Sey 
listening again and again to this story of a favourite devotee of the Ba 2 BS , evo an 
to the Lord is sure to be engendered—Devotion which cuts at the root O (all) ; 7 on ( ) 
Virtues like amiability and so on appear in (the heart of) the man who eee O #8 Ss sb 
nay, it is a fountain of greatness for those who seek it, a mine of spiritual g se or F ose 
aspiring for itand a source of honour to the high-minded. (47) With a concentrate mn one 
should recite this glorious story of king Dhruva of sacred renown (both) morning an evening 
before a congregation of the Brahmanas. (48) Devoted to the sacred feet of Lord Hari, he 
who recites it before an audience of pious souls on a full-moon day, the last day of a dark 
fortnight (when the sun and the moon ‘dwell together’), the twelfth day of either fortnight, the 
day on which the moon passes through the asterism known by the name of Sravana, a lunar 
day which commences after sunrise on a particular day and ends before the next sunrise, 
a Vyatipata (a particular astronomical Yoga when the sun and the moon are in the opposite 
Ayana and have the same declination, the sum of their longitudes being 180°), a Samkranti 
(the day on which the sun passes from one sign of the zodiac to another) or any sunday (or 
the seventh lunar day of either fortnight, which is particularly sacred to the sun-god), seeking 
no return for his service (either here or hereafter) and remaining satisfied with himself by 
himself, thereby attains perfection. (49-50) The gods shower their grace on that tender- 
_ hearted benefactor of the afflicted, who imparts to one who has no knowledge of Truth this 
wisdom, which is like nectar on the path leading to God-Realization. (51) | have narrated to 
you, O foremost scion of Kuru, this narrative of king Dhruva whose pious doings are widely 
known and who, when he was a mere child, left his playthings as well as the roof of his mother 
and resorted for protection to Lord Visnu. (52) 


Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled "The Narrative of Dhruva" 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


IIS SYetauey 


BA WANSR SATA: 


Discourse XIll 
Dhruva's posterity and the narrative of king Anga 
Yd Saq 
Pera tenfauiuattta = gare aepvouaiereory | 
é sesHrat — wraaetent 7§ Wet fag: samtie | 
Sita continued : Vidura's devotion to the Lord (who is beyond sense-perception) was 


intensified when he heard (the story) of Dhruva's ascent to the Abod i 
: SPE € of Lord Visnu as told 
by the sage Maitreya (son of Kusaru); and he proceeded to ask the sage further questions 


(as below). (1) 
lage Sarg 
@ ad Sadat am PRM GAC SAAT AM: SA AT MAMTA 1 2 | 


pis. 13] BOOK FOUR 351 


Re BeBe Re Be RCRA Re Ge Be He He Behr 
gee Be ACRRE RRR BRR TAR RRR AR RRR RRR REAR RRA AREAL A ARIA 


aa BLMINGiL Te = eae aa sien: fara: ufteatfated: 1 3 | 
eerdatics: Geeta aE: | eae oaRewat anata: fine 1X | 
at cation wa aftiet wacnen: ae asd Fe, Inara | & | 


Vidura said : Who were these Pracetas and whose offspring were they, O Maitreya 
of sacred vow? In whose line were they known (to have been born) and where did they have 
their sacrificial Session? (2) | account Narada as a great devotee of the Lord and as one who 
has directly perceived the Lord. It is he who taught (in his magnum opus, the Pafcaratra 
Agama) the Yoga of active devotion in the form of a (detailed) procedure of worshipping Sri 
Hari. (3) It is said that, full of devotion, Narada extolled the Lord, who is the Deity presiding 
over sacrifices, while He was being worshipped (through a sacrificial performance) by the 
Pracetas (who were devotees of the Lord and) addicted to their own religious duty. (4) Be 
pleased, O holy sage, to reproduce in full the stories of the Lord, which were narrated on that 
occasion by the celestial sage (Narada), keen as | am to hear them. (5) 





WAY sara 
qa dicho: Ua: frat sft ami adda Ameer fag: 1 & | 
a sare fag: ane: iat ate faacarad otnaraht 1 © | 
sar «ste 6fratet sereitafane stadtendeneanrrenerdd lol 


BATA TAA TM Hae ATTA: \SRUHAEMA  AIAISST «= deat |e 
Were errors aerate: | wfatdt: Ut Alea Serdar: 120 | 
Wal d Weyad Hoda: waft: iaat yold amaddlard WA: Wawel 
Maitreya said : When his father retired to the woods, Utkala, Dhruva's (eldest) son, felt 
no inclination to accept the imperial fortune and the imperial throne of his father. (6) 
Cogenitally possessed of a tranquil mind, free from attachment and viewing everything with 
an equal eye, he saw his own self projected throughout the universe and the universe as 
existing in his own self. (7) The impurities (still) lurking in his mind in the form (of impressions) 
of (evil) actions (done in the past) having been burnt by the fire of uninterrupted (practice) 
of Yoga (meditation), he looked upon his (individual) soul as no other than the tranquil 
Brahma (Infinite)—wherein all differences are set at rest forever, and which is one's real 
Self—and hence identical with the joy of consciousness, all-blissful and extending every- 
where, and no longer perceived anything apart from his own self. (8-9) Possessing the 
exterior of a stupid, blind, deaf, dumb or mad man, but unlike any of these in mind, he was 
seen on the road by the ignorant like a fire that has ceased to emit flames. (10) Thinking him 
to be dull and insane, the elders of the (royal) house as well as the ministers made Vatsara, 
his younger brother and son of Bhrami (Utkala's stepmother), the ruler of the globe. (11) 


adidas walga sere! pat farmed ET TY SET 182 
ueroier we oat ater a & Syed: | eared Mat MI THT: 1831 
saat fafreat age sft argue: aye: at genoa AacdswaaTas 1 2X1 
Smeg road arate eI eT Ai ATER AHL 
We ga fi qa qaadyd an RESIN 

f ASMA SG TTA eit ea TAA RoI 
a SaARAUM | Hat alearea Tabs htisoon PreMTT IT 1k S| 








352 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13 


eek ere eae deer RRA AAA EEA ALLA AL LALA AE ALLAH ARH ESS SEES Se ote 


ame BG: iad araal giz: Rao | Ware WER AA YAOT HTL 18 | 

STIS Tal Gls GA: MSA: NST: | STAT aaa «getter: faritayet: 1201 
Swarvithi (who presided over the milky way), the beloved spouse of Vatsara (a year), 
brought forth six sons, Pusparna, Tigmaketu, Isa, Urja, Vasu and Jaya (by name). (12) 
Pusparnahadtwowives—Prabha (daylight) and Dosa (night). Pratah (morning), Madhyandina — 
(midday) and Sayam (evening) were the sons born of Prabha. (13) (Similarly) Pradosa 
(nightfall or the first part of night) Nigitha (midnight) and Vyusta (the close of night or dawn) 
were the three sons of Dosa. (Of these,) Vyusta begot through Puskarini (his wife) a son 
(named) Sarvateja. (14) The latter got through his wife, Akuti, a son, Caksu (by name), 
who was appointed as Manu (in the sixth Manvantara, called the Caksusa Manvantara 
after him). The Manu's consort, Nadwala, bore (twelve) faultless sons named Puru, Kutsa, 
Trita, Dyumna, Satyavan, Rta, Vrata, Agnistoma, Atiratra, Pradyumna, Sibi and 
Ulmuka. (15-16) Ulmuka begot through his wife, Puskarini, six excellent sons, Anga, 
Sumana, Khyati, Kratu, Angira and Gaya (by name). (17) Sunitha, who was Anga’'s wife, 
gave birth to the evil-minded Vena, fed up with whose wickedness that royal sage (Anga) 
left his capital (for the woods). (18) Angered by him, the sages, whose words were 
(unfailing) like a thunderbolt, pronounced a curse against him, O dear Vidura; and when. 
(as a result of the curse) they died, they then churned his right hand (arm). (19) For, the 
world having been left without a ruler then, the people were harassed by robbers. (Now, 


as a result of the churning), there appeared the very first* ruler of the earth, Prthu, who 
embodied a ray of Lord Narayana. (20) 


fag Sara 

Ta WoMs: ANelsivT AIA: | Ue: BAAYEST se afenar sat 12 

fe digt ad slesa seleusngys i quendet wf yaar eentfae: 1221 

Tata: Te: «= Seifearfal aed clue fadets: asta 1231 

weenie GH Aad Galacsteisad | aera «UT CCT: 12K 
Vidura Said : How did that pious and high-souled monarch, who was a very storehouse 
of virtue and devoted to the Brahmanas, get a wicked son, on account of which he had to 
depart (for the woods), full of grief? (21) And for what offence did the sages, who knew what 
was night, employ a curse against a sovereign who had taken a vow of punishing (the evil- 
ae (22) A ruler of the people, even though guilty, should not be treated with disrespect 
y the people inasmuch as he wields by his own glory the might of Indra and others (the 
protectors of the world). (23) Narrate to me, your trustful devotee, all the doings of Vena (the 


son of Sunitha), O holy Brahmana—you who are the f 
; oremost of those e 
knowledge of the past as well as of the future. (24) bas Hi = 


Sara 
SIgISAAA «=—- UsaISTER Fela! Asrycacred erated Helanfefs: 1241 
ayaa erareda ashes: | gate gaa A a Weta saat: 1261 
Te watergera srgetssenfemttt Ciera arent ead: 1201 
a face tami ten SaAUa | Aa TSA AIM ASST: HAT: 1221 


Maitreya said : The royal Sage Anga (once) performed a great horse-sacrifice, in which 





*Itwas Prthu who for the first time organized the po i i 
pulation of the entire globe and foun i i 
he has been referred to in the above verse as the first ruler of the earth ; a aad 


cae baUOOMGNEE ei 


; AG 
pis. 13 ] BOOK FOUR 353 
i SSG ABBA BB BBO BeBe BRB Be Ae Be fe eB BE BeBe Be BRERA RRR ARI 


the gods did not appear (to take their share of offerings) even when invoked by the sages 
(who were great exponents of the Vedas). (25) Amazed at this, the priests officiating at the 
sacrifice now said to the sacrificer (Emperor Anga), “The gods accept not your oblations, 
poured (into the fi re by us). (26) (The materials of) your offerings, O king, are pure and have 
been procu red with reverence. The Vedic texts (recited in the course of the sacrifice) too are 
inno way lacking In force, since they are uttered by men who are steadfast of vow. (27) Nor 
do we know of the least disrespect shown to the gods in this sacrificial performance, due to 
which the gods, who perceive the doings of all, should not accept their shares. (28) 


HAY Sara 


ATTATET SAT q Tara Weis | ae «sd feenael wa aaLIZ0l 
Maitreya continued : Having the words of the Brahmanas (priests), the sacrificer, 
(Emperor) Anga, felt very sad at heart. With their permission he broke his (vow of) silence 
in order to ask the superintending priests the reason of it. (29) "The gods refuse to come, 
even though invoked nor do they accept the cups of Soma juice (offered to them) in this 
sacrifice. Tell me, O leaders of the (sacrificial) assembly, what offence | have commit- 
ted."(30) 
Yaad HY: 
eae Vad Ae dere feist srpawd fete Ao: 1321 
qa Met VW aA WAH Ge Wise Gam wt ae any 132! 
am wun wera feds: | aegges: manera  sftda: 1231 
TRAM AM REMI SM Had Sa: | sft aae ae Gat wmolea: 13x! 


The leaders of the assembly said : Not the least sin stands committed by you in this 
life, O lord of men! Yet, there is one sin perpetrated in a previous existence, on account of 
which you are issueless here, though possessed of such (rare) virtues. (31) (Therefore) with 
that end in view (in order to ensure that the gods may accept your offerings) endeavour to 
get a worthy son, O king, and God will bless you. Worshipped (by you) with the desire of 
obtaining a son, the Lord (who is the Enjoyer of sacrifices) will vouchsafe a son to you. (32) 
In that case the denizens of heaven will (surely) accept their shares when (they find that) Sri 
Hari, the Deity presiding over sacrifices, Himself is invoked for the sake of a son. (33) Sri Hari 
(as a rule) bestows (on His devotee) whatever boons the devotee seeks (from Him). People 
are rewarded precisely according as the Lord is worshipped (by them). (34) 


Sq clafaa fase Ua: Tada | GerStak fraqy farfufasta fase 1341 
wearer saet taaemera: i fawn wan fence War 13K1 


a fagadt wen Wletetfedtert| Hawa Yel Te: Welaea sareit: 13191 
aM aaa ut wea So waquadi mt sie SNqd HAL QysswM 1321 
a ae wa yea aang: | stemiatiat = AS easteeentte: 1331 
Thus resolved, the Brahmanas (priests) offered Purodasa (a mass of ground rice 
founded into a kind of cake) to Lord Visnu, who resides even In the sacrificial animal as the 


Spirit of sacrifice, in order to secure an offspring to the emperor. (385) From the sacrificial fire 
there rose a (superhuman) being, adorned with a gold necklace and clad in spotless white 


€nd bearing in a cup of gold rice rea 


Of the Brahmanas (priests) the noble-minded king received the boiled rice in the hollow of 








354 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13 


BeBe Re eRe eRe RR Be RR RRR RE RR RE RR RET BER ARB BBE BE HE BEBE BEBE BE RE BEBE BEEBE ME BeBe BENE BEBE Se BE Se Be Me Br We Be Hr Br Ke Sr Br 





his palms and, smelling it, joyfully handed it over to his wife.(37) The issueless queen ate 
that food, which possessed the efficacy of producing a male child, conceived through union 
with her husband and, when the time came, brought forth a son. (38) While yet a (mere) child, 
the boy was ardently attached to his mother's father, Mrtyu (the god of death), who had 
sprung from a portion of Adharma (the spirit presiding over unrighteousness); so he turned 
out to be impious. (89) 
a QMIAAGErA Agana: | SAAT, A, SSAA: 1% 0 | 
Stele lS SOM aaeafacre: isee «= Pea: ORR 1S 
q feast we wi arenfatadda: 1 aa a anfad Heal Vee: Ise 
ymaumaiat wat asm Wea: i meuayd ea a a fecha gum sai 
ad: uae alfdeeriss cargo ad fade: adet aa omfetaden: ixv 
ee see a Aleaeaarea: | uftedl ag Ad al: Baal Yer: sul 
ead at aa aauret vedi fafdea ers aaa Wet: se! 
Taking up his bow and playing the role of a hunter dwelling in the woods, the wicked fellow 
would kill poor (innocent) deer; and people would cry out (whenever they saw him): "Here 
is Vena (a tyrant)!" (40) Nay, that most cruel and hard-hearted boy would violently strangle, 
as so many beasts, children of his own age sporting in the playground. (41) Finding his son 
(so) wicked, the emperor (Anga) tried to correct him by various (forms of ) punishment; but 
when he was unable to tame him, he felt sore depreesed in spirits. (42) (He said to himself:) 
“Householders who are issueless have surely propitiated the Deity (in their previous birth) 
inasmuch as they are saved the agony caused by (the presence of) an undesirable son, 
which is indeed hard to bear. (43) What wise man would make much of that which, though 
bearing the name ofa son, binds one's soul with the fetter of infatuation, is a source of infamy 
to the parents and involves them in great sin, nay; which arouses a feeling of antagonism 
in all, causes infinite worry and makes the home a hotbed of affliction?(44-45) | account 
a bad son as preferable to a worthy son, who is a source of (many)-sorrows (inasmuch as 


he strengthens one's attachment to the home). For the former turns a home into a hell so that 
a man gets (easily) disgusted with it." (46) 


wT @ iden qt yefaeita sera needtea 
aoahsisetan Wied Wl aad  ysaAMivel 
fama:sfetear tft: «= a fectratergqeartonrea: | 
fafegreaiaiienar am faye gee mali: ixcl 
aerad: deel waded: sag a iT 
aa Wade Meat Ade una wadfagaixes 
| ad ASMA AEG TRACE ech ages FaeaSEMA: 122 
Pondering thus and disgusted at heart with his home, which was full of great prosperity, 
the emperor, who could not get a wink of sleep, got up (from his bed) at dead of night and, 
unobserved by (other) men, departed (for the woods), leaving the queen (the mother of 
Vena) fast asleep. (47) The people as well as the high priest (of the royal house), ministers 
_ and relations of the king and others were overwhelmed with excessive grief when they came 
to know that their lord had departed in disgust, and searched for him all over the globe, even 


as Yogis not knowing the secret of Yoga look (outside for the Supreme Person concealed 
within the heart. (48) Finding no trace of the emperor (however) and balked in their attempt, 


Dis. 14] BOOK FOUR 355 


8e Br Wwe Nr 
rar Be Br Be Be Be Be Hr SOS SS BR RR RB he Be Be Bi hr BeBe Bh Be Be tte rte te tet tet tr tee te tree te etre tre tte rte fe tte te tr tc te te DBAS 





they returned to the city and bowin 


9g to the sages as | 
their eyes, O Vidura (scion of Pur g sembled (there), told them with tears in 


u), about the disappearance of their master. (49) 


Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book Four of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SSNS ies 


AY ACsaM Sea: 


Discourse XIV 
The story of king Vena 
HAT SaTT 

aed WAat lari amet: tata & qo agara: UREA! g 

a AIT Gite were: ipa «Saoeafier oft ya: 1 2 | 

cal SITS IC qe | ieee: da: aaa saraqa: 1 3 | 

a saecqTem  sagissfayfats: | set ves wer: asifad: a: 1X | 

Wa vara shel Pige ga fea: ivde_ were amafa dedi 4 | 

aq aset A adel a adel fen: wfadisfa marae Aarau ada: € | 
Maitreya continued : The aforesaid sages, Bhrgu and others, solicitous as they were 
for the welfare of the people, saw that in the absence of a protector (in the form of a ruler) 
men were being reduced to the level of beasts. (1) Sending for queen Sunitha, the mother 
of Vena, O valiant Vidura, the sages (who were all expounders of the Vedas) crowned 
Vena as the sovereign of the globe, even though he was not approved of by the 
ministers.(2) Hearing that Vena, who ruled with an iron hand, had ascended the throne, 
thieves and dacoits soon hid themselves like rats afraid of a snake. (3) Arrogant and self- 
conceited as he was by nature, he was puffed up with pride now that he had attained to 
the royal state and acquired the power and affluence of the eight protectors of the world, 
and despised (even) holy men. (4) Thus blinded with the intoxication of power and proud 
like an elephant not governed by a goad, he mounted a chariot and touring (all over his vast 
dominion) and shaking heaven and earth as it were, banned all religious performances, 


proclaiming by beat of drumas follows; "You shall never perform sacrifices nor bestow gifts 
nor pour oblations into the sacred fire under any circumstance, O members of the twice- 


born classes !" (5-6) 

aren faatean | faqs Olmert Puasa: SI Aa: | 9 | 
STU lien wt ee aq sa Aaa: 1 oI 
aT al TAIAGU: | AMSAT Ra AE HA Ciceaed Sear | S| 
aTehta ag:aye: GeMMeAAyd | a: Tea de: tanimstasta: 120] 
Prataa: srorrares: wr freee SF MoM: | TeaTha AeA ATT eT TS STR 1 RR A 
dfggharaage aaisenty: pall JO: | Aiea Ale At Aet A Aeterreisac 182 
Sr Sean was wana «= Aa YSHTa: | 





356 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14 


eRe Re Be Re Be Ree Re Br Re BERR RRR RRR RERRERE BE RE BE RE BEB BEB BEBE BH BBE HH BEAT Br Br Wr Ge Be Ke Sr He Re He We Br Sr Br Hr Se Br Br Se Ke We Se Ke Ke Kee Be Be Be w, 


SUASAIAS St Aaa ST ATA: 123 1 


Observing the conduct of Vena, who had taken to evil ways, and pondering the calamity 
of the people, the sages assembled ata sacrificial session and compassionately said : (7) 
"Oh | a terrible calamity has befallen the people from both sides, viz., from the thieves (on 
the one hand) and the ruler (on the other), even as ants etc., inhabiting a piece of wood 
lighted at both ends find themselves in great peril. (8) For fear of anarchy this undeserving 
fellow was installed on the throne; but he himself is proving a source of terror. How can 
embodied beings live in safety now ? (9) Just as nourishing a snake with milk is fraught with 
danger to the very man who nourishes it, Vena, who was born of Sunitha and wicked by his 
very nature, seeks to destroy the people themselves now that he has been appointed their 
ruler. Nevertheless let us (try to) bring him round through persuasion, So that his sin may not 
touch us. (10-11) For Vena, who was addicted to evil ways, was made king by us even though 
we were aware of his sins. If, however, the unrighteous fellow does not accept our advice 
even when kindly addressed, we shall burn him with our spiritual fire, burnt as he already is 
by popular reproach. "Thus resolved, the sages approached Vena, concealing their anger, 
and, after soothing him with kind words, spoke to him (as follows). (12-1 3) 


IY HW: 
quad falta fagmam wW:1 ana:siaeatdat aa aa faaeariext 
ad staid: Yat algt:cnlaa fess: | ota faster fanaa | 84 | 
aoa om fang semi aaean:iafe faqs yufatvataattefa ic! 
Wasaga: WT «FG: 1 ta ae ates elas Sa a Aled 1201 
Ta UW R da Wa ates: ised Wa aul aadutsmhad: 1ecl 
ve Tat AAMT War ya: | ukqerfa fase fasar fasrereaaiees 
aes fea smaritatat! oer: waret Gas atha afore: Rot 
aq ; t > s . 7 ° ° a‘ I 
agidtedst = 8wa ot Us = wmeMrqiendfe 1221 
aa asiesa «= fesnfafafdcraarta «6 Wu: «© eR: 
Ree: Ue sieht aed qaed ara dix Sea 1z2 
The sages said : Listen, O chief of kings, to that which we urge for your consideration, 
and which, dear child, is calculated to prolong your life and enhance your fortune, strength 
and glory. (14) Duty performed with mind, speech, body and intellect bestows on men (after 
death an abode in) worlds which are free from sorrow, nay,-even the eternal state on those 
who are free from attachment. (15) Let not that duty, which consists in your case in ensuring 
happiness and security to the people, be abandoned by you, O valiant monarch ! For, when 
this duty is neglected, a king (surely) falls from his royal splendour. (16) A monarch, O king, 
who protects the people against (the tyranny of) wicked ministers, thieves and so on—and 
takes revenue from them as enjoined by the scriptures enjoys happiness here as well as 
hereafter. (17) The Lord, who is the Protector of (all) living beings and the soul of the 
universe, O noble king, is immensely pleased with the monarch who abides by His laws and 
in whose dominion and capital the very same Lord, who is also the Deity presiding over 
Sacrifices, Is worshipped by the people through (devotion to) their duty, following the (rules 


of) their (own) Varna (grade in society) and Agsrama (stage in li 
: ge in life). (18-19) What remains 
unattainable when that Lord, whois the Sovereign (even) of the Pines the eee (Brahma 





5. 14 
Dis. 14] BOOK FouR 357 


Peer ptttetiteee are rs 
geet SRR SRA BR A BBB BeBe Bret te BeBe Bete AE Re De Be RR RRR AER 


and oe Se aeee ? It is to Him that (all) the worlds along with their guardian deities 
devoutly offer t ie tribute. (20) It behoves you, O king, to win the affection of your nationals, 
who for your welfare worship through (the performance of) various sacrifices Him who is the 
Controller of the worlds as well as of the divinities (ruling over them) and even so of sacrificial 
performances (through which one attains to the position of those divinities), nay, who is the 
one subject of the three Vedas (Rgveda, Samaveda and Yajurveda), who takes the form of 
material substances (clarified butter €tc., poured into the sacred fire in the course of a 
sacrifice) and to whom all austere penance is directed. (21) Duly worshipped and thoroughly 
propitiated by means of Sacrifices performed in your dominion by the Brahmanas, the gods, 
who are SO many rays of Lord Sri Hari (Himself), shall confer (on you) the desired boon. 
(Therefore) It does not behove you, O valiant monarch, to show disrespect to the gods (by 
banning the performance of sacrifices and other religious rites). (22) 


aT Say 
oie St qt at seh ecita: 1a gfe uf fear at aftqoread 1231 
Teast = yet | aafauriierc aaqfcia 2 oushie oth US a1ext 
cel aagEst AH aa at wfwilesti aes ae amt aelffar ie 
faucet fit gst arint va: iasiet eae: aia: ferfarfaconafa: 1261 
UW art a fagen: seat acnoal: 1% waa qua: adda au: 1201 
carat Haff aed TA: | ais a Nel Ald ATS: HISAYSH TA 1221 
Vena said: You are foolish indeed, mistaking as you do unrighteousness for righteous- 
ness. For, ignoring the very lord who maintains you, you wait upon a paramour. Oh, what 
a pity ! (23) The fools who disregard God in the form of a king can never attain happiness 
either in this world or in the next.(24) Who is that Yajnapurusa (the deity presiding over 
sacrifices) for whom you cherish such (intense) devotion as corrupt women, to whom love 
for their husband is unknown, have for their paramour ? (25) Visnu, Brahma (the creator), 
Lord Siva (who has His abode on Mount Kailasa). Indra (the lord of paradise), Vayu (the 
wind-god), Yama (the god of punishment), Ravi (the sun-god), Parjanya (the god of rain), 
Kubera (the bestower of riches), Soma (the moon-gog), Ksiti (the goddess presiding over 
the earth), Agni (the god of fire), Varuna (the lord of waters)—these as well as the other gods, 
who are capable of granting boons and pronouncing curses too, abide on the person of a 
monarch: for a sovereign represents all the gods (in his person). (26-27) Therefore, tree from 
jealousy, worship me, O Brahmanas, through religious performances and bear offerings to 
me. For, what person other than me deserves your worship? (28) 
Haq Sara 
sei fade: «9 undtergqeaet | Ta: | agteartedelreat a ash WAFS: 1291 
sft asaeeare fen: afsedaar) sare qa Aa faet Ama: 1301 
auat waa oom: Nefacten: | Sasmremreare Het AeA Fa 13 
aaa | astra «= fasy | fafacrraa: 1321 


al ai uftaeia aqtengdsyat! Wa Seay 8 =8§- AAAS AISA: 1331 

. : when thus supplicated (by the sages), that highly wicked soul, 
situa eee a Soe and who had strayed from the path of virtue, did not accede 
to their prayer, all a tuck having left him (for good). (29) Slighted thus by that conceited 
fool (ine sane himself wise), those Brahmanas got angry with him, O blessed Vidura, 





WL. 


358 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14 


Ser trer See Re RR RRR LALA ELA EAE LEE EEE LLL EE BL LL BBB ERR BB Br 
ARR K 





at their prayer being turned down. (30) "Let him be slain; let this wicked fellow pitiless 
by nature, be killed ! If he survives, he will surely reduce the (whole) world to ashes in 
no time. (31) This immoral man does not deserve the exalted throne of amonarch—he who 
shamelessly reviles Lord Visnu, the supreme lord of sacrifices.(32) Who else than this 
unlucky Vena, the only one of his kind, would denounce Him by winning whose grace the 
fellow attained such affluence and power ?" (33) 
su craft «Saye «Rena: | foragedc CAAA 13% | 
fat: emg wa waeami dia waeama fara ered ut 
Thus resolved to get rid of him, the sages, who now gave free vent to their fury, 
despatched by their very menacing sounds of ‘Hum’ Vena, who had already been killed by 
reproaching the immortal Lord Visnu. (34) The sages having left each for his own hermitage, 
the sorrowing Sunitha (Vena's mother) preserved the (dead) body of her son by means of 
spells and other devices. (35) 


Ud Wat ¢ aaioongd: | ea AeHMsHeatasr: afta? 13e 1 
AVA, «AAR! STITT aA A Mega: 1391 
Wa Wad wa Mad Padfeeri are: ager yarns 3c 
Tse Sa aq aU addoMd dead a fraradr 13! 
SR GaGa AAAs Sia, Sel Sif aelsalela: Ivol 
MIN: AAeH Wei cami Aqdern: | Gad sal Tents Hava set ise 
Wea dat wstte 8 dengqnela | smrediat fe yor daisies Harare: 121 
farigaaqsat faa add: aye aa datdighesl «At: 1x31 
HIAPOISI Sars eMaigdeled: | Gaara «=8=—|- Gl atest: sv 
qq dsaqd de fe aia ate hateagqaend 8 = Proreddisvad iu! 
Ta azar Ae fifteen: | dare SAAT AUT, 1S & | 


eit AeMad AE URS Beda ade yepattd Forcrafiata aqéatiseara: 121 

Having, on one occasion, bathed in the waters of the river Saraswati and offered 
oblations into the sacrificial fires, and squatting on the river bank, those sages held 
discourses about the Lord. (36) They saw at that time evil portents appearing, which 
caused terror to the world, and said (to one another), "No evil may befall the earth on 
accountof thieves and dacoits, masterless as she is." While the sages were thus reflecting, 
a large volume of dust was raised by thieves running in every direction and practising 
spoliation wherever they went. (37-38) They then perceived the mischief wrought by those 
that looted the property of the people and were disposed to kill one another, now that Vena 
(their ruler) was dead. (39) They also came to know that the state had grown weak due to 
anarchy and that thieves and dacoits had gained in strength. Though powerful enough (to 
arrest the mischief), the sages did not stop the people (responsible for looting etc.), 
inasmuch as they were alive to the evil (in the form of violence etc., involved in 
counteracting the mischief). (40) (They, however, said to themselves :) "If a Brahmana, 
who looks upon all with the same eye and is tranquil (by nature), ignores the afflicted, the 
spiritual energy stored even by him (through penance) will run out like water from a broken 
jar. (41) The line of the royal sage Anga (Vena's father) too must not get extinct. For in this 
race have appeared monarchs (solely depending on Lord KeSava (Visnu) and possessed 


_ of unfailing prowess.” (42) Having thus resolved, the sages churned with great velocity the 


Dis. 15 ] BOOK FOUR ~~ 359 


Br Be BeBe BeBe BL He He He BER He He He Be He He Hee He Be He Be KH He Ke Ge Ke Kee KEK Ke Ke KAR AEH A RE RE REBECA RE BREE RE RE RERE PERE RE RE BEBE BEBE BRE BELA BE BEBE 
a a enc Re 


thigh of the deceased emperor, wherefrom arose a dwarfish man, dark as a crow, with 
exceptionally short limbs and particularly short arms and legs, large jaws, a flat nose, 
blood-shot eyes and red hair. (43-44) To him, who was bent low and meek too, and who 
said, “What shall | do ?" the Brahmanas said, "Sit down !" That is why, dear child, he came 
to be known by the name of Nisada. (45) Since he took upon himself the terrible sins of 
Vena even while being born, his progeny, the Naisadas, partook of his nature and took up 
their abode on mountains and in woods. (46) 


Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled "The Appearance of Nisada",forming part of the 
Narrative of Prthu, in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


St PTET TA 
DIESELS OD 


SID UBseRn sears: 


Discourse XV 
Descent and coronation of king Prthu 
WAT Jara 
ao Te ee ada: Dees neamanat fag aad! 2 | 
a get fat sage sae: isa: ames fafaat wae! 2 | 


Maitreya continued : Then again the (powerful) sages treated with rubbing the arms of 
that (lifeless) king, who had no issue, and out of the electrifying friction there sprang a couple 
(a male and a female person in perfect harmony of sex relation). (1) They farseeing sages, 
who were enlightened with Vedic knowledge and were masters of divine doctrines, beheld 
the couple born and comprehended that the two were part manifestations of the Supreme 
Person divine, who is omnipotent and omniscient and possesses all prosperity and glory. 
They became exceedingly happy to see the conjugate Persons and said : (2) 


BIT Hd: 
we} «faensitad: Aer qarficit pd Bane 
SAT NAAN Walt Ga Nafta aa: ge AER Afaea yystan: 1 x 1 
si ow wadt at Boyes stein = aMlel 8 8yatataeerit | & | 
aati wat cenfqearisa a daa fe sitasiasqcafets ¢ 1 


The Sages said : "This male person Is a part manifestation of that aspect of the all- 
pervading, all-knowing and all-powerful Lord divine, which protects the world. And this 
female person is a ray of the Goddess of Beauty, Bliss and Prosperity and hence never gets 
disunited from the Supreme Person. (3) Of this couple, the male person will be the first of 
kings on earth, a mighty king to glorify the name and fame of every kingin future, whose name 
will be Prthu as the splendour of his name will shine far and wide. (4) This other is a shining 
queen: her name is Arci, an embodied process of radiation; her finely set teeth are an 
indication of her firmly formed faithful character; her ornaments are emblems of her golden 
and gem-like virtues; her feelings and thoughts are all ennobling as hers is an ascending 
spirit. It seems as if she would outshine her husband. (5) Thus an inalienable power and part 
of the Supreme Lord divine called itself into being in space and time on earth to save the 
inhabitants, the human beings, from sins and sufferings. This other, the queen devoted to 
him, the goddess of inexhaustible wealth and prosperity, also came into the world as 


360 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15 


BeBe Re Re Be Re Br BeBe Re Re Be Re Be RRR RRR RR RRR REAR REE REE RE BRE BEBE EGER REBEL BEBE BEBE BE BEEBE BEBE BEBE HBF Be Be Be Sr Be Be He Be Kr Ke Kr Be Hr Hy dy 





inseparable from Him." (6) Ay sar 


gstaka wa fam wedsan 3g: | qaqa: Gate: al Jara: ers: 1 0 | 
Ween rAegyat fala a ad sunmadatefagut: om: 1 ¢ | 
Sa Weleda: alge Seat: bare afarot wet ger fae Terya: 1 e | 
Tatas aad a wR: TeMiaeited UHH: A TABATA 1e01 
qenfite set stelisterenfefe: 1 anfetatrenraren siete: Aelcit SAT: 188 | 
aheaat fica arm ma: WT AT: lat: fart: els TAISTgeATEAT 18 
Gistafarnt AER: Para: aedega: | UeatfetaTergaM farsisfaarar: 1231 
aa Wek wa BH dk auvemiam: waleceanday ae iext 
agg deena a: alhiwdt amiga: frteaas aus Wat AA: 124 
wen wad oad ad BRaMAiahk: Geld ah aAaceseed ra 1261 
SASH «SH: RISA ae | GIST TTT LAL V1 
Sera a gal <wearenfe Y: Wed aaa et: Geraforaer kel 
Tel Git aera a Get: | was: AA: WAR: WATS 1k< I 
fala: Udal Fel <wieletder: | aqdisa Amat ael aA Rayon io! 
Wass YYsa: saa agian ae TeMfaarstcitl 128 | 


Maitreya went on : The Brahmanas extolled Prthu, while the demigods known as 
Gandharvas were singing songs, the chief of them; the Siddhas were releasing showers of 
(Elysian) flowers, the heavenly damsels were dancing (all for joy at the advent of Prthu). (7) 
The sounds of conchs, trumpets, timbrels and drums spread vibrating in Heaven, as all 
celestial sages and orders of divine Fathers came down to the place (to pay their respects 
to the king where he stood). (8) Brahma, the adorable lord of the world, himself came at the 
head of the greatest of the gods, noticed some sign of the divine wielder of the mighty mace 
in the right hand of Prthu and lotus-marks on the soles of his feet and recognized him to be 
a part personality of Sri Hari (the supreme Lord). He also noticed that Prthu bore on his palm 
the sacred sign of a disc unbroken by an alien line, indicating an unconquerable sphere of 
power, and knew him to be a ray of the Lord of lords. (9-10) The Brahmana priests, who had 
their religious culture founded on the rites and ceremonies dealt within the Vedas, undertook 
to perform the holy ceremony of Prthu's installation. People brought from all sides 
(multifarious) things necessary for the coronation. (11) (Then) came with presents and 
offerings the deities presiding over rivers, seas and mountains, the sky and the earth, as well 
as serpents, birds, stags and cows. (12) When he was bathed with holy waters for installation 
as a King of kings, arrayed in royal raiments and richly adorned with bright ornaments and 
stood with Arci, his queen-consort, equally adorned, he shone like a rival of fire itself. (13) 
The god of wealth, O valiant Vidura, gave him a splendid throne of goldasa present. Varuna 
(the divinity of the seas) brought to him (the brilliant present of) a (wonderful) umbrella 
dripping with water and radiating beams like the moon. (14) The god of the winds gave him 
two fans made of the tuft of hair (on the tail of wild cows). The god of virtue came with the 
present of a garland’of flowers, the very embodiment of celebrity. Indra (the king of heaven) 

came to present him with an excellent crown and the god of mortality and moral control 
honoured him with a sceptre by which to control all. (15) Brahma (the lord of creation) brought 





Dis. 15 ] 
sqesnetnnneannoenntersnuennerssnnnentesertoe cnsseanaunneoannnnmnneannneneeemtoey nae Seaedes sanieienacwassacesesieeeeeeee 


for him an armour representing Veda (all-comprehensive knowledge) and the goddess of 
learning, a necklace of unique make. Sri Hari (the Supreme Lord divine) gave him His divine 
Disc bearing the name of SudarSana; and His Consort, the goddess of wealth, beauty and 
bliss, favoured him with never failing prosperity. (16) The great god whose function is to 
destroy and absorb the world at the end honoured him with a broad sword bearing ten brilliant 
marks of the moon and his consort, Durga, with a shield bearing one hundred marks of the 
moon. The moon, the deity presiding over the lunar sphere, brought him immortal horses 
made of the substance of nectar. An exceedingly beautiful chariot was given him by Twasta 
(a radiant agent of the sun-god). (17) The god of fire gave him a bow made of the horns of 
the goat and the cow and the sun-god gave him arrows shining like his rays. The goddess 
of the earth brought for him a pair of wooden sandals possessing the mysterious power of 
carrying him, as soon as he placed his feet upon them, wherever he should want to go. 
The goddess of the celestial regions gave him the privilege of getting celestial flowers 
everyday.(18) The sky-ranging spirits imparted to him the arts of acting and dancing, music, 
vocal and instrumental, and the occult way of disappearance. The sages and seers brought 
for him blessings that were sure to come true; and the deity of the ocean brought for him a 
conch that was his own progeny. (19) Seas, mountains and rivers offered to allow passages 
for his chariot. Then a herald, a bard and a panegyrist started singing songs of praise to the 
mighty monarch. (20) When Prthu, the powerful king, the offspring of Vena, came to know 
that they had come to praise him, he smiled and made these utterances with a volce as deep 
as the thunder of clouds. (21) 


AeA 
WM: Ya F Aa aa afeemthserasea A ead! 
farsa A wa wa dead a aeayay facat Fr a: 1221 
AAMT ASAI A AC ahaa RAAT AAT: 


aandeeraondae «= ad PT ASST: 1231 
Wega ada: wm: Wah: eMAeaadsadtst | 
jsemufasiata  faseet ware aafri da iexi 
SMal Bie: Se aerate fase: | gra: cetera: uted ar femfear 1241 
aa wiafen we aaenta adeih: | ad: aaa moet ated 126 1 
sft steeMad ASR UTRASa Gears adeHA Yad TaAeAMSEATA: 1241 
Prthu said : O you noble minstrel, herald and singer of praises ! praises may be due to 
me when my virtues (performances) will be known among men. Where is the ground at 
presentfor praises being addressed tome? Itis not desirable that your eulogies should prove 
untrue in my case. (22) Therefore, at some future date, when we attain distinctions worthy 
of being heard and spoken of, you, who are masters of fine expressions, may praise us to 
your heart's fill. Respectable persons do not let minstrels extol ordinary men (like me) of the 
recent times, it being open to them to glorify the greatness of God; whose shining attributes 
no darkness can touch. (23) (If you urge that itis possible for me to prove the existence of 
Such and such virtues in my conduct and therefore you should extol me for the same. I do 
Not fall in with your view.) Who would have himself extolled by bards for the qualities which 
are non-existent in him, even though he may be able to manifest remarkable virtues in 
himself ? Such and such qualities, it may be urged, are likely to fall to his lot. Butto get oneself 
praised thus on mere possibilities is to be an object of peoples ridicule. A fool, however, will 
not understand this banter. (24) Noble-minded persons shrink from their own praise even 


[564] B. M. 14— 





362 - SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16 


QR RR RRR RRA RRA AAA AA AR A RH HL HH Be Br Be Be Ke Br Be Ke Br Br Be Br Hr Hr Gr Hr Ge Ke He Hr Be He Hr Hr Hr Hr Gr Or Hr Hr oy gy, 


eee ae ee EEE 


when they are praised for qualities confirmed by conduct and known to all, just as those who 
are truly modest and supremely generous do not appreciate sincere praise for any 
reproachful show of valour. (25) As for ourselves, O (noble) bard, we are yet unknown in the 
world. Hence we find no reason to get ourselves celebrated by songs of praise for greatest 
performances. Such self-proclamation is only worthy of a child. (26) 


Thus ends the fifteenth discourse, forming part of the Narrative of king Prthu, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


IOI IS 


3TT WlSaseaa: 


Discourse XVI 
Glorification of king Prthu by the bards 
WAT Sara 
sa samt yale maar yfretfem: | qadsentaaermydaaar 121 
Maitreya continued : The minstrels were delighted at heart to hear the sweet words of 


the king, which they enjoyed as ambrosia. Urged by the sages, however, they began to 
| glorify him (in the following words) as soon as he ceased to speak :—(1) 


5 ad a afeaqaudt at eaaaisaaa Areal 
wee a deaf a arrendiamit  avwaffa: 1 21 
BAAMERHaAa: qatar: Horad wa HUTA: | 
aamet uta: salem: serena atin ag fade. 3 
We are not able to describe Your greatness as You are the foremost among the gods 
and have (condescended to) come to the world through exercise of a mysterious power Of 
Yours, known as Maya. (Itis a fact that) You have arisen from the arms of king Vena, yet Your 
powers and performances are such that the minds of even (the recognized) masters of 
speech get perplexed (in trying to describe them). (2) You are a part manifestation of the 
supreme Divinity known as Sri Hari, which name has here been changed to Prthu, the 
accounts of whose glorious deeds are worth hearing; we love to enjoy the same, as they are 


as good as nectar and want to spread the fame of Your magnificent deeds, as we realize 
them in our hearts according to the instructions of the sages. (3) 


TI styat sel wre edsqadaqi ae a enfant gen aeahtahern| ¥ | 
wW 4 Maem faucet a: lane are aarant cleatenarfet & | 
aq ale Smet are ore fags aa: weg yay yao aelafey: | 6 | 
feria aq SaoeTETAT | aTAT aot: eaaTatat feafrqhraL | © | 
easaterat eat AREAATER: | HePINOT: Ts We wererereasa | o | 
sree | te ATTA AT | BITAw a fageferrareun | ¢ | 
STeaaee Prcanrat Tae sora ferd: | 
watt 8 gt  Aqaret 1201 


"He is the best among those who pursue the paths of righteousness, and will persuade 





Dis. 16 ] BOOK FOUR 


Spe Be RRR RR Re BR RRR RRR RR Re RR hr i tr ie 


2 RR RR Re RR RRR Rr Re RRR Re RRR RRR EEE E EE 


the people to tread those paths. He is the preserver of the various systems of moral and 
religious life, the ruler who punishes the antagonists that seek to violate them. (4) Though 
one, He bears In His own person the bodies of the guardians of the celestial and terrestrial 
spheres executing the different functions of beneficence—of protection, promotion of peace 
and happiness and furtherance of the general well-being of both heaven and earth, 
according to the need, from time to time. (5) He replenishes His royal treasury by collection 
of revenue when there is time for it and again expends it by free distribution at times of 
emergency, in the same way as the sun, shining brighter, absorbs water and storing it as 
vapour for a large part of the year, releases it (abundantly as showers in the rainy season). 
He is equally good to all living beings and powerful as the sun. (6) He is also like the earth 
(in his kindness and goodness). The earth is trampled upon by all beings, yet she kindly 
bestows her benefits on them when they are in distress. She is always compassionate. In 
the same way, king Prthu (the son of Vena) is ever gracious and beneficent to His subjects 
in spite of the offences and wrongs done to Him by them, which He forgives (before they ask 
for His forgiveness). (7) When the god of clouds will not allow them to rain, so that manifold 
sufferings will be caused to living beings, especially human beings, the king will come 
forward and, to save all kinds of life, order the clouds to rain asserting His divine power as 
Indra, as He is God in the form of a human king. (8) (He is not only like the sun, He is like 
the moon too.) He delights the world by His shining face, which is an embodiment of 
ambrosial sweetness—-by His bright glances—full of affection and by His lucid smiles, 
beaming and beautiful. (9) His ways are inscrutable; His deeds are too deep for thought; the 
purposes His mind pursues are too remote for comprehension. His wealth is well protected. 
The points of His magnanimity are innumerable; all qualities and attributes concentrate in 
Him. Prthu is like the divinity of the ocean completely self-contained. (10) 


area dfdee seas fagradi aaritiufad seat aaraferdisac: 128 
sree YAR wa Half aot: isaredia gareaat area afeqr{ 122 
Tesi saa Tena | queer qUed eae fed: 1231 
steamed «Uh |OUR add | Tae | aratat TPT: 12x 1 
Talat AeCHAAAaaea: | AMA WS ARS Teh: | SST 1241 
qeat: Uae Newa gata: 1 ya: Ady Areal atacae: 1%e1 
mau: uresty ues gareta: | seg fagaicer: fest selateary 1291 
Seareaes: 4s URL (its Pra: | HIG ISA USTTURATAL 1221 
"He is beyond the reach not only of His enemy's arms, but also of the latter's thought. He 
iS Overwhelming in His power exercised against His antagonists. He is as if at a great 
distance when He seems to be near. He is invincible in everyway. He is an incandescent 
force risen from friction or the body of Vena as fire from wood. (11) Seeing the inner (secret) 
as well as the outer efforts and actions of men and other beings through spies, He continues 
to be unaffected as an indifferent super-seer as if He were the inner vital spirit that is there 
In every living body. (12) He never punishes him who does not deserve to be punished even 
if he be the son of those who are determined to do harm to His own self; on the other hand, 
He punishes His own son when found guilty, as He is established in the path of truth and 
Justice. (18) The sphere of the irresistible sway of Prthu, the limit of the advance of His army 
and the path of the wheels of His chariot will extend from the Manasottara mountain to the 


Whole region over which the sun shines with his rays. (14) He will delight (the various sections 
Of) His Subjects by His own (independent) efforts and works, giving full satisfaction as well 





364 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 16 


RRR RR RR RR ER A RR RRR BEEBE RR BERR BRE BE BE BBE BERT RE RE BEBE BT Be BEBE BEBE BEBE BEBE RE BEBE Be Br Be Be Hr He He Be BeBe He Bee Be Be Be Ke Be Re Kee Kr Sr ky v, 


a 


as fascination to their hearts; so He will be called a Raja (a king in the truest sense of 'he who 
pleases’ ). (15) He is immovable in His promise and purpose, He never deviates from truth, 
He loves the Vedas and the Brahmanas (those who are devoted to the Vedas); He serves 
those who are advanced in age; He is ever ready to give shelter to all beings (who are in 
distress or danger, whoever they be); He knows how to honour others; He is affectionate and 
compassionate to the poor. (16) He regards and reveres the wives of others as His mother 
and loves His own wife as a half of His own body. He is loving as a father to those over whom 
He rules; He looks upon Himself as a servant to those who are well-versed in the Vedic 
lore.(17) Heis supremely dear to all as if He were no other than their own self; He is aconstant 
source of increasing delight and joy to His friends and relations. He particularly seeks the 
company of persons who are free from all ties of attachment (to the world). He is ever up with 
arms of punishment against those who are evil-minded. (18) 


sda: 9 Hew TT HevafatcitT:: | 
afaafaemfad «fei aa aaa eit 28 I 
aa al TUSeMleeatyehate AAATA: | 
seaas—si(i‘i (CCITT: «9 ae aTOTAT «= MAT: 120 | 
aa yuren: fe at aa afe efter aot: | 
Herd «wet faa otiatst «=O Tae eT TTT: 1 RVI 
aa onal Om )|Oggesfema: )39= wetufaditent: 9 STAT. 
a eds antanlen freq Gal wWMAHtelts: 1221 
faapstaaisnta a: a ACTaATAAAaATIATS 
dq ffecgict fered cleqeqer aa Ars: 1231 
Wisma «= AIRC TT TT 
Teste = - ea Ova: Wings ada 12% 1 
WW iaeddeat wat wea 8 waa 
SNA Va Sade Ae ad sa at faeha iret 
wl cA firemen git fagafama: | srerarasat men: ga: geyuteHa: 126! 
ferit fatrasticteegeon: Mcstacalederehares: | 
Mig e earns aat afer ufaya: 12191 
sft AMeMad AEM wee Beda Aenea Feaseaa: 1261 


. “He is the Person Supreme directly manifested to men, the Lord of the three worlds; He 
is divinity absolute. He is the Spirit pure thatis there as the self-contained Satie every living 
individual; in the exercise of one of His divine functions He has appeared as a superman 
among men. When He IS fully realized in His truth, the apparent multiplicity of the world due 
to ignorance will all disappear in him as phantoms in Reality. (19) He is the protector of the 
terrestrial sphere from the quarter of sunrise (to that of sunset), a unique warrior and King 
of kings that He is. Seated in his triumphant chariot, (fearlessly) armed with a bow (and 
arrows), He will travel over the world, as the sun travels along the circle of the zodiac in his 
celestial journey, from the south to the north. (20) Wherever He will be in course of His 
travels, the kings will come to acknowledge His supremacy with tributes and offerings and 
it is believed that the guardians of the regions will follow the kings. Their consorts will think 





is. 17] 
DS BOOK FOUR 365 


Gr Br BBB BEB BE BEBE BBB RE BEB Be BB BYR Hr Be Be Re BH Re RR He hr hr Br oy 


z tr tr 
aa BEBE R BR Re RRA Re RR RE RRL Be RRR ROLE ROR ERE RE BEBE BREE BE LEE BE BES 


this primordial monarch to be no other than Lord Visnu (who holds a discus in one of His 
hands for - nea and will sing songs of His fame. (21) In obedience to Him as a Supreme 
king. Earth will become a cow for Him (to milk the desirable items of wealth for the good of 
all). AS a powerful patriarch He will provide for the livelihood of the people. He will smash the 
mountains, even as Indra did, withthe points of His bow and level the earth in mere sport.(22) 
When He roams over the earth like a lion with his tail thrown up, twanging His bow made of 
the horns of a cow and a goat, and irresistible in encounter, all workers of iniquity will hide 
themselves here and there. (23) He will perform as many as a hundred horse-sacrifices at 
the sou rce of the Saraswati river (in Brahmavarta) and in the course of the last sacrifice Indra 
(the king of the gods), himself a performer of one hundred sacrifices, will steal away the 
(sacrificial) horse. (24) In the garden attached to His own palace, He will meet the divine 
Sanatkumara (the master of spiritual knowledge) alone. Prthu will worship him with devotion 
and service and attain that pure and perfect enlightenment by which they realize the 
Supreme Absolute.(25) Prthu's warlike power and influence are unlimited and are known far 
and wide. A large volume of sayings, songs and sagas and stories will grow around Him (in 
the different parts of the earth) and He will hear them (sung and recounted) wherever He will 
go (in the course of His wanderings). (26) The vast orbit of His power knows no force of 
opposition, His burning spirit will enable Him to destroy the enemies of the people by 
conquering the quarters. He will be a (matchless) Master of the earth and His mighty glory 
will serve as the theme of songs for the chiefs of the gods and demons to sing." (27) 


Thus ends the sixteenth discourse in Book Four of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PS ARSE 


BA APsaMSeATA: 


Discourse XVII 
King Prthu gets angry with Earth and the latter extols him 
HAT Sara 


Ud A War aa: seuftrat Tomah: | SATA AL HA: Vitae AT 1g 

BRITT, AUT, ATTA NTT: | TATA SU: ett: MAST | | 

- Thus glorified by recounting his virtues and exploits, the 
fied the panegyrists by honouring them with presents of their 
He (further) greeted with due honour (members of) all the 
(four) Varnas (grades of society), from the Brahmana downwards, nay, his servants, 
ministers and family priests, the citizens as well as the inhabitants of his entire state, 
People following the various trades and the (various) functionaries and officials (of the 


State). (2) 


Maitreya continued 
celebrated Lord Prthu grati 
choice and applauding them.(1) 


Ger ard 
eer Tred |= atte agetroht | at ele YAR cht aeat cet a fear! 2 | 
sare farmer eft Gat at SAT HELI ae Aah wT Sa: AT VAT ¥ I 


i, 


ie 





366 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17 
BERRA ARR AAA RA LRA EAA AAA A EAB LRLL LL ALLL LS SLL SBIR LB BAR BB te 
ASAI «ARI, ARTA! ose SIT Sere TTA: HT TT TAA: 1 
SEE ANA WA Waa: WH: 1a: GAaA: ys dewey! « | 
WH UAE da weet Al aprdea aisegierracnt «MAT © 1 


Vidura said : Wherefore did Earth who could take any number of forms, (particularly) 
assume the form of a cow that Prthu milked ? Who played the role of a calf for the time being 
and what served as the milk-pail ? (3) Uneven (undulated) by nature, how was the earth 
made even (levelled) by him? And with what motive did the god (Indra) steal away his 
sacrificial horse? (4) Having acquired spiritual knowledge and wisdom (direct realization of 
the Truth) from the worshipful sage Sanatkumara, the foremost of those who have realized 
Brahma (the Absolute), O holy Brahmana, what was the destiny he attained to? (5) lam your 
loving devotee as well as of Lord Sri Krsna (who is above sense-perception). Therefore, be 
pleased to recount to me all the other glorious and holy deeds of the almighty Lord Sri Krsna 
of bright renown, connected with the story of that former manifestation of His; for (1 know) 
it was no other than Sri Krsna who milked this earth in the form of Prthu (sonof 
Vena). (6-7) 

Ud sald 
cient fata araganet sits ad sama aaa: seeds ¢ | 

Sita continued : Urged in this way by Vidura to repeat the narrative of Lord Vasudeva, 

the sage Maitreya applauded him and with a glad heart replied to him ( as follows). (8) 


WAY Saray 
aafafrr: yas  fatamfact wads oie: | 
wat 06 faites: §«= UBT @ | 
at  weenewunftiag amt mews gam: | 
ade ad: ao awa a: «alfa afin: afd: 1201 
wat Waried Wasa aefadit Aas | 
. Tat Feete shail ardiuited fea 9 wtenares: 128 | 
Maitreya said : When Prthu, dear Vidura, was crowned and appointed by the Brahmanas 
as the ruler of the people, his subjects, whose body had been emaciated through starvation, 
the Soil being left without any (crop of) foodgrains, approached their lord and said: (9) 
Oppressed with the gastric fire even as trees with the fire burning in their hollows, O king, 
we have resorted today for protection to you, who are fit to protect us and have been made 
- available to us as our lord, capable of providing us with means of living. (10) You are the 


protector of the world as well as the bestower of livelihood. Do you endeavour, therefore, to 
give us food, afflicted as we are with hunger, O king of kings, before we perish for want of 


provisions.” (11) 
WAT sara 
4: sat ae Pera ufefari de aat pets fifi asaquea 122 
sit aaa Seem SRR: ees fafa wa: qreferacer wer 1231 
sara exo Parte a aI: weauslt ya WTISAT 12 
aA aaa er: qitcdiseentant: iat aa dea aa aq ueray etl 
ar feant fafeen cet eet arnt wat: tenant wa aad aeufgerragenc ie 





pis. 17 ] BOOK FOUR 367. 


Sr Pe Re Re BrP keke HR Re HR Hea 
saree teh SSSR Ree h ehhh mhie heehee RAR BARA LE LEASES 
eee ea 


ote Meret AML arya weM: ae val faa aa facadt 12191 

ag pa TTA | ae Ara at uresaferat HAL 1c I 

Sa 3 HRTEM CTINL | Heer atat oie sh al Aa: 1291 

BM ses ae rea Sida: | feega cafgen usr, areon dace: 120! 

a Te Sa teat sega areata wester: serfe TART 122 | 
Maitreya went on : On hearing the piteous lament of the people, O chief of the Kurus, 
Prthu pondered long and (at last) was able to perceive the cause (of the disappearance of 
foodgrains, viz., that Earth herself had held up the foodgrains within her bosom). (12) Having 
arrived at the above conclusion by force of reason, he took up his bow, and in great 
indignation fitted an arrow to it, aiming it at Earth, even as Lord Siva (the Destroyer of Tripura 
or three towns built of gold, silver and iron in the heavens, air and earth by the demon Maya) 
aimed His shaft (at Tripura). (13) Seeing him with an uplifted weapon, Earth began to tremble 
and, assuming the form of a cow, ran in terror like a doe chased by a hunter. (14) His eyes 
turned crimson with wrath, the son of Vena thereupon followed her, with the arrow fitted to 
his bow, whithersoever she ran (for shelter). (15) Running towards the various quarters 
(north, east, south and west) and intermediate quarters (north-east, south-east, south-west 
and north-west) as well as towards heaven and earth and the region lying between the two, 
the goddess (Earth) saw him with an uplifted bow wherever she went. (16) She obtained no 
asylum against the son of Vena even as created beings find no immunity from death. Then 
with a sore heart she returned (much) terrified and said to the noble king: "O Knower of 
Dharma (the secret of piety), kind to the afflicted, protect me as well, intent as you are on the 
maintenance of living beings. (17-18) Such as you are, wherefore do you seek to kill me, a 
meek and innocent creature? How would he who is acknowledged as a knower of Dharma 
take the life of a female? (19) People do not strike the fair sex even though they have 
committed an offence. Much less would men like you, who are so gracious and fond of the 
miserable, stoop to such a thing. (20) Having destroyed me, an undecaying boat on which 
the whole -universe rests, how would you be able to support yourself as well as (all) these 

created beings on the surface of water ? (21) 


Ava 
aaa at afent moremeqert! art sels a dank A ctf a at a 1221 
aad ownage fa dread ua: | wena fe eeat aUst AA A Bed 1231 
@ Teas See PI SIT A Wee Aaa Ace: 12s 
amet | gata «| aRefar ferent agrtftereareta Aga 1241 
War, ated sla STATIS: | aay | Ageia JUTUTT: rgeitsaet: 1261 
vat erent alat feat Arar ORT: WE: | STHETECAAT ARTETTE SSA: 1291 
Prthu replied : Earth, | shall slay you, who have turned a deaf ear to my commands and 


take i rificial offerings but refuse to yield us crops. (22) Punishmentis not 
pec dicaciaantie sees of the cow which is so wicked that it feeds on fodder everyday but 
does not yield the milk of its udders. (23) Foolishly disregarding me, you refuse to release 
the foodgrains already created by Brahma (the self-born), and which you have concealed 
within your bosom. (24) When your bowels are ripped open by my arrows, | shall be able to 

d ones seized with hunger, by (appeasing their appetite 


Stop the lamentation of these afflicte 
with ) your fat . (25) For the rulers of men, to kill the vile and self-conceited soul—be it man, 





368 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17 


Pee Be Pe Be BeBe BeBe Be Re Re Re RRR AR RRR RRR RAR RRL BERLE BEBE RE EST RE BEBE RE BEDS SE BEB BEEBE BEBE SER Be Bt BEB A He Be Br Br oe 





woman or a sexless person—who is merciless to (other) beings, Is no killing (at all). (26) 
Having torn you with arrows into pieces as minute as sesamum seeds—you, who are 
stubborn and arrogant and have assumed the illusory appearance of a cow—l shall support 
these created beings by sheer dint of my Yogic (supernatural) power. (27) 
wa Wet at Hardie fawai sor sete: se Hel Tentaag: 12c1 
Seized with a tremor and bowing low, Earth spoke with joined palms to the king, who like 
Death bore a form which was the very embodiment of wrath. (28) 


7H we wer wan faded Jes 
qa: RUA fagascaisparancnfararda 128 | 
Saeneradt «40 fafafiat «= at Se OTe: | 
a wa wt eqdeae: wugufeisd Bol HAW 1801 
a UdaleleagstaaL PAAASSHNATAN ATTA | 
qaqa wisd feo Wega: wet q at adut fraraft 13¢1 
TH owe adie sere = gstaetareie: | 
A Geld akdeilemNaeisth Wh: Was sat: 132! 
aie  atsereute akniiserimarenaedaaets: | 


TH Wdaemecma AW: Wet Gea aes 
a a warretaatia sme watson fast 
SIA UT Valdes stiagent: IRB 
sane ata weaken: st vara fifag: feo! 
a dha: aayerent at at wage feerafai3ui 
i He feeereh TOTAL TOTTTATETET 
I Wad  atfedtracifiresar aml dierent: 1361 
Sit SAMA A USS Medan Adder yufesa afiasel ara Waeaiseaa: 12191 
Earth said : Hail, hail to the transcendent Person, who evolves diverse forms by dint of 
His Maya (creative energy) and appears as constituted of the three Gunas (modes of 
Prakrti), though (really speaking) He has by (constantly) realizing His essential nature 
eliminated all (possibilities of) identification with physical matter (Adhibhita), the Jiva or 
embodied spirit (Adhidaiva) and the Controller of both (Adhiyajfia) and is (therefore) above 
all modifications (in the shape of likes and dislikes resulting from such identification). (29) 
The same supreme Maker by whom | have been created to be the abode of living beings and 
from whom has proceeded this creation consisting of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) is 
ready with uplifted weapon to strike me ! Whom else shall | (now) resort to for protection ? 
(30) He who evolved at the dawn (of creation) this world consisting of animate and inanimate 
beings by dint of His Maya (creative energy), which rests on Himself and is beyond all 
speculative reasoning, is now out to protect it by the same Maya. How should He seek to kill 
me, devoted as He Is to righteousness ? (31) The Lord Almighty, though one, appears as 
many by virtue of His Maya. It is He who evolved Brahma (the creator) and caused the 
universe to be brought about by him. Surely the doings of such a Lord cannot be understood 
by men whose mind is tossed by His Maya, which is so hard to conquer. (32) Hail to the 





Di. Mesnnaannseennssonssensensennen COOK FOUR Hine 369 
at RRA AAA HARA ANA AAA AAAS 
supreme Person, the Maker (of the univers 
then withdraws into Himself His (manifold) 
reservation and dissolution of this univers 
five gross elements, the ten Indriyas and 
understanding and egotism. (33) Itis You. O 
footing the creation brought forth by You 
indriyas and the inner sense, lifted me up f 
water assuming the form of the primaeval 


€), who (when necessary) brings into play and 
potencies and who brings about the creation, 
© by means of His potencies in the shape of the 
the deities presiding over them, the faculty of 
birthless Lord, who, in order to place ona sound 
and consisting of the five gross elements, the 
a te penis of the ocean and took me out of 
pa Oar. Appearing in the for a hero, You, 
who once played the role of lifting up the earth, Se nee to aie eee arrows 
for the sake of milk, keen as You are to protect (all) created beings who have taken up their 
abode in me as In a boat on the surface of water ! (35) Surely the doings of divine 
personages (| ike You) cannot be known by people of my ilk, whose mental horizon is clouded 
by Your Maya (deluding potency), which brings forth this creation made up of the three 
Gunas. Hail to such personages, who bring renown to heroes themselves ! (36) 


Thus ends the seventeenth discourse entitled "The Taming of Earth" forming part of the 
Conquest of Prthu", in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


DINOS SIS 


STATSTea Sea: 


Discourse XVIII 
King Prthu milks goddess Earth in the form of a cow 
HAY Sara 

sa ugg «we Nepharee Greeters CAAA 1 2 I 
Ghat ua frat snfad a Aiada: arene Bet Aye Ae: 1 2 | 
sthiemsuagerghtenadekia: | ger aM: Wea Yet sta: Tha 1 2 1 
amie a: wero dela stat: seeettt star feredssta i x | 
dates oat fferayd sei de aera Ses UA: G71 4 | 
UI Ue alsa Aeon a fagnad! qa Hal ger sTafestadad: | & | 
wedded a eqakaetauieh: |antydsa lense agreisraarsell: 1 © | 
Wai at dea: efun aft ated Yaa eA aa «ga «= AalleldAeld |< | 
aa mead a fe aad amet dal Med aaa HAMGed A let! < | 
dent aq used yaRt yAMed seitarpiastat asst aig 101 

; am Wa: | aadiata Wk aA Sada A fast ieei 
It was thus that goddess Earth glorified Prthu, whose lips were 
quivering th naer. She was frightened; but she made herself quite and steady with an 
effort of re ae ete again:—{1) "O Lord! You possess power to do anything that You 
Please; kindly control Your wrath and consider what tell You (in humble submission). Like 
the bee a wise man takes the essence from everything. (2) Sages who have realized the 
Truth have discovered and tested methods for the realization of human ends here as well 


Wal a He Al 
Maitreya continued - 








‘370 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18 


Bee Re Se ee Re Re Ree Re Re eR RRR ER RRR RE RRR RR RE RE RRR REE Re BRE RE Be Re Be Ree BEE Be Re Be Re Re Be A Ae AY Re Se Hr He Se Ae He Hr Sr Se Br Hr Be Se Se Ke Ke Ke Hr Hr vy ¥, 


Le 


as hereafter. (3) Anyone of the later times who follows with faith and reverence those 
expedients found and taught by the ancient masters easily achieves the purposes of his 
life. (4) He who in his foolishness disregards them and undertakes to accomplish (ignorantly 
planned) purposes in his own (vainly independent) ways, can never be successful in his 
efforts. His ends are never realized, even though his efforts are renewed every now and 
then. (5) O king ! | noticed that the herbs and annual plants that had been evolved of old 
by Brahma, the Creative Agent of God, were being used and enjoyed by those who were 
unrighteous and had not undertaken any religious vows and observances. (6) I (therefore) 
absorbed (into my bosom) the herbs and annual plants, finding myself unprotected and 
uncared for by Your predecessors and that a generation of thievish people flourished on 
earth. | meant to preserve them for sacrificial rites. (7) It is natural that the plants have got 
assimilated in me through a long process of time. Now You are the person competent to 
draw them forth by some expedient known to be effective in this behalf. (8) O Hero of 
mighty arms, O Lord sustaining the life of beings, pray, find a calf, a befitting milk-pot and 
one who can draw the milk, so that, full of affection for the calf, | shall yield for you the 
desired objects in the form of milk if you want to have nutritious food coveted by living 
beings. (9-10) O king of boundless power ! remove my ruggedness and make me level so 
that, even when the rains have passed, the water poured down by the god of rain may stand 
on me. May all be well with You!" (11) 
sft frat fad aed ya ane sof: iad Heal Vl UUTageectsel: 1221 


,. 


qm ut a Gat UAeed BM: | adisa UW ame gee: ayaa 123 
Tar eeecatursager Gan laa seat Hal waged ara iexi 
Pal aa qe sx Bane fauna aan dant as aa: 1241 
eda «adalat «serena faeces «= eittmaud Ta 2& | 
TeateRasye «Ua Una Wa: | act famag Heal MAM AY Als 191 
aaa farisdon mer ahead! SAU ASEM: sree sgeaat: 12C! 
Trea aa ania fag: aseaamam | fake ante feat a a a faenenea: 1221 
Sa a Ae Waa Ha Seca a a cagatormay 1201 


Accepting this agreeable and wholesome advice of goddess Earth, the Emperor made 

a calf of Swayambhuva Manu and drew from her in his own hands all species of herbs and 

annual plants. (12) Likewise all other wise and intelligent persons too take the essence of 

everything and so after Prthu others also drew from Earth, as acow tamed by him, the objects 

sought after by them . (13) The seers and sages, O most righteous one, made a calf of 

Brhaspati (the preceptor of the gods), milked the goddess and got the sacred Veda for milk, 

their milk-pots being the organs of hearing and of speech and the mind, which is the sense 

of senses. (14) The gods made a calf of Indra (their king) and drew (from Earth) the 

(ambrosial) drink known as Soma besides mental vigour, ardour of the senses and physical 

strength for their milk in a vessel of gold. (15)The Daityas and Danavas made a calf of 
Prahrada, the noblest of them all, and obtained wines and distillates (toddy etc.) for their milk 
ina bucket of iron. (16) The Gandharvas (celestial musicians) and Apsaras (heavenly nymphs) 
made a calf of Viswavasu and derived the sweetness of song and beauty for their milk in a cup 
of lotus. (17) The venerable Pitrs—the deities presiding over the rites in honour of the spirits 
of departed ancestors—made a calf of Aryama (one of the twelve deities presiding over 
the sun, the chief of the Pitrs) and drew with reverence what is known as Kavya (food for the 
Pitrs), which they held in a sun-dried earthen vessel and which was milk for them. (18) 


Dis. 18 ] BOOK FOU 
R 371 
9 RB a ete Ble Ser Be BB Bert BB ete tee Be defer Bete te RAR Rett te tet 


The Siddhas (another class of heavenly beings) made a calf of the sage Kapila and obtained 
in the (concave) cup of the welkin mysterious powers (of becoming as small as an atom and 
sO on), powers which could be exercised by mere will; while the demigods such as the 
Vidyadharas used the same sage for their calf and the same pot and obtained the art of 
treading the air. (1 9) Others (such as the Kimpurusas, an order of swift and quickly-moving 
superhuman beings), who were adept in conjuring tricks, made a calf of Maya (the great 
demon architect and conjurer) and obtained the magic art of those wonderful beings who can 


disappear (in an instant to the astonishment of the spectators)—an art which could be 
exhibited by mere wish or thought. (20) 


aarenta seth free: ferfsrerarat: | yer SE: HUTS AASTASAL 122 | 
cere eR: wat Arma wae fae act aeeioast fd ga: 1221 
Taal wae at aa Fat a ee swat aera a efor: 1231 
wee: MU: wel Ee: A Heati quia feenst aaa aie 
aca aera: gee wa: i eet fear ATE, SATAY 124 | 
Fe SUSAR BS UY Gey va: | aelenragut yea eee: Gafaanl 12a 
Wa yeated: yeaa: wanted: | ateacfeter = eA 0 RSE 121 
(Similarly) the Yaksas, the Raksasas (the night-wandering ogres), the ghosts, the 
detestably ugly fiendish creatures known as PiSdacas, all of whom feed on raw flesh, made 
a calf of Rudra (the Lord of the ghosts), and drew the beer of blood in a skull for a pot. (21) 
Even so the serpents with and without hood, the snakes and other poisonous creatures 
(such as the scorpions) made a calf of Taksaka (the chief of the snakes and serpents) and 
drew poison in their mouth for the vessel. (22) The (graminivorous) beasts made a calf of 
the Bull of Lord Siva and obtained the grasses for milk in the vessel of the forest. Again, the 
(ferocious) flesh-eating beasts with sharp teeth made use of the lion (the king of beasts) as 
the calf and got flesh for milk in the pot of their body. The birds made a calf of Garuda (their 
king) and got mobile creatures (such as moths and insects) as well as immobile creatures 
(fruits etc.) for milk. (23-24) With the Banyan for the calf the trees got different kinds of saps 
for milk. The mountains used the Himalaya as the calf and obtained the various minerals (for 
milk) in the basins of their ridges. (25) Earth is a wish-yielding cow. Now that she had been 
(tamed and) made available for milking by king Prthu, all the species of living beings milked 
her each with its own chief as the calf and obtained milk in various forms and held it in their 
own vessel (suitable for it). (26) In this way, O descendant of Kuru, king Prthu and others, 
who sought food for themselves to eat, milked the cow and got different kinds of milk in the 
form of their own food with different calves and cups (to hold it). (27) 


ddl wWelafa: sta: Wace GY: | dadel Amat WOT sfeqaca: 1c! 
splaq waqsnen faitqeta Use! yeehe aa: wash aA fay: 12¢1 
SNA WTA aa: Tea afte: fet | ara, eras AA AA AeAled: 1Z01 
TAL Ut: Uda getter ferferenta SF | MAH As Maton Meer 132 | 
megake ata yarifqnctiaage aahd A aa aarp: 1321 
oft siraerrad AST WAS Seca AGHA FaaSTASHTE AMSA: 12C I 
Thereafter king Prthu became pleased with goddess Earth, who now yielded all the 


Objects of one's desire, and fondly accepted her as a daughter, feeling paternal love for her. 
(28) Prthu (the son of Vena), the almighty king of kings, crushed the crests of mountains with 








372 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


ee TEE RRR ARREARS RRR ARERR RRR RER RARER EERE R RRA et ate Ts 


the ends of his bow and mostly levelled the surface of the terrestrial globe. (29) Lord Prthu 
(the son of Vena), who was a father to his subjects and provided them with the means of 
subsistence, next planned with due regard to propriety dwellings (for human beings) at 
different places all over the earth, andhe founded villages, towns and cities, built castles and 
forts of every description, designed abodes for cowherds and pens for cattle, contrived 
camps andcantonments and taught how to dig mines. He (also) provided houses for farmers 
and cultivators and raised hamlets on hill-sides. (80-31) Before (the advent of) Prthu people 
had no idea of different kinds of human dwellings like villages and towns on this globe. Now 
they began to live comfortably (in rural and urban conditions) with a sense of security of life 
and property in every part of the earth. (32) 


Thus ends the eighteenth discourse forming part of the Story of Prthu's Conquest, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SSIES SS 


a enfaanseaea: 
Discourse XIX 
King Prthu performs a hundred horse-sacrifices 


Hag sara 
smelt Us gq ade a:1Hellad Val: AA BA Weil aradti 2 | 


qe Ta pif: aod «Nee 2 

a await: WaaTa sae: | stays Pale adeloqse: Wy: 1 3 | 

Stadt Agata oleae: Bela: | softest «= - werent: 1 x 

fag facet cen qMal Waa: igrerame: wader ti ut 

eel ARel ait atten: GAenlea: | qadtquinam & a aaaakeent: | & | 

awa wee aie: adem adi dit aniftaanat ame UN I © | 

we «We: «89 aiken al aRamio: sree Wed: 1c | 

eta Taher fraisa agiete soreaqaetg: wad cleat: AUTeHT: 1 et 
aitreya continued: The king (Prthu) nowconsecrated himself as a preparation for (the 
Peon of) a hundred horse-sacrifices in Brahmavarta, the anaiet Sa as 
ane where flows the Saraswati in an easterly direction. (1) The glorious Indra (the lord of 
sale! who had attained to this exalted position by virtue of his performing a hundred 
aah ices) grew jealous of the grand sacrificial festivities started by king Prthu inasmuch as 
ne oes the Same would obscure his own achievements. (2) For in that sacrifice 
agavan Sri Hari; the Lord of all sacrifices and the almighty Ruler, Teacher and Soul of the 
whole universe, was directly perceived by all. (3) He was accompanied by Brahma and Siva 
oo the other protectors of the world—who came with their retinue—and was being extolled 
y Gandharvas (celestial musicians), and hosts of Apsaras (celestial nymphs) as well as by 
sages. (4) Along with the Lord came a number of (celestial and semi-celestial beings such 


as) Siddhas, Vidyadharas, Daityas, Danavas, Guh 
p aras, ; ; yakas (Yaksas) and so on, the foremost 
attendants of Sri Hari led by Sunanda and Nanda, and ee of the Lord like Kapila, 


is. 19 
CE RS BOOK FOUR: 373 
EE ERS SSSR SSS RSE ARERR EARNER ERA AAA ETE E ELLE ETS 


Narada and Dattatreya, as well as masters of Yoga like Sanaka and his three brothers, who 
are all eager to wait upon Him. (5-6) In that sacrifice, O Vidura (a descendant of Bharata), 
goddess Earth attended In the form of a celestial cow, that supplies milk and clarified butter 
serving as oblations for the Sacred fire and gratifies all one's desire, yielded to the sacrificer 
all the objects sought by him. (7) Rivers bore (as their streams) all sorts of sweet and 
delicious drinks (pressed out of grapes and sugarcane), as well as milk, curds, butter-milk 
and clarified butter together with many liquid foods. The gigantic trees, which profusely 
dropped honey (from their pores) bore fruit in abundance. (8) Oceans brought him heaps of 


jewels and mountains brought four kinds of foods. Similarly all the worlds with their guardians 
brought presents (for the king). (9) 


sa oretestrea yeh ueter are, arenes: ofrerameitene 10 | 

oAOTTFET Tt 8 aqEiaad aqaal weladtare ferifed: 1221 

aa Ta aTATATOT fagrran | srarafia ures atseref enifersma: 1221 

stan atfett a MAT Hea: \araead Umakas fasla ara 1231 

ad mepit diet A ent aio aes versa at aot a Ysa ex 

amma d wt waashratqaiafe arei aa wes fagqerema el 

W aaa: skeeacn fageaisrasaediipel wart yenfea ia 

aise SO a dfs den srdfea: @uaidk: wager  faqdsqefar.iee! 

wea ded wt feser uma: iamaad agers fafa gia set ied 
The powerful Indra grew jealous of such great prosperity of king Prthu—who looked upon 
Lord Visnu (who is beyond sense-perception) as his (sole) lord and master—and threw 
obstacles in his way. (10) While Prthu (the son of Vena) was (therefore) engaged in 
worshipping Lord Visnu (the Lord of sacrifices) through the ‘performance of the last 
(hundredth) horse-sacrifice, the jealous Indra stole away the sacrificial animal, himself 
remaining hidden from view. (11) The venerable Atri detected him hurrying through the air 
in the garb of a heretic, which he had taken on himself as an armour, and which leads one 
to mistake unrighteousness for righteousness. (12) Egged on by Atri to kill him, Prthu's 
son, who was a great car-warrior, gave a chase, all inflamed with rage, and shouted, “Halt ! 
Halt !" (13) Indra wore elf-locks on his head and was besmeared with ashes. Seeing him in 
that guise, the prince took him to be piety incarnate and refrained from shooting an arrow 
at him. (14) When he returned without having killed Indra, Atri urged him once more to Slay 
the wrong-doer, saying, "Strike, dear child, the great Indra, whois (in fact) the vilest of gods, 
inasmuch as he has interfered with (your father's) sacrifice." (15) Thus incited by Atri, Prthu's 
son gave chase to Indra as he was hastening through the sky, even as Jatayu (the king of 
the vultures) chased Ravana (when he was flying with Sita in his aerial car). (16) Indra (the 
lord of paradise) gave up for the prince the horse as well as the guise which he had assumed 
and vanished (from the view of his pursuer). The hero (then) came back to (the site of) his 
father's sacrifice, bringing the horse with him. (17) Witnessing the wonderful achievement 


triand others, who had been officiating at the sacrifice) gave 


of Prthu's son, the greatsages (A ; 
him the (significant) name or Vijitaswa (the conqueror of the horse), O Vidura (an incarnation 


of Dharma) ! (18) 
mga ania | were we: amequieat fewer fay: 1eet 
ait: aestarmra acanl fagrral | mureaeaiget «= aR «| AAMaTeId 1201 
Gon dfaee aaa fafa wal Hise wt a cheat ceacied: TE 1k 


374 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


BERR RR RR A RRR RRR RA RR BRB ER BBB BER Be BEB HBR HEH BT Br Br Ke Hr Ke Hr Sr He He Sr Hr Be Br Br Be Br Br Br Br Br Hr br zy 








aaraqarea frqaqaMastt| dea SMS TgStom: 1221 
am «aft sme sa waka am aoe cue foe austere 1231 
wat? oo ae | areata wagdisfagsg ee aero 12 
ered saaerig TaHUeTeg | MATT Watt VAT Uae aA aria 1241 


Creating a thick mass of darkness, the mighty Indra stole once more under cover of 
it the horse, tied with the gold chain, from the sacrificial post and the wooden ring placed 
in front of it (to which the horse had been secured). (19) As Indra was hurriedly passing 
through the skies Atri directed the attention (of Vijitaswa). The hero, however, did not 
obstruct him, holding as he did (in his hand) a staff with a skull on its top. (20) Urged, 
however, by Atri, he set an arrow to his bowstring in indignation and aimed It at him. Indra 
(thereupon) gave up the horse as well as his garb and stood invisible. (21) The hero too 
thereupon returned to (the scene of) his father's sacrifice, taking the horse (with him). It 
was (some) weak-minded people who accepted as their own the reproachful garb 
assumed and shed by Indra. (22) The hypocritical garbs and appearances that Indra 
assumed with the intention of stealing away the horse (came to be known by the name of 
‘Pakhanda' inasmuch as they) were the marks ofa sinful propensity (3944 @rsi7). The word 
'‘Khanda’' has been used here in the sense of a mark. (23) In this way the mind of men was 
(foolishly) attracted towards the deceitful garbs assumed and dropped by him (Indra) when 
he stole away the horse with the motive of interrupting the sacrificial performance of Prthu, 
as well as towards false creeds passing as true religion under the attractive labels of 
‘Nagnas' (a fraternity of naked mendicants), Raktapatas (monks with red robes) and so on, 
and preached with exceptional eloquence. (24-25) 


cefaa WTa Ge: Fass spite = (aomteriteldentd: 1261 
Was: wanted feast yeaa! 
fanart «aera CSSA: «= Safe RI 
Wadatedadt «= RICCRTIN—Cs:s«CSRMTAL RCI 
When the venerable Prthu, who possessed extraordinary prowess, came to know this, 
he lifted his bow and took up an arrow in (great) indignation to strike at Indra. (26) Prthu's 
might and rapidity of movement were irresistible; he was terrible to look at (on account of his 
great fury). When the priests officiating at the sacrifice saw that he had made up his mind 
to kill Indra, they prevented him, saying, O king of great wisdom, it is not worthy of you to kill 
anyone other than the beast approved of (by the scriptures) on this (sacred) occasion. (27) 


We will invoke to this very place through powerful spells Indra, who has thwarted your 


purpose and has been eclipsed by your glory, and will without delay forcibly throw your 
enemy, O king, (as an oblation) into the fire. (28) 


Fa eit faqteidst «SRT aed SEY: Werle 1221 
= arent Mars At Wedd: 1a frataa aya AeA: |: 1301 
ae Ua 9 Aegteaitat fan: igsuraied wa:  aifafehrataar ise! 
qyente: quidantgieniranisng: | ste a maha: fabeaaratarenifart 1321 
Sqemt =. aa wentedvera | suratr fe ak a. sanactenfaal 1331 





is. 19 
OS aseieesecceccrereerpeeeeee BOOK FOUR 375 


ARREARS REHEAT ARLE RAE REALE R EERSTE, 
TASTE ea: SH fea fem SEAT | 
Set {oq wished faa AMSAT 13¥ | 
Sas, Sk SE: | teat aa unausttatafia: 1241 
: retest | feat faaeast ae TATA 1235 | 
SEI. uhatateradturt erry Sami ECR al 
ATTEN AAA aaah pe 
4 Soe aah set ae een 
ust a orerquenioet =osaueurqueud «ow | af lac! 


Having addressed Prthu (the master of the sacrifice), in these words, O Vidura, his 
priests were indignantly proceeding to pour oblations into the sacred fire (with the avowed 
object of invoking Indra), with the sacrificial ladle in their hand, when Brahma (himself) 
appeared (before them) and prevented them (from proceeding further), saying, “Indra does 
not deserve to be killed by you, for Yajfia (by which name the then Indra was called), whom 
you seek to get ride of, is a manifestation of the Lord Himself, while the gods who are (being) 
propitiated (by you) are (so many) forms of Indra alone. (29-30) Look at the great violation 
of Dharma committed by Indra, O Brahmanas, with the intention of obstructing this 
(sacrificial) performance of King Prthu (which mischief is likely to be repeated if he is not 
conciliated). (81) Therefore, let the number of sacrifices standing to the credit of Prthu of wide 
renown fall short of one hundred by one. (Turning to Prthu himself, Brahma said,) You have 
no use for sacrifices well performed, since you are conversant with the Dharma conducive 
to Liberation. (32) It is not worthy of you to show anger against the mighty Indra, who is your 
second self; for God bless you, both of you are manifestations of the Lord enjoying excellent 
renown. (33) Brood no more over this incident, O mighty monarch, and listen to our word with 
an attentive mind. For the mind of the man who contemplates achieving what has been 
thwarted by Providence gets highly enraged and is steeped in blind infatuation. (34) Let this 
sacrificial performance cease; for the gods are obstinate (by nature). It is due to this 
performance that Dharma is being violated through pseudo-religious practices started by 
Indra. (35) Look at these men being carried away by the attractive forms of false religion 
given currency of Indra, who has interfered with your sacrifice and stolen your horse. (36) 
A ray of Lord Visnu, you have now appeared on this earth from the body of Vena in order 
to preserve the religious faith of the people, conforming to the various scriptures, that had 
been undermined by his misdeeds, O Prthu ! (37) Therefore, considering the (true) welfare 
of this universe, O Ruler of the people, fulfil the desire of the progenitors of the world (such 
as Bhrgu and others, who have fondly cherished the hope that the Lord Himself will manifest 
in your person and bring salvation to the world) and foil the conjuring trick employed by Indra 
in the shape of the terrible path of pseudo-religion (shown by him) which gives rise to a 


number of false creeds. (38) 


WAY Sara 
Sui a clean ares aah: | aM A Hal aAaed Aaraia a Best 1321 
aayrara yaa afta | arraget et A cafe aftict: 1xot 
fast: Aeaieraeqsr: Aga eraerafaromt: | StTfRrat ae: amiiesia Ach: 1x21 
aISSEaI Herarat Wa WA ead: (oki aaaana faqeatiaran: 121 





376 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


Be BeBe Re Bee Ree Be Ree Re Re Re Re BER Re REET Re Re Be BEBE BE Re RE RCT Be By Be Be Be Be Re Be Ke Be Ke Br Be Gt Be He Hy Sr Hr Hr Kr Kr Kr Se Se Sr Hr Hr He Sr Sr Hr Hr Sr Hr Hr Ke Sr We We Br Kr We Br Hr Hr ay Hy 


fa Sra AEN URS Sloat agers yafersts THiafseMS ETA: 123 | 


Maitreya went on : Thus advised and instructed by Brahma, the progenitor and 
preceptor of the world, Prthu (the ruler of the people) did as he was told (insisted no more 
on completing the hundredth horse-sacrifice) and not only came to terms with Indra but also 
bestowed his affection on him. (39) When Prthu, who had many a (noble) deed to his credit, 
had finished the ceremonial bath taken at the end of a sacrifice, the gods (the bestowers of 
boons) that had been propitiated by him during his sacrifices, conferred boons (of their 
choice on him). (40) The Brahmanas, whose blessings (always) came true and who had 
received their sacrificial fees and had been (duly) honoured with reverence, pronounced 
their blessings on king Prthu (the first constitutional monarch), O Vidura, (highly) gratified, 
(and added:—). (41) "All those who had assembled (here) in response to your invitation, O 
mighty-armed ruler !—manes, gods, Rsis and human beings—have been (duly) honoured 
by you with gifts and attention." (42) 





Thus ends the nineteenth discourse forming part of the Story of Prthu’s Conquest, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


FISTS IS 


31g, fasitseara: 


Discourse XX 
Lord Visnu manifests Himself in the sacrificial hall of king Prthu 


HAT Sara 
Ward avs: Wh asad fay: i agdguiqs! aay AAAI! 2 | 


Maitreya resumed : Pleased with the sacrifices (of king Prthu), the all-pervading Lord 


Vaikuntha (Visnu), the Enjoyer and Dispenser of the fruit of sacrifices, too, (appeared on the 
scene) with Indra and addressed the king (as follows). (1) 


Wi dscns wate sland anenaaqe = arqméhri 2 | 

Gita: Meal oim aa RMT: ager yest ale ArT Hear! 3 | 

Gear aig qara mean CAHN 1 TT Wa ut stat dha aagaaari x | 

1 fagMiaenenrandte: : 

a ray (1 Stel sit Acne sitagisqasid 1 & | 

AA: Wisferaiteate We | set sfeut ara a: Hatemat aa: 1 & | 
The Lord Said ; This Indra has interfered with your (vow of) performing a hundred 
horse-sacrifices. Ashe (now) tenders his apology (to you), you will be well advised to grant 
him pardon. (2) Those pious souls in this world, O ruler of men, who are possessed of good 
understanding and are the best among men bear no ill-will against their fellow-beings, as 
(they know that) the body is not their self. (3) If even people like you are bewildered by My 


(divine) Maya (deluding potency), services rendered to the elderly (in point of wisdom) for 
a long time should be regarded as sheer fruitless labour.(4) Hence the awakened soul who 


pis. 20 ] 


eS SRA RAAT MR HRM HERR EH ee OOO FOUR . 377 « 


gener se RR Ke He Hr Be He re; 
BeBe Ge Be Bs Re Re Re Be Ree Me Re Me He He He Re Re RE RE HE HERE RET ER REEL HEM 


Knows Be eS pees as of ignorance (about one's own self), desire and action 
never oe SR cACEent (5) Having no attachment to this body, what wise man would 
enterta A g ineness with regard to the house progeny or wealth, produced 
py that body ? (6) , 
Ue: Ue eecattatiioisa qT: | Met Saga: Aral PRIISSATISSHA: UE: 19 | 
Qo GTAAMAaRy 3 
ae . oe ae Wee: | Asad sep heratisht razr: a ata flea: 1 <1 
a: Sex at het Pret: sremPaa: iat sake wh We, Wataft 1 et 
une: «= aeeahat RR: lat A waa wal Harm 1201 


SeMaTEA — SEMPRETRTAL| eer at Aart see 122 | 

The Self referred to (in verse 3 above) is one without change, pure (untainted by Maya), 
self-effulgent, beyond the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), the substratum of divine 
attributes, all-pervading, unveiled, the witness ( of all), having no other soul and distinct from 
the body. (7) The man who knows the Self, existing in the body, as described above is never 
tainted by the modes of Prakrti, though abiding in Prakrti, established as he is in Me (the 
supreme Spirit). (8) The mind of the man who daily worships Me with reverence through (the 
performance of) his own duty (as enjoined by the Sastras), expecting nothing (from Me), is 
gradually purified, O king ! (9) He whose mind is purified dissociates himself from the world 
of matter and, attaining true wisdom, enjoys (eternal) peace, which is the same as My 
equipoised state and is also known by the name of Brahma (the Absolute) or final 
beatitude.(10) He who knows this immutable Self as if it were unconcerned, though presiding 
over the body, the senses of perception, the organs of action and the mind, attains 
blessedness. (11) 


frat (i fT Uae Sei ete: | 
arg wa faa get a fated afl aeatet: 1221 
aa: warren: qa a ea a fsa: | 
BERR DEGLI IE TSEC fara ahifaetentaory 123 | 
fa: Mea wt sara hdd YEAR| 
Sata qaqua: SATA AAT PREASTART 12% | 


Ud AAA AMAA AAS ATA SaAATAT: | 
wet yeaa af PATA: 1241 
abe ad ast Waax guig ase Woieiteata: | 


GL 


T lace only of the subtle body—which is made of the five subtle 
crac MRS ara ihe aehlee presiding over the same anda reflection of the Spirit— 
and which is distinct from the Spirit. Enlightened souls who have conceived a strong 
attachment to Me never give way to the morbid feelings of joy and grief, when they meet with 
affluent or adverse circumstances. (12) Viewing the exalted, the middling and the vile alike 
and balanced in joy and sorrow, and having conquered the senses and the ie (therefore), 
O valiant monarch protect all the worlds with the help and So opere en Se eit people | 
(ministers and others) made available by Me. (13) Protection of a Nabe SS : e only way | 
to the salvation of a ruler ; for thereby he gains hereafter one-sixth of the meri (earned by | 

d, who fails to protect the people and yet levies taxes 


th Serer erhan : 
ae et onthe eats sin. (14) Thus, mainly devoted to the sacred duties 








378 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29 


RRR RRR RRR RRR RRR RE RR RR E ER REEREREB EER BEB BE BEBE BEE BE BBE BEM BEBE ME BET SEB BE ME BE BE PTR Be Be BY BY Re Re Be Se Ke Re He Re BY Re He brag, 


approved of by the foremost Brahmanas and enjoined by tradition, though unattached to 
them, and ruling over the earth (with righteousness) you will win the love and devotion of the 
people and in a short time you will be able to see the perfect ones (Sanaka and others), who 
will call on you at your own house. (15) And ask of Me any boon (of your choice), O ruler of 
men, since you have won Me by your virtues and good disposition. | am not easily accessible 
through sacrificial performances or austerities or even Yoga (concentration of mind), 
dwelling as | do in the heart of the even-minded. (16) 


HAY Sara 
a sa cee faygadtr faafr saenfaa one Ra Se Bw: 1201 
Ward Wea: Ton ated Ba Hao add ug fae faaast sieve 
aaa faa  Gyddedeu: | afer Aa Welt: 1291 
TITAS SAA Aetae tad: lL URa UUM a A WAR PEAT 1201 
aq stent  WadefedR  factieq  arremeyore: | 
a fester a awefagal  ealaqerquencafen: 12°21 
BATATSAT SAH facia qenirennre Gear | 
Gal wad fafa sad 3 faemeanagiates: 1221 
Maitreya continued : Thus instructed by Lord Viswaksena (Visnu), the Preceptor of 
the universe, king Prthu, the conqueror of the world, bowed his head to Sri Hari's 
command.(17) He embraced Indra (who had attained to that position through a hundred 
sacrifices)—who was (just) going to touch the latter's feet (by way of apology) and was 
ashamed of his own act—and gave up his enmity towards him. (18) Prthu now offered 
worship to the Lord, who is the Soul of the universe, clasped His lotus-feet with increasing 
devotion. (19) Though inclined to depart, the Lord, who had eyes resembling the petals of 
a lotus and who is the disinterested friend of the virtuous, kept on looking at him and could 
not proceed, being detained by his own kindly disposition. (20) Prthu (the first constitutional 
monarch on this earth) could not see Sri Hari because his eyes were bedimmed with tears, 
nor could he speak anything, his voice choked with tears. Embracing Him in his heart, he 
(therefore) held Him (there) and stood with joined palms (where he was). (21) Then, wiping 
his tears, he gazed on the Supreme Person—who (now) appeared before his eyes, that 
would not be sated (with His sight), and who stood touching the ground with His feet and with 


the finger-tips of one of His hands placed on the elevated shoulder of Garuda (the sworn 
enemy of serpents)—and addressed the Lord (as follows). (22) 


Fyeard 
Ri faut wage qa: ae guild w>WofafsParera | 
4 aReonat ara feat arta daca a a a1231 
a amd Aa deg wlaa aa - gEEOMasraa: | 
TeMitecyaa «86 fet «Sige «Sa: 1 
a sree 8 Ree 889 vaccensiterqenenonfre: | 
ait Gieteaaactat «= palittt «oat fears at: 12 





| WERT aa ema aendfin a: Sea | 
SRT, WTS Shae: we va fiwdsiie fe aa ieci 


Wray St wa weat Seeranqurfawneary | 
Waa TANUEd aat Pifirrraras faa 1291 
wa fre a oumat fentfet at quitht ame aa 
aet YZ rent ae a setsfea: cet oa: ant qaft ata: 1301 
aaa ST Sa ited aerrereret «saa Sa: | 
aa aged fir wa am waa =: Sea 1321 


Prthu said : How could a wise man ask boons—enjoyable by those whose mind is 
engrossed in the world of matter—of You, O omnipresent Lord, the Ruler of those capable 
of conferring boons (on their votaries) ! | too would never ask of You, O Lord, the Bestower 
of final beatitude, boons which are available even to the denizens of hell. (23) | crave not 
under any circumstance even final beatitude, where there is no (occasion for enjoying the) 
nectar of Your lotus-feet, oozing from the inmost heart of the most exalted souls through their 
lips. (Therefore,) pray, endow me with ten thousand ears (to enable me to drink to my heart's 
fill the nectar-like praises of the Lord); this is the boon (I ask of You).(24) O Lord of excellent 
renown ! even the air (breath) laden with drops of the nectar of Your lotus-feet, issuing from 
the mouth of exalted souls, restores the knowledge of Self to us, fallen Yogis, who have 
forgotten the path leading to (the realization of) the Truth. Hence we require no more 
boons. (25) How can a man of flair—who has accidentally heard Your auspicious praises 
in the society of noble souls only once, O Lord of excellent fame, feel sated, unless he is a 
veritable brute—with the glory, which even Sri (the Goddess of beauty and prosperity) has 
gladly adopted as a theme of Her songs, keen to imbibe Your virtues. (26) Full of ardent 
longing, therefore, | would, like Laksmi (who is distinguished by a lotus in Her hand), adore 
with all my being You, the highest of all embodied beings and the abode of all excellences. 
Let there be no bickering between us two, who are competing for the service of a common 
lordand who have focussed our mind on Your feetalone. (27) Jealousy is sure to be aroused. 


O Lord of the universe, in (the mind of) Goddess Laksmi (the Mother of the universe) whose 


role (of devoted service to Your feet) itis my desire to share. But fond as You are of the meek, 


You ir trifling services. And rejoicing as You do in Your own Self, You 
VSRGHInG Re eee Hae (Goddess Laksmi). (28) It is therefore that even after 
attaining wisdom pious souls worship You alone, who dispel the delusion caused in the mind 
of Your devotees by the modes of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas). (As a matter of fact.) 

we know of no other purpose than the constant remembrance of Your feetin the life of noble 
souls. O Lord. (29) The words "Ask (of Me) aboon (of your choice) that You (just) addressed 
to me. engaged in worshipping YOu (ina disinterested spirit),l reckon as intended to delude 
the creatures (of the world). If the people were not bound by the cords of Your speech (the 
Veda), wherefore should they take to action (with interested motives) under a spell of 
delusion ? (30) Indeed man has been split from You, his real Self, by Your Maya (deluding 
Potency) O Lord: thatis why the stupid fellow hankers for other things. (Nevertheless,) even 


‘ 
: 
7 
: 
: 
: 
. 
- 
: 
: 
‘ 








380 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


REAR Re Re Re Re RR RR AAA AAA AAA EA ALAA EA EAA AA NET Br Br Kr Br Hr Br Hr Kr Gr Kr Hr Hr Br Sr Hr Sr Br Br Hr Hr Hr Gr Hr Hr Hr or ey ert 


as a father does whatis good for his child of his own accord (without being asked by the child), 
You too should likewise strive for our good (31). 
WAY Sara 
saa ya: a faweq ame wee ata ake a | 
fasta eis A Hat aat Tat Aalat ait A GRAS! 32! 
aa Ge Hasseparra: saa Aalegend oth: Sela SAT 133 
Maitreya went on: Extolled thus by Prthu (the first constitutional monarch on this earth), 

the all-seeing(omniscient) Lord said to him, "May you have devotion to Me, O king ! 
Fortunately enough you have developed such a mental attitude towards Me, through which 
one is able to get over My Maya (deluding potency), so hard to escape from. (32) Therefore, 


do My bidding carefully. O ruler of the people; for men who carry out My behest reap good 
results everywhere.” (33) 


WAY Sara 
sa age usd: 9 sfrenedage: | ghidisqygkad TY ashe Afr 1ax 
cafe laqaera aaa: \ farce Heal: GMT BAH: 1341 
ama Ual altadeteuknd: | aut aq: aa AHvommared: 1361 


Ward Wath: AueAG Ae: iahaa AAI VINA Wedd 1301 
Se ANA: UII | Ste A tami tara wi aa 131 
Sa SEMad AM UAE Seas Tae feasiseara: 1201 

Maitreya resumed : Thus welcoming the words of the royal sage Prthu (the son of 
Vena), which were full of deep meaning, and worshipped by him, the immortal Lord 
showered his grace on him and made up His mind to depart. (34) Honoured by the king with 
(polite) words, wealth (rich presents), salutation (with joined palms) and devotion, and 
treated by him as (So many images of) Lord Visnu (the Ruler of all sacrifices), all the gods, 
Rsis, manes, Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Siddhas (a class of celestial beings 
endowed with mystic powers from their very birth), Caranas (celestial bards), Nagas (a 
species of living beings with a human face and serpent-like lower extremities, inhabiting the 
subterranean regions), Kinnaras (a class of demigods with a human figure and the head of 
a horse, reckoned among the celestial choristers and celebrated as musicians), Apsaras 
(the dancing girls of heaven), human beings, birds and many other beings as well as the 
attendants of Lord Vaikuntha (Visnu) left that place. (35-36) Stealing away the mind as it 
were of that royal sage as well as that of his preceptor, the immortal Lord too returned to His 
own Abode. (37) Bowing to the Lord, who is adorable even to the gods and is unmanifest 


by His very nature, and who, having revealed Himself (to Prthu) had become invisible once 
more, the king (also) retired to his capital. (38) 


Thus ends the twentieth discourse in Book Four of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


DOS BESS oy 





. 1 j > 
SS 2 rr re BOOK FOUR ; 381 
2 SERRE R SSE BWR MM REM REM MERE Me HE BE Me Hee Ee ERE RE REE ERE ERE ERA 


sigan fase: 


. Discourse XXI 
King Prthu's teaching to his subjects Er 





Sad 
Ttfench: SOARS AVANT: | Hera hahrerehfted at at ae 
piggies ap ISL | qunaanoetaiotieniniia, 12 | 


agra: Tactedesy: Wate: Ufa | TeaeSaaTes4haT: ada: Hepa! 2 | 
wait = dtuafefa: = eyaase: | amitgipeenss ypqusenfted: | | 
age area AATATATT afm fade wed a: Real ae: | 4 | 
Git: WaT AA ARMM: | URAC Sta: «© frerarre: 1 & | 
a Waeeraeaiea:  seaifor ei were: | 
oat wWeratahaves ae: wid feraeee ut ueHi | 


Maitreya continued : The city was decorated everywhere with (strings of) pearls, 
wreaths of flowers, drapery, ornamental arches of gold and highly fragrant incense (burning 
in censers). (1) It had its streets, quadrangles and high-ways sprinkled with water perfumed 
with sandal and aloe, and was adorned with flowers, unbroken rice, fruits, young blades of 
barley, parched grains of rice and lights.(2) It was beautified with stems of bananas 
containing bunches of flowers and fruits, as well as with young arecas (uprooted and planted 
here and there by way of decoration), and was embellished all round with festoons prepared 
with the leaves of various trees (mango etc.). (3) People of the city and (particularly) fair- 
looking maids adorned with polished ear-rings advanced to greet him with lights and 
presents as well as with all kinds of auspicious substances (such as curds etc.) collected 
(for the occasion). (4) Extolled (by bards and minstrels), yet free from pride, the hero entered 
the palace in the midst of a flourish of conchs and the crash of kettledrums and the chant 
of Vedic hymns by the priests. (5) Greeted everywhere (on the route) and (highly) pleased, 
king Prthu of great renown honoured the citizens as well as the different classes of his 
Subjects hailing from the countryside, by granting them boons which delighted them. (6) 
Doing many such deeds (as the milching of Earth), the great monarch of unimpeachable 
conduct and the most adored of all ruled over the terrestrial globe and, after establishing an 
extensive renown, (eventually) ascended to the highest abode (of the Lord). (7) 

qd sad 
aaa «wat Perf uae | 
sie | | + ae aired der of th 

Sa - Vidura, that eminent votary of the Lora, aunaka (the leader of the 

eeeiblacs at or ee eoneeee n the forest of Naimisa)! hailed the sage Maitreya (the son 


- first constitutional monarch 
of Kus — dwelt upon the glory of king Prthu (the 
on thisigiobenwhicuinad been augmented by excellences of every kind and had won the 


homage of men of great virtues—and spoke (as follows). (8) 
Sa 


aisfirfirw: q , | AMA ADS TaN AAA sate 1 = 
a wa aia 7 spUietstgit Algae eAayar: | 
Sheers eyarent. waar) STOTT a get SUL 








- 
— 


382 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21 


BeBe Be Be Bee Pe eke Be Re Re eRe Ree RR RE RRR AR RR ARR RRR LR Re BERLE BBB RE REE BBE BEE BEBE BEER BEEBE BE TEBE BERTIE BSE EE HE Be Fe Re Re He Be Re He He Me ay 





Vidura said : What did that Prthu (further) do, who was installed as king by the 
Brahmanas, received presents from all the gods and bore the prowess of Lord Visnu in his 
arms, by which he milked Earth (in the form of a cow)? (9) What knowing man would not hear 
the glory of king Prthu; for it is the remains of whatever was achieved by his valour that all 
the (so-called) rulers of the earth as well as the different worlds and their guardian deities 
enjoy to their heart's content even to this day. Therefore, pray, tell (me more of) his faultless 


doings. (10) 
HAY STI 
TTA Aa eM AAT AL, laneIa Gy ATH Wafsteraar 1281 
Aaaeaferdiexl: AAA UHeUSAH | SII MAMI Poraaeyanad: 122 
weissdteradien wa featerer aa serio a UsTiio aA ATT 183 
dfetaecd aag rads Aled: | Shera: deat Wey ANMNTYS Misa 121 
MQ: Uys WR: 9 cHarevtalur: | Gara: WAe: ana: dare: afestra: 1241 
aca GeaMurdioarlerlat: | saadasnisrat CHIAANSeeAATT, 1.2 | 
Getiachladheareryeist: SAP: Aa gerne ake ie 
Siferarsreatiaettiaaa ARAYA: | HONS: SA Haaren: Helfer: 1Vo1 
farkaeraa: daa 9 wad: laferereqeaie: de: «= dedafara 191 
are faque smelt ys yenfasaqiademamna dal sqdadfaa Rol 
Maitreya resumed: Living in (ruling over) the holy stretch of land lying between the two 
rivers, the Ganga and the Yamuna, he enjoyed only such pleasures as had been earned by 
his past deeds and (that too) with a view to exhausting his merits (and not for the gratification 
of his senses). (11) His commands were respected everywhere and he held undisputed 
Sway over all the seven main divisions of the terrestrial globe, barring, of course, the 
Brahmanas and the votaries of the immortal Lord (who recognize the Lord alone as their 
progenitor). (12) Once he consecrated himself for a great sacrificial session and there was 
a huge gathering on that occasion of heavenly beings, Brahmana seers and royal sages, O 


noblest Vidura ! (13) When all the venerable persons in that assembly had been duly 
honoured according to their rank and position, the king rose in their midst like the moon in 


_ the midst of stars. (14) He was tall of stature with brawny and long arms and. had a fair 


complexion, eyes ruddy as a lotus, a shapely nose and a lovely countenance. He was gentle 
in appearance, had rounded shoulders, beautiful (rows of) teeth and a winsome smile. (15) 
Full of vigour, he had a broad chest, bulky hips and a belly shaped like a leaf of the holy fig 
tree and charming with folds. His navel was deep and circular like an eddy; his thighs 
resembled a pair of gold pillars; and his feet were slightly elevated in front. (16) The hair on 
his head was fine, curly, dark and sleek and his throat was marked by three spiral lines like 
those of a conch-shell. He had on his person a pair of costly and excellent pieces of linen, 
one wrapped about his loins and the other slung across his right side and left shoulder. (17) 
Being under a vow of abstinence he had laid aside his jewels so that the natural beauty of 
all his limbs was (now) manifest. Covering himself with the skin of a black buck and wearing 
(a ring of) Kusa grass (used on ceremonial occasions) in his hands, he looked (exception- 
ally) graceful and had (just) finished his (religious) duties appropriate to the hour. (18) The 
king looked all round with eyes which were full of love and soothed one's agony and, thrilling 
the whole assembly with delight—as it were, made the following speech, which was 
charming to the ear, full of elegant (figurative) expression, bland, polished, deep in 
Significance and uninterrupted by emotion. (As he spoke,) it seemed as if he was recounting 
at that time his own experience for the benefit of all (who had assembled there). (19-20) 





is. 21 ] 

Oe aRiCen enn nnninnnnententinnnens BOOK FOUR 383° 
BRR Be te Re tHe Re Re Re te he Re tr tee 

Be Be Ke Ke Ke Kee Ke Be Wee Ke He We Be Be Fe He Be He He We Be eB Ke Ke WEA He 


UMA 


> Ae a: reat 
pane TST: |e grafted: aqatifaerl 122 | 
SrTae alist: | vfaner afte: wy Vay wMleay yeree 1221 
qa A aegMremreptareniea: 
é an : : | CilehT: QI: SHUTS A Tea aBEEH 123 
s ae CHARA Maat Aes YS wet a a TIT A: 121 
wa HoT agfiverd eneitarqaa: | geatennfirrahe Asque: | ara: 1241 
A SSCs Raqeadatscren: | ard: URAMea As Athos IE I 
ated aaa Halfsrecaaa4 _ 
SSA MU Bed icelaea: sifetaga: 1219 | 
qaremy = aglae: | rama «| uetgemenfeag: = fra: 1201 
oa TATA A MAM Wig aesnfa pemfa wWeryat 12e1 
afematyt Feat: aheam sdtfentiea afantaentnt WaVATeASTAT 130 | 
The king said : Worthies present here, may you all be blessed. Pious souls gathered 
here, pray listen ! Those who are eager to know what Dharma (righteousness) is ought to 
submit their own conception (about it) before the wise. (21) As a ruler on this earth | have 
been assigned the role of punishing the evil-doers, protecting the people (against calami- 
ties); affording them means of subsistence and keeping them severally within their bounds 
(the spheres allotted to them by the Sastras). (22) By discharging these functions | as such 
hope to attain those realms which yield what one desires and which—as the expounders of 
the Vedas declare—are earned by him who wins the pleasure of God (who has the record 
of all our past doings before His very eyes). (23) A sovereign who levies taxes but fails to 
teach the people their sacred duties (merely) reaps their sin and forfeits his fortune. (24) Free 
from acarping spirit and with your mind fixed on Lord Visnu (who is above sense-perception), 
therefore, my (beloved) subjects, do your own duty for the good in the other world of your 
ruler (myself); (for) therein lies your own interest and thereby you will have done a (great) 
favour to me. (25) Kindly lend your hearty support to this (prayer of mine), O pure-hearted 
manes, gods and sages for the fruit which accrues hereafter to the doer, the instructor and 
the countenancer is (just) the same. (26) In the opinion of some (believing souls); O most 
worthy ones; there is a God (who dispenses the fruit of all actions); for both here and 
hereafter can be seen in some rare cases places of enjoyment as well as bodies which are 
endowed with (uncommon) brilliance. (27) In the opinion of Swayambhuva Manu (the first 
ruler of the earth), Uttanapada (his younger son), king Dhruva (Uttanapada's illustrious son), 
the royal sage Priyavrata ( Swayambhuva s elder son), my grandfather, Anga, nay, of 
Brahma (the birthless creator) and Lord Siva (the Progenitor of the universe), as well as of 
(the demon kings) Prahrada and Bali (Praharada s grandson) and others like those 
enumerated above, one has to do with (it is necessary to postulate the existence of) 
Bhagavan Narayana (the Wielder of a mace), the sole independent means of securing the 
three objects of human pursuit (Viz. religious merit, earthly possessions and sense— 
ificati lv bliss and final beatitude, the only dissenters being (my 
Gratification) as well as heavenly hers. who were deluded in th tt 
father) Vena (the grandson of Death) and (a few ) otners, ee 


of righteousness and (therefore) deserve to be pitied. (28—30) 
qenedarfirefaeranarrraresrarataet Ae fea: | 
adt am waged ARTIRe! 
ger:  faqotrercenerctt 3 : 


oe a a: ot elt | Feat WHET 138 





384 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 21 


SoBe Be Be BeBe BE BR HE BL Be Be BER BEE BA AGE Br Br Re Bee REA Re Be Be Be Ke Ke Ke He Be He Ke Be He Br Be Br Br Se Hr Br Be Hr Hr Hr Br Br Hr Sr Sr Sr Br Sr Be Sr Be Hr Hr Br Br Hr Hr vr Br Br Fr Fee 








qa 3a aqatdelg fa fsTe tered: HeRTOT: aut: | 
staf: neues qoetenntatadatteaega: 133 | 
Like the (sacred) stream (the Ganga) that has flowed from His great toe, the pious and 

ever-increasing relish one finds in adoring His feet immediately wipes out the impurity of 
mind of those afflicted by the trials and tribulations of mundane existence, accumulated in 
the course of all previous births. (81) Even the man who has taken shelter in the soles of His 
feet is completely rid of all the impurities of mind and, acquiring the special power of 
dispassion and Self-Realization, never returns to worldly life, which brings misery in its 
train.(32) Confident of achieving the goal according to your (individual) merits and free from 
hypocrisy, (therefore) worship Him alone—whose lotus-feet are capable of yielding 
whatever you desire—with the functions of your mind, speech and body and by your own 
duties which serve as a means of procuring a living to you. (33) 


BTatfaslrch TUN STUN SZAT: qafaeseaurisnattenst: | 
AMA SA ae AA let als aA: Wedd: 1 3X1 
Tae «=| aN ET ATL 
farmed fayfiwead gaat eq aque: 1341 
sal «aa |CCofaaeeaae «SiR TUTTI 
wader asita amar feat atfirac 8 genat: 136) 
MW Wd ast: sHateeahafaea ana fa a 
cela ststdead rat he waa Wiha TESATAT 1319 | 
Sevuaed: ues: gut fea  efdeonfiacai 
sama etna «ae Safa a eT: 1301 
TIT: aie  fastraapeft areien: | 
deat aageattaetd: aida Wales Freer 138 | 
Wiewtdaidaeted: wiles wi: wart 
aaa «odd: ut fend ad sfasysrixo! 
THe: Uy deaifad: sale aaa geaarafi: 1 
1 a@ am wat afeena ede 8 UNA: 1s 
aa et | 6faet | ae ayers 
watt =o fetuft = aieigpa «6 atemeet §=— Fea 121 
Bes UeeSRYATA agarfatenttenra: | 
2 Preval frat SI UM aRaeM ada asia S31 
RS ait Pit 8 qe | =aquretsy] || ATE: | 

A cee of fee Sa - Bee AGH Ss | 

Peco) manfesa inset inthepac ara nian ae hee ee 
many attributes, which is accomplished with the help of diverse substances (such as barley, 


rice, sesame seeds and Clarified butter), qualities (of thin i i 
: » Qui gS), actions (Such as the pounding 
of paddy and fanning the chaff from the grain) as well as through the purposes to arch the 





pis. 21 ] 


various rites are directed, the intention 
virtue of things and the appellation (suc 
.g Known. (34) Even as fire Manifested 
with their peculiarities (size, shape et 
Bliss) manifesting Himself through t 
with external objects) in the body (of 
Matter), the Time-spirit, laten 
rites as Well.(35) Oh! those of 


with which a sacrifice is undertaken, the distinctive 
h as Jyotistoma and Vajapeya) by which a sacrifice 
through (various) pieces of wood appears endowed 
C.), SO does the all-pervading Lord (who is supreme ~ 
he medium of the intellect (which has identified itself 
Paes an Individual), which is a product of Prakrti (primordial 
ef vane Ber serial aa as the fruit of various religious 
on the surface of this globe who with a firm resolve 
incessantly worship, through the performance of their (allotted) duty; Sri Hari, the Preceptor 
of the universe and the Supreme Lord of all those who receive a share in the sacrificial 
offerings (really) do me a favour. (36) May the lustre emanating from the ruling (Ksatriya) 
race through their great affluence and power never overpower the Brahmana race, and the 
votaries of the invincible Lord Visnu, shining brightly through sheer forbearance, austerity 
and adoration. (37) It is by ever adoring the feet of the Brahmanas that Sri Hari, the most 
ancient Person—who is a (great) devotee of the Brahmana community, and who takes the 
lead among the most exalted—won Laksmi (the goddess of fortune), who never leaves Him, 
and a glory which sanctifies the universe. (38) Following as you do the righteous conduct of 
the Lord, pray, adore in all humility and with your entire being the Brahmana race, by serving 
whom that independent Lord—who dwells in the heart of all and is (extremely) fond of the 
Brahmanas—is supremely pleased. (39) Who is better qualified in this world to serve as a 
mouth of (vehicle to convey offerings to) the gods (who feed on sacrificial food) than the 
Brahmana race, by constantly adoring whom a man automatically attains final beatitude (in 
the shape of everlasting peace) before long consequent on his mind getting purified as a 
matter of course? (40) The immortal Lord, who is the sole theme of the Upanisads (the 
utterances referring to those who are devoted to Self-Realization) surely does not enjoy the 
oblations poured into the sacred fire—which is bereft of consciousness—so well as those 
offered with reverence into the mouth of a Brahmana by the knowers of Truth in the name 
of gods fit to be adored ina sacrifice. (41) Equipped with reverence, austerity, commendable 
conduct, chariness of speech, self-control and concentration of mind, the Brahmanas ever 
retain in their memory, with a view to discovering the Truth, the pure and eternal Veda, in 
which (the whole of) this universe can be (clearly) Seen as In a mirror. (42) O venerable ones ! 
let me carry the dust of their lotus-feet on my crown all my life; for the sins of the man who 
constantly wears it (on his head) speedily disappear and all sorts of virtues seek their abode 
in him. (43) And riches (of every kind), as a matter of course, woo him who is an abode of 
excellences, rich in moral character, full of gratitude and devoted to the elders. (Therefore), 
may the Brahmana race and the bovine species as well as Lord Janardana and His servants 


be gracious to me ! (44) 
Haq sara 
sft gaat safe frqeatestta: | Teaeara: Alelaet aaa: S41 
wat wat eats saat ofa: | wereused: = aa ASMSATETA: 188 | 
foaafraante  wraferca aa: | fafargeregt: = ABIEENTHTAM: 19! 
ae. eit queer: | TART afm: detent ixc 
aa at we ufaatt 4 aaa Pee: | 
a : a fensgvaeae = Hel Sth 1X1 
arergafig ara aq SATAN HEAT Age: HEU 1 ot 








386 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 20 


wer BBL Re BER Re RE RE RR REE RRR ERE RE REE LEER ARE RE BEE BER BE BET BEBE BEBE BEBE BBE REM BeBe BEBE HE Be Be He He He He Hr Se HEH Re Ve He Ke Re Br He Be Ke He, ¥, 


St] ASINE: UREaaoeed: sai wat 9 aseset =o adfadadfara: yet 
an faqgeaa yea vdedial sa apeifaea fasdie wcstat 1421 
sf siaerrad Feel URAee Seca aCeakepay Unfaiseqe: 121 


Maitreya went on : As the king spoke thus, the manes and gods as well as the 
Brahmanas (who had assembled there and) who were (all) pious souls, felt delighted at heart 
and applauded him, uttering words of approbation. (45) (They said:) the Vedic text that "one 
attains to the higher worlds through a (worthy) son” is (quite) true. For the sinful Vena (Prthu's 
father), who was killed by the curse of the Brahmanas, has been able to cross over (the 
tortures of) hell (through you). (46) Even so Hiranyakasipu (the demon king) was about to 
descend into hell as a consequence of his blaspheming the Lord, but escaped it through the 
piety of his virtuous son, Prahrada. (47) O great hero, father of Earth, may you live happily 
for numberless years—you who have such devotion to the immortal Lord, the one 
(undisputed) Ruler of all the worlds ! (48) Ah ! having you for our ruler, O king of sacred 
renown, we look upon ourselves as under the protection of Lord Mukunda (the Bestower of 
Liberation) today, since you reveal (to us) the stories of Lord Visnu, the foremost of those 
enjoying excellent fame and a votary of the Brahmana race. (49) Itis no great wonder on your 
part, O lord, to instruct your dependants; for it is the nature of exalted souls possessed of 
a tender heart to love their subjects. (50) Robbed of our judgement by our own actions (of 
past lives), going by the name of destiny, we had been wandering (in the wilderness of 


transmigration). Today you have led us across the darkness (of ignorance), O lord! (51) Hail 
to you, the most adorable person, dominated by the quality of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and 
Tamas, who inspiring the Brahmana race, protect the Ksatriya community and vice versa, 
and inspiring both, maintain the whole universe by dint of your own energy. (52) 


Thus ends the twenty-first discourse in Book Four of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


eS Pe Peck ts 
OD OY iwi eS DS 


BA glaanseara: 
Discourse XXII 
The sage Sanaka and his three brothers impart 
instruction to king Prthu 
HAY Saray 
SY Ita ge Ga carp asran: qdaca: 1 2 1 
dg fase wit AASARASHART | CHATACTOT SHAM ANSE OAT | 2 | 
cetiatd MU senfegated: 1a da sfatat qonfiai 3 1 
Tatel ard: eu WaMAdheAR: | fateracgGstarsich . TelerAaSOAAL | 
aAcexiteaesea stdiercnaeTa: ita 8 aiteadt «89 - qarercorata i & | 
Gene Ae afewsiga ween | eRe: wid: we WaT! & | 


Maitreya continued : While the people were thus extolling Prthu of great prowess, there 
-came to that spot four Sages, resplendent as the sun. (1) Surrounded by his attendants, the 
king saw the lords of divine seers descending from the heavens. They were (easily) 





! 
7 


Dis. 22 ] BOOK FOUR 387° 
BABAR BERETS SESE SESE ESE SE SSSR RE RIK RHR RRR RR RRA A RL ARR RAE LAA EEE LEER 


recognized (to be no other than Sanaka and his three brothers) through their splendour, 
which dispelled the Sins of the spheres (through which they passed). (2) King Prthu 
(instantly) rose with his courtiers and all others present there, as if eager to seize back his 
life-breath, that had shot forth (to meet those sages) at their very sight *, even as the mind 
runs forth to meet the objects of sense-enjoyment. (3) When they had accepted the Arghya 
(water offered for washing the hands of a distinguished guest) and taken their seat, the king, 
who was (most) urbane (in manners) and was overwhelmed by his esteem for them, 
worshipped them with due ceremony, his head bent low with modesty. (4) He (then) sprinkled 
his tuft of hair with the hallowed drops of water wherewith he had washed their feet, thus duly 
following the ways of the virtuous, as if in order to evince his respect for the same. (5) 
Endowed with reverence and self-discipline, and full of delight, he addressed those sages, 
the elder brothers (even) of Lord Siva—who, when installed on seats of gold, shone like the 
sacrificial fires in their proper places. (6) 


Yea 
el sarah fe A use Ager: | ae at ad aretedatat a alii: 1 © | 
fe qe qeuathe oth wa ai ae fam: seleta frat fame aaa: 1c | 
qq GAA Glen Slr Weds ai an adest wd ane ase eaa: 1 e | 
Beat si a aa: aerat eater: | aaa DeaargGursyateataat: 120 
aeeta a daseftnihanaue: | sexjerdedadtauredtedtfactsta: 1221 
ward oot fastest Sect «qnera: | aha sega ST Sten Wa Geta A122! 
calaa: gas Ale shametdafear i atearam wale, Ufa Wendie: 1231 
TA PASI BANA Ad Haeipael aA A Ahad Afiqra: evi 
dee dias: «Yel aeahaarl! Hoes Va Ue AA: SASaT WAT IA! 
SHAH ad aa MaMa: | aaa  fagedt Ate: 12E1 
Prthu said : Oh ,what meritorious acts have | performed, O abodes of auspiciousness, 
that | have been blessed with your sight, whom even Yogis (men possessed of mystic 
powers) find it difficult to perceive? (7) There is nothing very difficult to attain in this world or 
the next for him with whom Brahmanas (like you) and Lord Siva and Visnu and their 
attendants are pleased. (8) The world does not perceive you, even though you range 
through the various regions, just as the visible creation and Mahattattva (the principle of 
cosmic intelligence) etc., which are the causes of this world, are unable to perceive the 
all-seeing self. (9) Though poor, those pious householders are (indeed) blessed, whose 
house contains water, (a mat of) straw or (bare) ground, the master himself and his servants 
etc., worthy of acceptance by venerable souls (like you). (10) (Worthless) like the trees 
harbouring (venomous) serpents are those houses which, though replete with all kinds of 
riches, are not hallowed by the holy water washing the feet of the Lord's devotees. (11) 
Welcome is your visit to this place, O exalted Brahmanas; for despite your juvenility you are 
ever self-controlled and reverently observe great vows (of perpetual celibacy and so on), 
following the ways of seekers after liberation. (12) Is there (any hope of) good for us, who 
know the objects of senses to be the only thing worth coveting and have fallen, through our 
* Our scriptures maintain that the life-breath of a young man goes forth to meet his elders when the latter pay him a visit 
and that it is only when he rises and bows to them that the life-breath returns :-— 
aed wen deemia aa: eafat <Tata 
Weyer varel =A MGC | Watered Il 








388 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 20 


BeBe Be Pr He Ge Ver HCH Kee AAAS: BeBe Ree Pe RE RE RRE Re ReRe eRe KER Be Be Be He Ke Hr He Br Hr HY Hr Br Br Hr Br Be Be He Br Be Br Ke Se Hr Se Sr Ke Be Hr Se Sr He Ge Sr He Be Ber Rr Sr hr Hr Hr Fr Hr He Hg, 


RE ne ee nn Ec 


own doings, into this (whirlpool of) transmigration (which is a hotbed of miseries) ? (13) Itis 
out of place to make enquiries about your welfare inasmuch as you revel In your Own self 
and no thoughts of good and evil (ever) arise in you. (14) Therefore, reposing full faith in you, 
| (make bold to) enquire of you, the loving friends of the distressed, how salvation can be 
easily attained in this (very) birth. (15) Surely the birthless Lord, who shines as the very self 
in (all) sages and reveals Himself (in the heart of His devotees) moves about on this earth 
in the guise of Siddhas (sages like you in order to shower His grace on His devotees. (16) 


Hay Sara 
yaeregnnieanvd Ut Ws fd ayia ga Sle HAR: Naas zie 
Maitreya went on : Hearing these graceful and righteous words of Prthu, which were 
pregnant with serious import, brief and delightful, the sage Sanatkumara cheerfully replied 
as though smiling. (17) 
GApAR sara 
ay us went  adycfeneari vad fast aia area aleiteeit iect 
Gee: US Mey A aA: | aes: Adar fadtit WL Ie 
aaa UCM See: «= eRfacetS UTqales | 
Tada 4 faepift Aft art ome 9 ASMA: 1201 
Teyana aad zr ane aeafaqery ea: | 
sag siete sia aa asta feet a ariee 
a Sem 48 Wagtadea faaraasseanfanamsar | 


armenia «CaCO UH aT TRI 
ara MAT OTA AAA ATR UT a | 


fafameen oo uRd 60 ote SO fat eee 123 | 
aigqat Unease TC (G(s eae I 
AAA Masset aecar farttgar alataarenr A 12¥1 
Sareea faqs | 
Waal Was: Pedeaaa ifort waft arta va: 1241 
wal testa «6 afsaet «= garrendar «= aafearriear | 
eect ak iterate «= a aftreatferdisfa: 1261 
Serer qarEtIa TOM area ateraiaas | 
Wicd Sa Ue «St a | Gest 1201 
Sanatkumara said : A very good enquiry has been made by you, even though you know 
the answer, O great monarch, your heart being given to the good ofall living beings, (for) such 
is the bent of mind of the virtuous. (18) The meeting of pious souls is thought highly of both 
by themselves and by those who meet them; for worthy questions put to and the noble 
answers given by them enhance the happiness of all. (19) Certainly, O king, are you gifted 
with that rare and abiding love for hearing the praises —elicited by suitable questions—of 
the lotus-feet of Sri Hari (the Slayer of Madhu), which shakes off the impurity of the mind in 


the shape of latent desires, SO difficult to remove. (20) In the scriptures, which have made 
a thorough enquiry (into the truth), (only) absence of attachment to things other than the Self 





—— il - 


mm Mn | 


Tw | 


= a 


Dis. 22 ] BOOK FOUR 389 


Sr Br Br Re Be Ree Rr Br Br Br 
pr Br Be Be SHES SESESE Se Se Be Be Be eB Be Be Se Be Be RR Be Be Be RE RBH Be Re BBE he Me Be Be Be he Br Be Be Be Be Be Be ERR RE RRR EERE RRA AER 


and intense love for one's real Self, the attributeless Brahma, have been finally concluded 
to be the only way to salvation for men. (21) That love for the attributeless Brahma as well 
as the absence of attachment to the world of matter, both as cause and effect, is easily 
developed through (intense) faith, through the discharge of duties consecrated to the Lord, 
through a desire to know the higher truths and by being firmly established in the Yoga of 
Knowledge, through worship of the Lord of Yoga and by ever listening to the hallowed stories 
of the Lord of Sacred renown, through a distaste for the company of those delighting in lucre 
and sense-enjoyments and by eschewing wealth and sense-gratification esteemed by such 
people, through love for seclusion when finding delight in the Self, but not such occasions 
when a potion of the nectarine drink of Sri Hari's glories is had, through harmlessness and 
by living the life of an ascetic, through an enquiry into that whichis conducive to one's spiritual 
welfare and by drinking the peerless nectar of Lord Mukunda's glories, by practising the 
twelve forms of self-discipline, (viz., non-violence, truthfulness, non-thieving, absence of 
attachment, modesty, non-accumulation of wealth and luxuries except in the interests of 
others, belief in God, continence, habit of meditation on God, firmness, forgiveness and 
fearlessness) and observing the twelve religious vows (of internal and external purity, 
muttering the divine names and sacred texts, austerity, offering oblations into the sacred fire, 
reverence, worship of the Lord, pilgrimage to holy places, endeavour for the good of others, 
contentment and waiting upon the preceptor * ) by refraining from calumny and abandoning 
all activity (for the acquisition and preservation of worldly goods), by enduring pairs of 
opposites (like heat and cold etc.), and by devotion to Sri Hari, growing through the utterance 
of His praises, which (ever) adorn the ears of His devotees. (22—25) When this love for 
Brahma gets firmly rooted, man resorts to a (worthy) preceptor and, like the fire consuming 
the very source whence it originates, he dissolves his subtle body, mainly consisting of the 
five subtle elements and enveloping his pure self (in the form of the ego), when the same 
has been freed from its latent desires by the force of wisdom and dispassion. (26) When the 
envelope (in the shape of the subtle body) that wraps the pure Self and which stood 
heretofore between the soul and the Oversoul has (thus) been dissolved, the embodied soul 
sheds all the attributes of that envelope and no longer perceives that which is external to the 
self nor his subjective states, just as a dreaming man no longer sees the things of his dream 


when it has been broken. (27) 
sneanamifeena oat QUA | Peale Sore A YAM UR Aledey 1221 
Ais uff ada wereata yea: | stems wena fel wait areal 1281 
MEIC ERICA SUC Mel GL ER GGL aa qe: eraetata geld i301 
MAA AAW: aftata ase «= HA: MRR: 132 1 
aa: ua aa ve: eteeaicens: | aq SARA: reaitsHATA 132 | 
aitarattreart aateatagat qo sfarctt Afar AAA 133 | 
I qpalentttaag aaa facta: | rateleraataron §=—|- aaetfaendtea_ 13% 
aan wet wath aneabaencderd | Aaaisat aat Met parateigd: 1341 
sat a A wat Wetter a at faad atritetacsfanigery 1361 
at a RR eT aE a Sefserghraorega ay | 
a: dafraacen ete ferernifer: rerey Sethe Tera ETAtTS STE 1319 | 


* Vide Srimad Bhagavata XI. xix. 33—35. 





390-’ SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


tr 





Re Re R RRRR RAERRRBE RE RE LE AEAE RE R BERE RE BEE BRE ME BEBE RE RE ETE REE BEBE BEB BE RE BE BER BEBE BEBE BEM SESE HEME BEBE BE Be BEBE Be BREA He HERE A Ne Br Hey, 
afte deaerada fase ara fadafaaia aft atieaia: | 
<q freumohasqerd seeadeioospit soe 1c! 
maid ataaqaraara a: | 
aaa fnnadl aaatstt sgelarroredat Ws area 139! 
wan Hele wawlangaet seattnaqe = fata | 
ad a wiinad asrianall qealgt SAG GENIUIT IXo! 

Only so long as this conditioning mind-substance (the principal constituent of the subtle 
body) persists (i.e., inthe waking and dream states) man perceives his own self, the objects 
of sense and that which connects the self with these latter (viz., the ego), and not at any other 
time (e. g., in the state of deep sleep). (28) Everywhere (in the external world too) it is only 
when water or a mirror or any other condition is present that a man perceives the difference 
between one's own self and that which is external to oneself (viz., one’s reflected image), 
and not at other times (when the condition is absent). (29) Distracted by the senses, which 


are themselves drawn towards their objects, the mind of those that (ever) muse on such 
objects (as worth attaining), takes away the power of discrimination of the intellect (as 


-imperceptibly) as a clump of grass sucks up water from a pool (through its roots). (30) 


Consequent on the loss of reason, memory fails; loss of memory is followed by loss of 
wisdom and the sages refer to loss of wisdom as the ruination of the self through one's own 
self. (31) There can be no greater loss in the world to a man than the ruination, through one's 
own self, of the soul, for whose sake everything else becomes dear*. (32) Constant 
preoccupation with wealth and the objects of sense means the ruination of all the interests 
of men. Deprived of his knowledge and wisdom through such preoccupation, man is reborn 
in the immobile creation (the vegetable or mineral kingdom). (83) Whoever is keen to cross 
and reach the other end of the impenetrable gloom in the form of ignorance (the root of 
transmigration) should never conceive an attachment to that which is most detrimental to 
(the attainment of) religious merit, worldly possessions, gratification of the senses and 


liberation. (34) Of these four too, liberation alone is acknowledged as the highest purpose . 
of life; for everything falling under the category of the other three objects of human pursuit . 
is ever exposed to the fear of death. (35) There can be no stability in (the life of) the higher | 
and the lower orders of creation that have come into existence ever since the equilibrium of . 


the three modes of Prakrti (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) was disturbed (at the dawn of 
creation); for their hopes (to survive) have always been blasted by the all-powerful Time. (36) 
Therefore, O king, know Him to be your very Self—the Lord who perceptibly and inwardly 
shines as the all-pervading Ruler of the Jiva (the conscious principle in the psycho-physical 
organism) in the heart of (all) mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate) beings invested 
with a body, the senses, the vital airs, the intellect and the ego. Him do | resort to (for 
protection)—the ever free, taintless and enlightened principle—who has set aside Prakrti 
(Primordial Nature) defiled by the Karmas (of the various Jivas) and in whom appears this 
phantom of the universe both as cause and effect, vanishing on the dawn of discriminating 
wisdom even like the (false) notion of a serpent with regard to a wreath of flowers. (37-38) 
Resort (then) as your (sole) refuge to Lord Vasudeva, by fixing the thought on the splendour 
of the very toes of whose lotus-feet pious souls cut asunder the knot of egotism (which is 
nothing but a conglomerate of tendencies to action) formed (by Karmas themselves), in a 
manner that even recluses who have emptied their mind (of all thoughts of the world), having 


* Cf. Brhadaranyaka Upanisad IV. v. 6. 





pis. 22 ] BOOK FOUR : 391- 


ee Lune tes Tt hte tree yey yee eT eee TE TTT TT TOT TTT TTT TTT 
experienced in crossing the ocean of m 


: . etem Ss ie ; tes - - 
crocodiles in the shape of the five senses psychosis—which is infested with (fierce) 


and the mind—by those who have not found their 
boat in God, inasmuch as they seek to reach the other end of it by painful means (Such as 


the practice of Yoga). Therefore, you make the adorable feet Sri Hari 
of Lord Sri Hari your boat and 
cross the ocean of misery, which is so difficult to cross. (40) ari ean 
Aa Sara 


a Wat saa HAOTAATT | afer: aaareaara A AT: 1421 
Maitreya resumed : Enlightened thus about the true nature of the Self by Sanatkumara, 


son of Brahma (the creator) and a knower of Brahma, the king duly praised him and 
addressed him (as follows). (41) 
UMA 


pdsy7e: ya aftunssatqerfiea | anmefid we wea AAA: 12 
eres 9 aredta 9 wratadonef: | aes fe 2 adam we fe a 1x3! 
SOT aN: YA A Fes Aahtasa: | Usd as det Hal sia aa rafeas xx 
wma A Wi A aeigqada widdetataead «a daaarefacdda ixul 
aa TEN YF Baa a cat alaqwanwemsa yRt afreea: 1*E1 
atest wadt wf warad frfat: sfaorfear: | 
Teaaeunom: Wadd at wt aa datlaneta faateaar ive! 

The king said : Sri Hari, who is (so) kind to the afflicted, showed His grace to me in the 
first instance (vide Discourse XX above). It is in order to bring it to its culminating point, O 
divine sage, that you have all come (here). (42) And compassionate as you are, ithas been 
made fruitful in its entirety by you. What shall | give you (in return for this grace), when 
everything belonging to me, including myself, has been graciously allowed (as a favour) to 
me by pious souls? (43) My life, spouse, sons and house with all its appurtenances, kingdom, 
army, lands and treasury—all this | offer (at your feet as something already belonging to 
you). (44) He alone who is well-versed in the Vedas and (other) sacred books is competent 
to command armies, rule over akingdom, direct policies of war and exercise dominion over 
all the worlds. (45) A Brahmana eats his own food, wears his own (clothing) and gives away 
his own (property to others). It is by his sufferance that the Ksatriyas and others eat their 
food. (46) May you—who are well-versed in the Vedas and have in your abounding 
compassion precisely explained to us, in the course of your dissertation on the Spirit, the 
true nature of God as depicted above—may you ever be pleased with your own acts (of 
delivering the afflicted). Who will make himself a butt of ridicule by presuming to 
recompense your acts of benevolence? (47) 

WAY Sava 
So araaaa «sia Ofeiet: | Sites adler Rie: UsyTaParaat FOI 1c 
s a + apftreeaealaqaT | SHIA AA START: 18 1 
sain a amar ames ameter aaa = derfentmenttgeehay 140 | 
Tas salfur fase fateag: aarfed: | HAAR A WAM SIAM Neha: WAL IG 1 
Ty adams araapseatad: | Arastdsereay, Prentatchad 142 | 

Maitreya continued : Adored by king Prthu (the first constitutional monarch on the 
Garth), and praising his virtuous conduct, those masters of the science of Self-Realization, 


tin 








392 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 20 


SER BE RR eR RARER RE RE RT RE RR ERE RE ERR REE REE Be eT Be BEBE Be eT Me HEHEHE NTN HE NY BE SEN SENT SYS EB BY SST SNe Be Be BY Be Mr Br Sr Br wr Hr sr Hr ay 9, 
5 a 


rose to the heavens, while everyone stood gazing on them. (48) Vena’'s son, the foremost 
among exalted souls, who was firmly established in the Self through concentration of ming 
as a result of the instruction received from them in the science of the Spirit, regardeg 
himself as one who had realized all his ambitions (in life). (49) He performed (all) his duties 
at the proper time, at the proper place and in the proper way to the best of his ability and 
resources as an offering to God. (50) Resigning the fruit (of his actions) to God with a 
concentrated mind, and regarding himself as a witness of (all) actions and beyond (the 
realm of ) Prakrti, he remained unattached (to everything). (51) While remaining a 
householder and endowed with imperial fortune, he was free from egotism and conceived 
no attachment for the objects of sense, even as the sun, though shining on bog etc., does 
not get daubed with it. (52) 

Wane PAVATAATA | Gaeeaaa = Uafetereraarary 143 

fatal east gia sfeot gai adel ceded atten: gator ux 

TMM SE: HIS A VST: | AAtanghaha: APA: GSE TST: 1441 

Iaaamaa east sam:1 gage Ver ws Yat aq ius 

aidestdataes ga asta: i fafa afta atersigel For iu 

add WW aM wie sa adaqiaqn sa gala: Urateentisa uc 

musa  fieramsd  fenatai get ga alaneal Wael aeut ae uel 

aIdikaa aie aed WEalstatl atau eal warm wauisa iol 

eet sa Ured wel Walrad Aqagi sya war: 121 

Geis Wiad Wa et: i yvaat wefasg faygaeamatda | 

feat Wsaraatlensaraaea: WUE 1&2 | 
miata Ueraeatet dl dA eisfas: mug alot wa: waft ie3! 
Si Arerad FM URAC ted Aas Yaak afesnseara: 1221 
Thus duly performing (his) duties at the proper place and time with his mind fixed on 

the Self, the king begot through (his consort) Arci five sons who came up to his ideals— 
Vijitaswa, DhumrakeSa, Haryaksa, Dravina and Vrka. A part manifestation of the immortal 
Lord, Prthu alone manifested at the proper time (special) qualities of all the regional gods 
for the protection of the created beings of the (whole) world. Delighting the people with his 
mind, speech and conduct as well as by his charming virtues, he bore the (significant) title 
of Raja (he who delights) like another moon-god (who is known by the name of king 
Soma because of his delighting all created beings with his cool rays). Evenas the sun drains 
(in summer) the moisture of the earth, and releases it (during the rains) and radiates heat, 
so he drew the wealth of the earth (by way of land revenue and other taxes), (freely) 
distributed it (among the people during famines etc.) and exercised his authority (over the 
people). (S3—56) He was formidable like fire in splendour and hard to conquer like the great 
Indra (the lord of paradise), vied with the earth in forbearance, and with the heaven in 
bestowing on men whatever they sought.(57) Like the god of rain he showered blessings on 
the people according to their desire, (thereby) gratifying (them all). Like the ocean he was 
too deep to be understood and in firmness he was a compeer of Mounts Sumeru (the king 
of mountains). (58) In meting out punishment he was as justas Yama (the god of retribution); 


in his marvellous acquisitions he resembled the Himalaya mountain. Like Kubera (the god 
of wealth) he was rich in treasures, and like Varuna (the god of water) he had his wealth well- 





Dee aatenasexesre eee eee BOOK FOUR 393° 


* SRR RR RR RR RRR RR GH AAA EEA ALAA 


guarded. (59) Like the wind-god he could move everywhere and matched him in strength (of 
body), vitality and prowess; while in irresistibility he vied with Lord Siva (the Ruler of the 
ghosts). (60) In comeliness of form he matched the god of love and was full of spirit as a lion. 
In paternal affection he equalled Swayambhuva Manu, while in lordship over men he was 
like Brahma (the birthless creator). (61) In €xpounding the Vedas he was (another) Brhaspati 
(the preceptor of the gods), while in Self-control he was (as good as) Sri Hari Himself. And 
in devotion to the cow, the preceptor and the Brahmanas as well as to the votaries of Lord 
Visnu, and (even so) in modesty, humility and amiability as well as in his efforts for (the 
benefit of) others he was his own equal (peerless). (62) Through his glory, sung by the people 


everywhere in the three worlds, he had reached the ears of women even as Sri Rama entered 
the ears of pious men. (63) 


Thus ends the twenty-second discourse, forming part of the Story of king 
Prthu, in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. - 


PITS ONS 


ZI Watfaantseara: 


Discourse XXIll 
King Prthu practises asceticism and departs for the other world 
HAT Sava 
SBISSH Nadekeed at sai sneaa afeiaermadeat: ssmafa: 1 et 
waeysatia = frat «rds Premfatacant «= aaeifte «= Sifter 2 | 
sare «= eSséfeeTgeiifa i seg faassen: Penistrmtat | 2 | 
AATeTeTIaAaaTAN seragqead | siwet saa ae wafer gel x | 
SCHSER: BWeHaUig: sla! sora: Hhtfraad aqua: AA! & | 
wy usar ah asharansvgh: | sienvsna: Ret seach wives: | & | 
fafiaitarerd eat fale: \srkuafg: pea sda! © | 
aa 0 mae SAORI: IMO: «= - Aa egeatieaeer: 1 C 1 
CASA wa salen TE! art qi «= - FETA HATA: 1 e | 
smracghifnr: aret: sega add: Bai akoina avatars 10! 


Maitreya began again : A man of (great) self-control and a (true) protector of his 
Subjects, Prthu (the son of Vena) had himself fostered his own creation (in the shape of the 
Various crops and the numerous towns and villages founded and populated by him), made 
(necessary) provision for the maintenance of (all) mobile (animate) and immobile 
(inanimate) creatures, lent his support to the practice of virtue by the virtuous and (fully) 
discharged the commission of the Lord, for which he was born on this earth. Realizing, one 
day, that he had grown old, he entrusted the earth, (who was a daughter to him and) who was 
weeping as it were out of grief at her separation (from him), to the care of his sons and repaired 
unattended to a hermitage alongwith his consort, while his subjects stood disconsolate. (1—3) 


[564] B. M. 15— 





394 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 23 


PIR ARR RRR RRR AAA ARR LAR AAA LL LLL LLL LLL SIAL BSL ERE Ble Ber, 


Uninterruptedly observing his rules of self-discipline there too, he embarked on (acourse 
of) severe asceticism, highly approved of by anchorites, with the same earnestness as he 
had erstwhile evinced in the conquest of his own ancestral dominion. (4) Subsisting on 
bulbs, roots and fruits (to begin with), he ate dried leaves for sometime, contented himself 
with water alone for some fortnights and thereafter lived on air (alone). (5) Leading the life 
of a hermit, the dauntless Prthu basked in the heat of five fires (one in each of the four 
quarters with the sun shining overhead) in summer, exposed himself to hard showers during 
the rains, stood immersed in water up to his neck in the last two months of winter and slept 
on the bare ground (all the year round). (6) Practising forbearance with (strict) control over 
his speech and senses, he observed (a vow of) complete celibacy, controlled his vital airs 
and did the highest form of austerity, seeking (thereby) to please Sri Krsna. (7) His (stock 
of) Karma having been burntas a result of that asceticism, gradually developed to perfection, 
and his mind (thus) purged of all impurities, he thoroughly subdued his senses and mind by 
controlling the breath and was (thereby) able to cut asunder the bonds of his Vasanas (latent 
desires). (8) Prthu (the foremost of men) now adored the Supreme Person through that very 
Yoga (mode of worship) which the divine sage Sanatkumara had taught him as the best 
means of realizing the Self. (9) Ever engaged in duties sacred to the Lord and striving with 
utmost reverence the pious soul developed exclusive devotion to the Lord, who is no other 
than Brahma (the Absolute). (10) 


Tata 8 Wad: Undated AUTH | 
wea fatkeaeytareta a4 fase aque foie ie?! 
fara erraientit tears steotiee aq a | 
Waa anmittdinm sagen we a patiert 
Wa a diet: dakar | sad a Hie das BM Hea 1231 
Aaisr Ue Uoat aq Wt: LAVAL IBAA « Ma-HuSaitefer 1 ex 
see od Af maonaea fi-wge: 1 a art fat ard aver eu 
Grae sa dit aur aun: | fatrrafa aster arat avers 
sage Ce alee Se «| ae VI 
a Pequiaaed sia mama VIIa = aqwaneaenaadeh Ar 
sas WAAR AT ASARNSHRTSTY: 1221 
His mind having been transformed into pure Sattva (Sattva unmixed with Rajas and 
Tamas) through worship of the Lord, he attained wisdom, coupled with dispassion and © 
Sharpened by that devotion, which had been supplemented by constant and perfect 
remembrance of the same Lord; and through such wisdom he was able to tear off the veil 
of egotism (which conceals the true nature of the Jiva), the origin of all doubt (and 
misapprehension). (11) Having got rid of his self-identification with the body and realized 
the true nature of the Self, and freed of all cravings he gave up ( the pursuit of) even that 
wisdom by which he had been able to tear off the veil of egotism. For, so long as a striver 
does not take delight in the stories of Sri Krsna (who had Gada for His elder brother), he will 
not cease to be led astray by the (minor) achievements of Yoga (concentration of mind). (12) 
Having thus irrevocably fixed his mind on the Supreme Spirit and become one with the 
Infinite, that great hero cast off his body at the (proper) time. (13) Closely pressing the anus 


with his heels and slowly forcing up the breath (from the Muladhara or the mystical circle 
situated in the space between the generative organ and the anus), he held it (first) at the 





Dis. 23 | _BOOKFOUR 395 * 
; REESE SS SR SESS SSE EASA AAERE REL AAR ERAN E RHEL EERE RAR EERE EEE EEE 


navel and (then) at other places, such as the heart, the chest, the throat and the space 
between the eyebrows. (14) Directing the breath higher up by stages to the crown of the head 
and free from (all cravings), he merged the air of his body in the cosmic air, the solid part 
of the body in the earth, the fire in the cosmic fire, the appertures (in which the various senses 
are located) in ether and the liquid part of his body in water—each in its own source. He 
(then) merged earth in water, water in fire, fire in the air, and the air in ether. (15-16) He 
(further) merged the mind in the senses (by which it is drawn in the life of varied experience) 
and the senses in the subtle elements from which they severally proceed; and carrying these 
(the above-mentioned ether as well as the senses and the mind as merged in the subtle 
elements) higher still (by the ego and withdrawing them into the same), merged them along 
with the ego in the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence). (17) He merged the 
Mahat-tattva (the ground of all its evolutes) in the Jiva (the embodied soul), conditioned by 
Maya; and established in his true Self (Brahma), by force of wisdom and dispassion the 
mighty Prthu, who was till now a Jiva conditioned by Maya, cast off the condition (of 
Jivahood) attaching to the Self. (18) 


Tent Ades a qHardeel a aaa walt Ya: 12e1 
atta adaaeadgar {staat ANGCEaATT | 
aieranit ukeaiet i «a  seenmostanmidfa: 1201 
te fauataedanieh «aq: oer aaa aren: 
see «fafa fase a adt faamentaaeisaa 22 
fara et GleitsteTyMT «= cele ibe TReHetUT: 
aa féfaeniaeatia: uta faa afe earadt wduret 1221 
fasiaaaiat aredt yy dat ufeqidqpadw egadauca: Agee: 1231 
> gaan dferreenmiaeamqdg gra A WISI 
The great queen Arci, his consort, had followed him to the forest, though (very) delicate 
and unfit even to tread on the rough soil with her feet. (19) Though exceedingly emaciated 
through devoted participation in the austerities (reposing on the bare ground and so on) and 
sacred duties of her husband, her (personal) services to the latter and by nourishing her body 
with the food (bulbs, roots and fruits etc.) taken by Rsis (hermits), she did not feel miserable 
(all the same), gratified as she was by the touch of the hand of her beloved spouse and the 
attention received from him. (20) Finding the body of the sovereign of the entire globe and 
her own beloved lord bereft of consciousness and all other signs (of life), that virtuous lady 
wept for a while and then placed it on a pyre on the ridge of the hill. (21) Having performed 
the rites (suited to the occasion), she bathed in the waters of a stream; and after offering 
water (through her hollowed palms) to (the spirit of) her husband, who had performed noble 
deeds, and bowing tothe divinities who stood in the heavens (witnessing the scene from their 
aerial cars), she thrice went round the (funeral) fire clockwise (as a mark of respect to her 
departed husband) and entered into it, contemplating on the feet of her lord. (22) Seeing the 
pious lady follow her husband, Prthu, the foremostamong heroes, goddesses and gods, 
Capable of conferring boons (on their votaries) applauded her in their thousands. (23) 
Raining down flowers on that peak of Mount Mandara, they spoke to one another (as follows) 
in the midst of a flourish of celestial trumpets. (24) 


Gl Hy: 
ama ga ageien at ad sas ui aterm aft Ast aget sits 1241 


396 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis: 23 


ARENMKARERAAAAAAL ALARA LALLA AAA AAA AN AAT A TR RIT RRR RR Bree, 








au qa amqeing Se of adi ceamemndiendgdsreta = rior ie. 
ast aud fe aaah waaay! wa Mert a 4 tenet crear 1201 
a aid ana Foe ver yal osama aye fawdg feast 121 


The goddesses said : Oh, blessed is this wife, who thus waited upon her husband 
(Prthu), the king of kings, with all her being even as Sri (the goddess of beauty and 
prosperity), the Consort of Bhagavan Visnu, waits upon Him, the Lord of sacrifices. (25) 
Following her husband, the son of Vena, that virtuous lady will surely ascend to Vaikuntha. 
See how by virtue of her remarkable deed, which cannot easily be conceived of, she is 
passing beyond us (the heavenly region) ! (26) What other position could be beyond the 
reach of those mortals who, though their span of life on this earth is so uncertain, attain 
spiritual wisdom, which indeed leads to God-Realization ? (27) Alas ! he has been (badly) 
deceived and is proving his own enemy, who, having attained with great difficulty the 
human state, capable of yielding (the fruit of) liberation, becomes a Slave to the pleasures 


of sense. (28 
(28) HAY Sara 

eadigaray ulate NM age a at atenfaat qe aa: sroreqarara: 12¢ | 

sayMAuaisa yy: A wTaaa:ialid ca akaqemahida a iz0l 

a sa Aaeqva waeaialed: addi Madureiia a get: adie 132 

HON Alda Weta sidiafa: | asa: doqfaeatt: ares: aaAasars 1321 

B:pa senrenvd at Adwalsseati sit: asetaat elat aad: 1331 

Tapia: Waa Al Haft ufled: ise Wed damageatanom 3x! 

qq mega we caledome| mitimnianiaapargaicegh: | 

MGAIqAel ACU HOT UAL 13% | 

farang ws speadefrafa arias agi eet Wa: yaa ae 136! 

Wrasse «6 UE ae ad que sWjErepaadaad 1301 

afardiattuted Aeteeageens | she, panda: arefdt nfaargare 13! 

Serena 86 aT ae «|S ea SS fama: | 
wad vay a a fami oud a aAqer: 13e1 
ad AAS Ad AR TAM Meat Agee AAS MSA: 123 | 
Maitreya went on : While the wives of the gods were (thus) praising her, Arci (the consort 

of Prthu) reached the abode of her lord—the realm to which Vena's son, the foremost 
among the knowers of the Self, who had his mind (ever) fixed on the immortal Lord Visnu, 
had attained. (29) Such was the glory of the most powerful king Prthu. | have (thus) told you 
the story of that king of remarkable deeds. (80) Whoever reads with reverence and 
concentration of mind this story, yielding extraordinary merit, listens to it or narrates it bids 
fair to attain to the (exalted) State of Prthu (viz., the divine abode of Lord Visnu)..(31) A 
Brahmana (one belonging to the priestly class), reading it, should attain pre-eminence in 
sacred knowledge, a Ksatriya (a member of the warrior class) should become the ruler of 
the (whole) world; a Vaisya should become a chief of his clan and a Stdra (one belonging 


to the artisan and labouring classes) should (by listening to it) acquire pre-eminence (among 
his own class).(32) A man ora woman thrice listening to it with reverence is blessed with best 





15. Aer BOOK FOUR xe 
= SRI SAA GEA See Bre Re ee Be te Re Be RHR RE RRA RA ETT 
children, if issueless and becomes the w 
good reputation and a dunce turns out 
to men and wards Off inauspiciousness. 
and heavenly bliss, it wipes out the imp 


ealthiest if destitute. (33) An obscure person attains 
to be a learned man. It is a source of good fortune 
ia! cone bringing wealth, reputation, longevity 
"ob: les of the Kali age. icularl 
keen toacquire religious merit, wealth, enjoymentand iene te shouliBa icone 
to with Seprapabee: eing the best means of achieving these four (purposes of life). (85) The 
INS Seabee MII out to conquer (lands), marches after listening to this 
narrative bring tributes before him even as they did before Prthu. (36) Free from attachment 
to everything else and cherishing unalloyed devotion to the Lord, one shouldlisten to, narrate 
or ead the sacred story of Prthu (the son of Vena). (37) | have told you, O Vidura (son of 
Vicitravirya), this narrative revealing the Lord's glory. A man fixing his thought thereon should 
attain to the goal reached by Prthu. (38) A man who, devoid of all attachment, daily listens 
to or narrates with reverence this story of Prthu develops unflinching devotion to the Lord, 
whose feet Serve as a bark to take one across the ocean of mundane existence. (39) 


Thus ends the twenty-third discourse in Book Four of the 
great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


ot PF oct Preet Pe 
DDR BED D 


BAA Udlaaseara: 


Discourse XXIV 


The hymn sung by Lord Siva (and taught to the Pracetas) 
HAT Sara 


fafraatsRRITSSHATA: §«—- YAAAU: | AeTarsaAtsaaKeHTST MIG WTFaces: | F | 
edarntarardt yaaa cao sdtet qadaa dat sfaura fay: 1 2 | 
arauiant - sienleweea rdeliadigid: | staeraaternt «rasa TAA! 2 | 
Ud: uaNs Afeaheaa: Wl afagenaigeua: Uaatria Wat: | ¥ | 
Maitreya began again : (Now) Prthu's son, Vijitaswa of great renown, became the 
emperor. Full of fraternal love, he gave to his younger brothers a quarter each of the earth's 
Surface (to rule over).(1) To Haryaksa, the emperor assigned the eastern quarter; to 
Dhimrake§ga, the southern; to the one known as Vrka, the western, and the fourth (viz., the 
Northern) to Dravina. (2) Having acquired from Indra (the lord of paradise) the secret of 
invisibility, he earned the surname of Antardhana. Through (his wife) Sikhandini he begot 
three sons, who were highly esteemed (by all). (3) Pavaka, Pavamana and SuCci (by name), 
they were fire-gods (bearing the same names) formerly (in their previous incarnation), born 
(as human beings) under the curse of the sage Vasistha, they (eventually) attained once 
More to the glorious state of fire-gods by practising Yoga. (4) 


araeit 40 awaett «| efaeiaafereqt a garment tage a sfrar{ & | 


Tat afi SIRMRUS Re Aa atetereasta famast 1 & | 
waa gt Oe URATAIAAIAGE | Sstatewraa | PASA AAT 1 © 1 








398 * SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24 


BeBe Br Br Be Be Ree Re Be Re Re RR Re Re Re RE RE ERE ERR BTR BBB Re BEY Be BB Be Be He He BY HY By Hr Br He Hr He He He Br Gr HEH Be Be By Hy Br He Hr er Hr hr thay, - 


Antardhana, who (it will be remembered) had refused to strike Indra, eventhoughhe hag - 
come to know that Indra had stolen (his father's) horse (vide IV. xix. 20), got (a fourth son) 
Havirdhana (by name) by (his other wife) Nabhaswati. (5) Under the pretext of (participating 
in) a protracted sacrificial session he relinquished the kingly duties, regarding them as cruel 
in that they involved (the unpleasant task of) exacting tributes, inflicting punishment and 
levying taxes and so on. (6) Even though occupied with that sacrificial session, the king (who 
had realized the Self) adored the Supreme Spirit, who is perfect (in everyway) and ends the 
suffering of His votaries, and attained a residence in the same Heaven with the Lord by dint 
of thorough and uninterrupted concentration of mind. (7) 
fara U2 Udi ase TH YH HPO Aa Hawa! ¢ 1 
afesd quem etaenits: serufa: | frarerey Freon arg a pes! < | 
gee wana at faqai seine: gentiengd aqede gol 
amg 49 fata Age AT lea areas feral qyaegar | 
UkcHandiagle AnAsta: Botta 12et 
faqareredafragrem: \fafirr: gear feet mora FTt: 1221 
Uretaates: Ua: det eae qeaaad: Pad eaten: Welt: 1231 
fiossest: cseret dauasvianfasri eadagenttr aratssdemmeantry 1 ex 
uf aa fifa sealed idee WoW Gas Aaa: 1241 


Through Havirdhana (Antardhana's son), O Vidura, Havirdhani (his wife) bore six sons— 
Barhisad, Gaya, Sukla, Krsna, Satya and Jitavrata (by name). (8) (Of these) the highly 
blessed Barhisad, the eldest son of Havirdhana, became the ruler. He was well-versed in 
the sections of theVeda dealing with the rituals, as well as in the methods of Yoga, O worthy 
scion of Kuru. (9) As aresult of his performing sacrifices (one after another) close to the place 
enclosed for each foregoing sacrifice the entire land was covered with blades of KuSa grass 
with their pointed ends turned towards the east. (10) He married Satadruti, a daughter of the 
deity presiding over the ocean, recommended by Brahma (the god of gods), who was 
charming in every limb and was still very young, and for whom the fire-god (himself) 
conceived a passion the moment he saw her going round the fire during the nuptials, richly 
bedecked with ornaments, even as he did (on yet another occasion) for Suki (a princess of 
that name). (11) Nay, even (other) gods, demons, Gandharvas (celestial musicians), sages, 
Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystic powers from their very birth), human 
beings and Nagas in every quarter were captivated by the newly-married bride (as she 
walked) producing a tinkling sound with her anklets. (12) Ten sons were born to king 
Pracinabarhi (so-called because of his having covered the earth's surface with blades of 
Kusa grass with their pointed ends turned eastward—vide verse 10 above), through (his 
wife) Satadruti. They bore the common name of Praceta; their mode of life was the same and 
they were all fully conversant with the moral code. (13) Enjoined by their father to beget 
children, they entered a lake (almost as extensive as a sea) for austerities and, having duly 
controlled their mind, worshipped Sri Hari (the lord of austerities) through (their) asceticism 
for ten thousand years, contemplating on and adoring Him and muttering what had been 
imparted to them by Lord Siva, whom they had met on the way and who had showered His 
grace on them. (14-15) 

lagt Sara 


wade fier aenssdtafe aga: i gene et: staat We, aAatetad 1 2&1 


? 
“¢ / 





s. 24 ] 
OM eeUPMATTV NAAN OREN NNEeenanen OOM FOUR 393 .° 


te Br te 
SSR ERR RRR RH AAA AAA AAA AG AAA ANEE 


idura said: Pra 
Vi : y, tell me, O holy Sage, how came about the meeting of the Pracetas 


with Lord Siva i the way, and what significant precept Lord Hara (the Destroyer of the 
universe) was pleased to impart to them. (16) It is indeed difficult for mortals, O Brahmana 
sage, to get an opportunity to meet Lord Siva, on whom (even) sages have only been able 
to contemplate as the cherished object of their desire by shaking off all attachment. (17) 
Though revelling in the Self, Lord Bhava (the Source of all creation) goes about the world 


associated with His terrible (destructive) eneray (i pot 
n 
maintenance of the world order. (18) gy (in the person of Goddess Siva) for the 


HAT sara 
seta: fadated fareissera area: i feat = seit TAGs: 128 | 
easdt = taeda A ee ga eS Nemefmorea 1201 
Tee T ETAT HET ATT, | SAAN AasHleHUSal epee 1221 
be ET BEE CIES DL4SSUR COL ICQa iE | | Uelenlarait fear fafeuaaeant 1221 
a werden femme fae usd  desauraneny 1231 
dda Wane ae seitanaansar faqergit: 12% 1 
ddenmenrast «= ftfaenus )«= fester Sere «leet: UTasiiaentdent: 1241 
Q@ aa soatdet wnardane: | adam aera sa: sadars & 126! 
Maitreya went on : Having received their father's command with bowed heads, the 
pious Pracetas set out in a westerly direction with their mind earnestly set on austerities. (19) 
(At some distance) they saw a very large lake almost as extensive as a sea and pellucid as 
the mind of an exalted soul, with the creatures inhabiting it (ever) cheerful. (20) A home of 
blue and red lilies, lotuses, Kahlaras (lilies blossoming at dusk) and blue lotuses, the lake 
resounded with the notes of swans, cranes, Cakravakas (ruddy geese) and Karandavas (a 
species of ducks). (21) Hemmed in by creepers and trees which were thrilled with joy (as it 
were) to hear the sweet humming of drunken bees, it presented a gala appearance due to 
the breeze scattering in all directions the pollen from the seed-vessel of (full-blown) 
lotuses.(22) The princes were wonder-struck to hear music which ravished the mind by its 
Weird style and was preceded by the sound of clay and wooden tomtoms. (23) That very 
moment they were filled with curiosity to behold the dark-necked and three-eyed Lord Siva 
(the foremost of gods), refulgent like amass of red-hot gold and inclined to shower His grace 
(on His votaries), issuing from the lake with His retinue, His glories being sung Sy 
Gandharvas and Kinnaras (attendants of the gods); and the princes bowed to Him. (24-25) 
The Lord, who relieves the agony of His suppliants and is a lover of righteousness, gladly 
Spoke to the princes, who were not only well-versed in the moral code but (also) possessed 
€ noble character and felt (much) delighted (at His sight). (26) 
Mex JAI 


at afewe: ua fated afeatiien same WR AUN at aq 101 
a: Ut Yea: erenftaroratadiet| wad ayes STA: Wet fe WIC 
foe. squat: gar fafteraia ad: we fe Ar 

; anmadisr aud ve sare fag: Heres 121 


a 








400 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24 


BeBe Be Re Rr Re Re eRe Re Re Re RE RRR RE RE REE RE RR RRR RRR E R RE RB ARE BY A Hy Be BIH Me Be BME BeBe HM He He He Be Bre Me We He Hr Kr Br Hr BeBe Re Be He We Ke He Re Re Ke Re He Brg, 


AMI UATaa Bs Hat: VW Wa aM | A AAA A WarraAishet cHfefercd 130 t 
sé fafa weet ued age ce Pstaet aie gad cea a: 1391 


Sri Rudra said : You are the sons of king Vedisad (Barhisad); your intention (too) is 
known to Me. It is only to shower My grace on you, may all be well with you, that! have thus 
blessed you with My sight. (27) He is indeed (supremely) dear to Me, who has directly taken 
refuge in Lord Vasudeva, who is beyond both the Unmanifest, consisting of the three Gunas 
(Sativa, Rajas and Tamas), and the Spirit, known by the name of Jiva. (28) A man devoted 
to his own duty (prescribedin the Sastras) attains to the position of Brahma (the creator) after 
a hundred lives and realizes Me (only) if he has acquired still higher merit. A devotee of the 
Lord, on the other hand, ascends immediately after death to the (supreme) Abode of 
Bhagavan Visnu, which lies entirely beyond the realm of Matter and which Myself (as Rudra) 
and the (other) gods (holding some office in the cosmic order) shall reach (only) after the 
dissolution of our subtle body (at the expiry of our term of office). (29) Now you are (all) 
devotees of the Lord and as such are dear to Me as the Lord (Himself). And to the votaries 
of the Lord either, no one else is ever dearer than Myself. (30) (Now) distinctly hear this holy 
and supremely auspicious hymn, which is also conducive to final beatitude; | (hereby) impart 


it to you. (31 , 
aie i HAT Sava 
Saale «Tame 0a OR Lae OUTTA eA: 1321 
Maitreya resumed : With a heart full of compassion Lord Siva, who is ( ever) devoted 


to Bhagavan Narayana, spoke the following words to those princes, who stood with joined 
palms (before Him). (32) 
Hex SATA 


fd ad simtacrana alee Ai Vad Weal We Ade sie AA: 1331 
7: Usa wget age ws Hews wuifaa ax 
Hees Ya aederdHa alam  faysatea  yseerne i341 
TH qisttega gihalhsaetiaa: uma gota fryqe 136! 
eniutign feat wast aiamt fewadtata oer aaa get 
7A ssi ga FM: wd aMaadi daa a wart aa: ade i3cl 
aac fae wedlaadiamacleied wuesisiaerd 13e! 
saieqa awe Adisddfaiert aa: Yara cle aaqsl yada xo! 
sama gna) faqeara «etl i aisenifaarera yea sae a INR 
Tet STR waa aU iad ama ged speeaHusited | 
Gees Uo Breanna A 1s? 1 
Whpaaaaa Tigisepdca | castes «= aR areitfaryea 1x3 | 


sri Rudra said : “Your glory tends to the blessedness (unfoldment of the blissful nature) 
of the foremost among the knowers of the Self; may it conduce to My blessedness as well. 
You ever exist as the supremely Blissful; hail to You, the (supreme) Spirit, who have 
assumed all forms. (33) Obeisance to Him who has a lotus (constituting the universe) sprung 
from His navel, the Controller of the subtle elements and the senses, to Vasudeva (the first 
and foremost of the four Vyihas or manifestations of the Lord, the one presiding over the 
Citta or reason), who is (ever) tranquil, immutable and self-luminous. (34) Salutations to 





is. 24 
Dib 12)  exwennenenewesesessarest gy sOOK FOUR 401 


xo Petr tr 
LRa PP eet ee te ee eS Teeth ee 


skarsana (the secondo - 
aa ‘afinite a destroys ie UVES that presides over the ego), whois unmanifest 
universal dissolution), and to pracvtenn i ee fire issuing from His mouth at the time of 
cnowledge of the world and who presi a (the third Vytha), from whom comes the highest 
fo Aniruddha (the fourth manifestatio Es over the intellect or understanding. (35) Hail, hail 

: n), presiding over the mind, which is the controller of 

sense. Obeisance to You as th : a 
tne s Ae Beant: as tne sun-god, who pervades the universe by His effulgence 
and Is Ce’ g and decay. (36) Salutations to Him who is the door to heaven and 
final beatitude and who constantly dwells in a pure heart. Hail to the Fire-god (who has 

igence for his energy), through Ge vee cs (w a 
effulg OY eke whom are accomplished sacrifices performed with the 
help of four priests (viz., Hota, Adhwaryu, Udgata and Brahma) and who makes for the 
continuance of sacrifices. (37) Obeisance to Sri Hari (the Lord of the three Vedas), who as 
the moon-god (the seed of Yajfia) serves as the food of both the manes and the gods, and 
salutations (again) to the Lord who in the form of water gratifies (all) embodied beings. (38) 
Salutations to You, who appear as the bodies of all living beings as well as the Cosmic Body 
and take the form of earth. Hail to You, who (as the wind-god) sustain all the three worlds 
and are endowed with the strength of mind, senses and body. (39) Obeisance to the Lord, 
who as ether supplies a clue to (the existence of) objects (through its attribute, sound) and 
provides a basis for the conception of inside and outside. Salutations to Him in the form of 
that (well-known) sacred sphere of great splendour (known by the name of heaven). (40) Hail 
to You in the form of worldly activity and activity carried on in retirement—leading severally 
to (the attainment of) the world of the manes and the region of the gods—and also in the 
form of death which is the fruit of unrighteousness and causes pain. (41) Obeisance to You, 
O Lord, who yield the fruit of all actions and are omniscient (or revealed in the form of 
Mantras). Salutations to You in the form of Sri Krsna, who is supreme virtue personified and 
is possessed of unobstructed wisdom, nay, whois the most ancient Person, the Lord of both 
Sankhya (the path of Knowledge) and Yoga (the path of Action). (42) Hail to You, who as 
Rudra (the god of destruction) preside over the ego and are endowed with the three 
potencies (in the form or doership, instrumentality and activity). Obeisance to You, who (as 
Brahma, the creator) are knowledge and activity personified, and from whom proceeds the 


vast wealth of speech. (43) 
at at feat af amaninqi wt fant wat aahsayeTety lex 
Rereasiqeerrear adetredenen | aatarargarg GMAT 1S | 
UaeseTaat «= RLY ATfereHA! last qauior  aAenuifayeory Xs | 
Siifersrefererargs Aer OM TT, loaaginengRe FWHvse Ivo! 
TH hen icarae AAO, | Rgeloh TaTASTAT OTOL ese sel 
Rimeshan  fruahrniaate Breasts ISI : 
Utena fasta orareeetae, igkcoeeicc! ANAAATUINAT 140} ! 
SATA STAR ae ORAL | arrarda fargo astray 14 I : 
cat | eoretfat | TergferrisaTe fara | | 
a LE Od 
behold You—with Your sight, which is held in such 
leased to reveal to us Your beautiful form, the most 


ll the senses by its (numerous) excellences. (44) 
d the conglomeration of all elegance. It has four 


- 
Lek 


"Pray, bless us—who are keen to 
great esteem by Your devotees. Be p 
beloved of Your votaries, which delights 4 
It is cerulean as a charming rain-cloud an 


eee 





RRR RRA EAL ERA ALAA RRR BER BERET MES ESE RE EH SER ESSERE He Be SH RE He Be Br BER Be Hr He Hew, 


long graceful arms and a winsome countenance perfect in every detail. (45) It has eyes 
resembling the petals in the heart of a lotus, captivating eyebrows and a shapely nose, lovely 
teeth, ravishing cheeks and mouth, and ears exactly corresponding with each other and 
serving as ornaments. (46) With the outer corners of its eyes smiling as it were with 
affection. Your form is decked with (flowing) tresses, is covered by a shining fine cloth— 
yellow as the filaments of a lotus—and is adorned with a pair of polished ear-rings. (47) |t 
is (further) graced with a brilliant diadem, bracelets, a pear! necklace, anklets and girdle; and 
its glory is heightened by a conch, a discus, a mace, a lotus, a garland (of sylvan flowers) 
and gems (of various kinds). (48) It carries about its shoulders, resembling those of a lion, 
the lustre of the ear-rings and necklace etc., the Kaustubha gem lending charm to its neck; 
and the form is brightened by the bosom, which outshines the touchstone (bearing a streak 
of gold on it) by Goddess Sri, ever abiding thereon (in the form of a golden streak). (49) Its 
belly, resembling the leaf (of the Indian fig tree in shape), looks (very) attractive with its (three) 
folds, which are shaking with the (alternate) inhalation and exhalation of air. By its deep 
navel, spiral in shape like whirlpool, it is inviting the universe (as it were) to return (to its 
source, the belly). (50) The fine (yellow) loin-cloth and the girdle of gold shine all the more 
brightly (by contrast) on the swarthy hips. (Again) the form looks (very) comely by its (pairs 
of) beautiful feet, shanks, things and depressed knees, each pair matching perfectly. (51) 
With Your feet shining as the petals of an autumnal lotus and driving away the darkness of 
our heart by the splendours of their nails, pray, reveal to us that form as Your very essence, 
that has dispelled the fear (of Your devotees), O Preceptor (of the universe), since You are 
the guide of souls wallowing in ignorance. (52) 


l\aekparmswae:  wedaqfasariu3t 
Tae UPAd GA @ou: Adele Read Warde: 14x! 
a SUNTAN Gara QUT | Ura cht Asocleges fact afe: 144! 


aa fides ard afweadi fad faedaaq dideitdieenftayer 146 
aurea qeat A wi agadaqisnacsase veal ferqafere: 14! 
BUM SAA cifiditancdate: arMtageararany | 


Wee wes Wo ABA Iu! 
1 aa fad afedfamt amet a fageniaei 
Takamiya asides Aq aq a afaqi4e 

aae Sead fad faufeaacfa Ad | ad a Ha Ut satfertenrarfaa ferqary 1 G0 | 


“This form (of Yours) is worthy of being constantly meditated upon by those who seek 
the purification of their mind; for it is the practice of its adoration which brings fearlessness 
(in the form of final beatitude) to those who perform their own (allotted) duty (as a stepping- 
stone to Devotion). (53) Sought after even by Brahma (who rules over heaven) and the 
(ultimate) goal of those who are exclusively devoted to Self-Realization, You are attainable 
(only) by him who is full of devotion, and are difficult of access to all (other) mortals. (54) 
Having propitiated through exclusive Devotion—hardly attainable even by the virtuousS— 
You, who cannot be easily propitiated (by any other means), who will seek anything other 
than the soles of Your feet ? (55) Though destroying the universe even with his brows 
contracted as a token of his majesty and energy, Death does not recognize the soul who has 
taken shelter under those feet as subject to his authority. (56) |! am not prepared to equate 
(the enjoyments of) heaven nor even final beatitude (immunity from rebirth)—much less the 


dA ah ee BOOK FOUR 403 
RRR RRS SR RRR AR RRR RRR LR eB BR AR IAT AAA ELL LAR EEE 


blessings sought for by mortals—with the fellowship, enjoyed even for half a moment, of 
those who have developed an attachment for the Lord. (57) May we enjoy the (blessed) 
company of those whose sins have been washed away by immersing their soul in (the stream 
of) Your glories and their body in (the holy waters of) the Ganga flowing from Your feet— 
which absolve one of all sinS—nay, who are imbued with compassion for all creatures and 
are possessed of a mind free from likes and dislikes and endowed with virtues (such as 
straightforwardness and SO On) ! Let this be Your boon to us. (58) The contemplative soul 
whose mind Is neither distracted by external objects nor loses itself ina spell of drowsiness 
(during meditation) exceedingly pure and blessed as it is by the loving devotion of such 
devotees, easily and surely succeeds in realizing Yours true nature at this stage. (59) You 
are the same Brahma (Infinite) in whom is manifested this universe and who shines through 
the universe, nay, who is supreme effulgence and is all-pervading like ether. (60) 

a owed oeecagse fant wa: acaeiatina: | 

useage: aearmewea anead wnaq setae ice! 

froeemena afta: sreram: ae aata fagat 

WirsardwAUNefad at aA dl A a wa alfael: 1621 

waa 86S: «Gee: anealinea wean fafiraa 

Tete «89S OeeinaTen: 49 aedal aoT®CisiésEisiséT:'1 3 

ae . F Ffes nn 

ato faaet Gee CS ataedgy a: 1G 

"O Lord, we know You to be absolute—You, who evolve this (universe), sustain it and 

again dissolve it, as though it were real, Yourself remaining unchanged, through (the 
instrumentality of) Your Maya (deluding potency), that assumes multitudinous forms and 
gives rise to the notion of difference; yet which is powerless against You. (61) They alone 
are well-versed in the Vedas and the Tantras (the scriptures dealing with the worship of the 
various deities and revealed by Lord Siva to His Divine Consort, Goddess Parvati), who, 
devoted as they are to the path of Action and imbued with faith, duly adore, for (the attainment 
of) perfection (in the form of Self-Realization or final beatitude) through a network of rituals, 
this very (embodied) form of Yours, which is hinted at by the five (gross) elements, the 
Indriyas (the senses of perception, as well as the organs of action) and the mind (as their 
Ruler).(62) You are the one primeval Person, whose energy (in the form of Maya) lies 
dormant (before creation). It is by the said Maya that Sattva, Rajas and Tamas (the three 
modes of Prakrti) get differentiated and it is from the same Maya that this universe— 
consisting of Mahat-Tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), the ego, ether, the air, fire, 
water and earth, the gods and the Rsis (seers) and the multitudes of living beings—springs 
up. (63) By a part of Your being You have entered the body, which is of four kinds (viz.,sweat- 
born, oviparous, viviparous and sprouting from the soil), and has been brought forth by Your 
own Energy (Maya). It is therefore that they call that ray of your being, residing in the body, 
as the Purusa or Jiva, which (wrapped in ignorance) enjoys through the (various) senses the 
trivial pleasures of sense like the honey collected (and enjoyed) by bees. (64) 


a wi claricsat feat @ Ag Alea: | 
SGU TACT eMac aAATET: 1G | 


maktaareda sqeet fag 8 ole 
aaa: agar AeciceSteranaAdch: Taal 








404 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24 


BORE Be Re Re Be Re BR RRR Re BEE Re Re REAR RR Be BeBe Re Be Ry Be Hr Ae Br Be Be Br Br Br Ar RAAHARAEAAELAAEE LALLA AAA AERA Hee 


aeedcet  fasata afte) aaisanMetanricha: | 

figaaaeda ww ae feta 9 Aaagdde icv 
aq waafa al Wem Gee faufsam| fad «| eaeeaepdigeea | Aft: 1G01 
Si wad Ws at faqel orem: | eeringicscd WTA: 1&2 
AAAI AIART PAAR Gee TUS ATA TA egh 1190 | 
SAMRAT «AR Aa: | ofeciera: «= et Ua TMIeTTEMT: 1108 | 
Sale Ue aM «fanganfa: | rardararerat ferga: aiaarary 192 | 
+ ad dea: wa sere sma: | sa eae: faget fafaen: set: 1193 | 
3a fiael aml wuaafed: Gam i ster 9 sisift §=«arqcaaat: 1x | 
Saafe dist wi f:tad wig wf gat awreteleiay 104) 
q sa sa Gal add wanda seta «ogee after 108 
farad USS eS AAA | AAA MATT AAC HUTT «—«-«sUID 
sé G: Hea sea Meatless: sgatraa: | qojareagaaaeit Tard HHAARMA: 11921 

Tt Wie AWeddc: Ut Ge: WAI: Aa! 

Sd 48 Unlafael )986oneeteaaed «Sa SIRT TATA 108 | 

Sf AMeMad ASM URES Blea Ages Said AA Aghasseara: 12%! 





"Your true nature can (only) be inferred (and not directly perceived). Possessed of most 
tremendous velocity and irresistible like a hurricane, it is You who destroy the (various) 
worlds, sweeping off the various creatures by the creatures (themselves) even as the wind 
sweeps Off the clouds. (65) Alert as the serpent that grabs a rat, licking the ends of its lips 
through hunger, You as Death suddenly overtake the Jiva (an embodied soul) who is utterly 
careless (about his goal), engrossed as he is in the thought of his (worldly) projects, and, 
being totally given up to the pleasures of sense, is seized with inordinate greed. (66) What 
wise man, who regards his body (life) as wearing away (in vain) through neglect of You, 
would abandon Your lotus-feet, which our ancestor (Brahma) has adored through fear of 
bondage in the shape of worldly existence, and which the fourteen Manus (from Swayambhuva 
onwards) have worshipped without reasoning (with unquestioning faith). (67) The (whole) 
universe is (almost) dead through fear of Lord Rudra (the god of destruction). Therefore, to 
us, who know this, O all-pervading Supreme Spirit, You are the (only) fearless resort." (68) 
Go on repeating this hymn with the purest of motives, O princes, (duly) discharging your 
sacred duties with your mind set on the Lord; this will do you good. (69) Worship Sri Hari 
alone—the (supreme) Spirit dwelling in your heart and (equally) present in all creatures— 
extolling and meditating on Him again and again : (70) Having received this hymn called 
Yogadesa as imparted by Me and retaining it (in your memory), repeat it reverently all of 
You with a concentrated mind, observing the vow of hermits. (71) Intent on multiplying 
his progeny, it was the glorious Brahma (the lord of progenitors of the universe) who taught 
it at the dawn of creation to us, his (mind-born) sons, Bhrgu and others, all of whom were 
(equally) keen to push on (the work of) creation. (72) Enjoined to proceed with the task of 
procreation, we lords of created beings all evolved various species of living beings, having 
got rid of ignorance through this very hymn. (73) Even nowaman devoted to Lord Vasudeva, 
and ever repeating it with an attentive and absorbed mind, attains blessedness before 





Dis. 25} BOOK FOUR 40> 
ttt t atest tier eT TTT TTT TTT TT Tree eet eee 


long.(74) Of all the blessings here spiritual enlightenment leading to final beatitude is the 
highest. He who sails in the bark of wisdom easily crosses the ocean of misery (inthe 
shape of metempsychosis), SO difficult to cross. (75) Imbued with reverence, he who dwells 
upon this hymn in praise of the Lord, sung by me, willbe able to propitiate Sri Hari, (otherwise) 
so difficult to please. (76) Aman who is steady of mind obtains whatever he desires from that 
Lord, the sole repository of (all) blessings, when He is celebrated through this hymn sung 
by Me and is highly pleased thereby. (77) Rising before daybreak and full of faith, any mortal 
who listens to or recites it (to others) with joined palms is freed from all shackles of 
Karma.(78) Repeating with a concentrated mind this hymn in praise of the supreme Purusa, 


the Oversoul, sung by Me, O princes, practise austerities: thereby you will attain in the long 
run the object sought for (by you). (79) 


Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse entitled "The hymn sung by Lord Rudra”, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


DOTSS SE REID 


BIN Uafaanrseara: 


Discourse XXV 
Introductory part of the parable of Puranjana 
Saq 
Sta aresa sam arfeseiiafsia: asad «UstTqat «aaarddeld BE: 1 8 I 
tad Wiad: Wa Aad Weds: sod  aaRgdalmad whi 
Treated at: maa mAMa! ANeseAIeaa: HAs: Weal! 3 | 
Tae Bids HAs geaiag-aela: Garay: saree aed | x | 
Maitreya continued : Having thus instructed the Pracetas (the sons of Barhisad), and 
duly worshipped by them, Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe) disappeared on that very 
spot, while the princes stood gazing. (1) Repeating the hymn of praise to the Lord, sung by 
Sri Rudra (the god of destruction), all the Pracetas practised austerities for a myriad years; 
Standing in water. (2) (In the meantime) O Vidura, the sage Narada, a knower of the truth 
of the Spirit and compassionate by nature, admonished (their father) Pracinabarhi, whose 
mind was attached to rituals, (as follows). (3) "What good, O king, do you seek for yourself 
through rituals? (True) welfare lies in the cessation of sorrow and the attainment of 
happiness, and such welfare is not expected from them.” (4) 


= oararit wer at aatofergeit: gfe A fans wet aa qela aie: 1 & 1 
Ted Hearty yaaa: 1a wt frat Yt we Panadta | € | 


The king (Pracinabarhi) replied : | know not the supreme good, O blessed one, my 
mind being distracted by (the thought of) rituals. (Therefore) pray, impart to me that pure 
wisdom whereby | may be freed from (the shackles of) Karma. (5) Sticking to the life of a 
householder—where one performs actions prompted by interested motives—and regarding 
Sons, wife and riches as the (only) object of human pursuit, an ignorant man fails to attain 


‘406 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis, 25 


BBR Re Re RR RRR RRR RRR RRR RR RR RAR BER KR AD Be Be Me HB Hr BeBe Be HT BB Br Br Sr Hr SSS SSR She Hr Br Ptr hr he Seg, 





the highest good, and wanders in the path-ways leading to transmigration. (6) 
Ang sald 

at Wt: SST Us UAE Usa ATE? | SaNftraitang ihre Geaat: | 9 | 

TW at wated we aad wal TM -gHekoquiumra: wan 

a A Uaasgiafterd «TU Gere ditt Pole vet a1 ¢ | 

Wee AA Wi IS Sea: | TeaMfageAsseATMatelisa: 101 

SSAA: AR awa yet sy: iaged aafecaye fart gaiees 

A ay AA A: Tal Yao Aad: Wel HMA aaAMise Ter Te 1221 
Narada said : O ruler of men, O king, behold the multitudes of creatures slaughtered by 
you in thousands as animals for sacrifice, merciless that you are. (7) Retaining the memory 
of your cruelty, they eagerly wait for you, their anger having been roused (by the recollection), 
and will tear you with their horns, made of steel, when you have departed to the other 
world.(8) In this connection | will narrate to you the following old legend. Hear from me as 
| tell you the story of Purafijana. (9) O king, there was a monarch of wide renown, Purafjana 
by name. He had a friend named Avijhata (unknown), so-called because his activities were 
unknown.(10) Searching for an abode, the king ranged over the (entire) globe. When 
(however) he did not find a suitable place, he felt dejected as it were. (11) Seeking after 


pleasures, he rejected as many cities as there existed on the earth's surface, holding them 
unfit to yield such enjoyments. (12) 
a wed fenadt cfacrga aryl eaat vafeaifl: at cfermearom 1231 
TEATS TOTAAL TAT LUT: lunar: ye: det aed We: 1 ev! 
aterenleenaqearnraccncrent: \eueaeret dat fret atradifta 194 
AAA AT hl STeAATT: laeeastadrentstet «= fergurafafaz: 1&1 
One day he saw on the southern ridges of the Himalayan range (in the land of 
Bharatavarsa) a city provided with nine gates and exhibiting all the marks (of a good 
city).(13) Surrounded by a defensive wall, groves, watch-towers and moats, eye-holes and 
arched gateways, it was dense on all sides with houses having turrets of gold, silver and 
Steel. (14) The floor of its mansions being paved with sapphires, crystals, cat's-eye gems, 
pearls, emeralds and rubies, the city was radiant with splendour as Bhogavati (the city of the 
Nagas in the subterranean regions). (15) It was provided with assembly halls, cross roads 


and highways, gambling-houses, bazaars and rest-houses, banners waving from flag-staffs 
and terraces built of coral. (16) : 


Gale | eiat «= feetguertines | Aelaestioaenloneentorea 1201 
feaghiagapearentarga | Aestaretacaateritteaate KYA 
Arad: | Sed Aa ure ax alfeneanfsa: 129! 


Now, there was a park in the outskirts of the city, which was full of celestial trees and 
creepers and spotted with lakes echoing the noise of warbling birds and humming 
bees.(17) The margin of its lotus ponds was enriched with trees whose boughs and 
young leaves waved gently in the breeze blowing from flower-beds and charged with the 
spray from cool cascades. (18) There was no molestation caused in that park by the 
various species of wild animals, that were (all) wedded to non-violence like hermits. The 
passer-by thought himself invited to that place by the notes of (its) cuckoos. (19) 





is. 25 
ar ee eS 


Gea SIMloneaa SeRtae Tar | Tear alah: 1201 
BRUSSEL Tat seitertor Add: | saanrongaaasitet «=—- HIATT 1221 
Ga Uett Tet Gattet awa waferrausal fart quseSrery 122 | 

a ateht sare PIPTAOTL | USA HUA Mert Ayes 1231 
wal wet fFoetiaers fre steer weenie iey! 


| n that garden he beheld a most charming damsel—who had arrived (there) by chance— 
coming with ten attendants, each of whom was the spouse of a hundred wives. (20) She was 
guarded on all sides by a five-hooded serpent, that was a bodyguard to her. Sixteen years 
of age and capable of assuming any form at will, she was out in quest of a husband. (21) The 
girl had a shapely nose, beautiful teeth, lovely cheeks and a charming countenance, and 
bore in her symmetrical ears the splendour of (brilliant) ear-rings. (22) Clad in a tawny skirt 
and adorned with a girdle of gold, that lady with well-formed hips and swarthy of complexion 
looked like a goddess as she walked with her feet making a tinkling sound by their 
anklets.(23) Moving with the (stately) gait of an elephant, she covered (every now and then) 
with the end of her garment out of modesty her close-knit, symmetrical and spherical breasts, 
which bespoke the advent of youth. (24) 


wae Sted ak: asst ragga We: WlawAayar 1241 
cl a HaeRna Heatdte Ha: Aa i sara qa dite fe faentifa ara A 1RE1 
H USM A A WHat Agel: | Ul al Gel: GY Hiss Ase: WAT: 1 ol 
a gitar ary wa ult faferadt fe ymaset att 
eainmiqanetnt «=o OTIS: «Of: «0S HATTA RCI 
aeat «oatdaaa wage gift draw ae 


aaa War aa: TaTAASATAT SUT Bits 1301 
waar ay 0 Gaeta Ml ftettielmanqeangdy | 
sia 2 ala arya aadica afd aff 1381 
Pierced by (the arrow of) her affectionate sidelong glances, with the outer corner of her 
eyes serving as its shaft and her eyebrows, dancing for love, as the bow, the gallant youth | 
(Purafijana) spoke in a winning tone to the girl, who looked (all the more) charming with her : 
bashful smiles :—(25) "Who are you, O pretty damsel with eyes resembling the petals of a 
lotus? Whose daughter are you and whence are you here, O noble girl ? Tellme, O timid one, 
what you intend to do in the outskirts of this city. (26) Who are these ten attendants of yours, 
led by that great warrior, who makes the eleventh ? Again, who are these young women, O 
beautiful lady; and what about this serpent going before you ? (27) Are you Hn (the goddess 
Presiding over the virtue of bashfulness) or Parvati (the divine Consort of Lord Siva) or Vak 
(the goddess presiding over speech) or Rama (Goddess Laksmi) living in seclusion like a 
hermitess in this forest in search of your lord, who has (I am sure) realized all his ambitions 
by merely craving for your feet ? (If you are none else than Goddess Rama) where has the 
lotus bud (Your invariable companion and distinguishing mark) dropped from the tips of your 
fingers ? (28) (No,) you are none of these (aforesaid), O damsel with well-formed thighs, 
Since you touch the ground (with your feet). (Therefore), be pleased to grace this city with 





408 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 25 


BERR Re Re Re Re Re Re BER Re Re Re Re Re Re ERE RE RE RE ERE RE BRB BER REAL AER Be BEBE Be BB BB BE Br Be eB HH Hr Hr Br Br Br Sry Br Ke HH Hr Sr Br Br Br BeBe Bt Br Br Pr Bt Br Br Be or HH g, 


RR en Lt 





myself, an eminent hero of extraordinary prowess, even as Sri (the goddess of beauty ang 
prosperity) adorns the transcendental realm (of Vaikuntha) with (Her Consort) Lord Visnu 
(the Soul of sacrifices). (29) Instigated by you through (the movements of) your playful 
eyebrows conspiring with your bashful and loving smiles, the all-powerful Love is harassing 
me, whose mind has been distracted by your side-long glances ! Therefore, (pray,) show 
your grace to me, O beautiful one ! (30) (Just) raise and show me your sweet-tongued 
countenance—with its charming eyebrows and eyes possessed of lovely pupils—which is 
screened by dark tresses hanging low, and not facing me through bashfulness, O damse| 
with bright smiles !" (31) 
ARG Sad 

sa UGH OAR | aramaeikad i seared a a weet aie alfa 1321 

— fam ad wera ead! snes arena Wt AM a achat 1331 

sl ae «face A aa: UMIaaa fiat ake Gt SOME: 13% 

TW Waa: Pen A aT ads AME! Gar Ala salt APtisa Tear WHT 134 | 

fepaissiaisha Usa IP area | see ress ETT 13 1 

sai waafifasa gd waned? fast cater Jem: Sayer Wd Gar: 1301 

eS Y aed wa athena seanahyansantad URL 13é1 

aot gaudenrat A warelsqa al: | olen faanen fan ara chalet fag: 13° | 

faqeatinaiat 89 ATTA EAST aaha BOT sasha Gayest: Iso! 

al ama ak fae aaa fraesiaaia quia fa wg Aleit atest aia <2 | 

ea Wet a whit: fat a aslgrardeds | 
ASAT eA QUilgtheadiactens AAT 1S? | 


Narada continued : Enamoured of the heroic Puranjana, who thus courted her like one 
who had lost one's patience, the girl smilingly greeted him (in the following words), O valiant 
monarch ! (32) "We are not fully aware of our own progenitor, O ornament among men, nor 
do we know the progenitor of anyone else (yourself), who is responsible for the family name 
no less than for the name of the progeny. (33) We only know our being present here today, 
(and) nothing beyond that. Nor do we know him who built this city for our abode, O brave 
one ! (34) These men and women are my male and female companions, O courteous one! 
When | am asleep, this serpent keeps awake, guarding the city. (85) Thank heaven, you 
have come; may all be well with you ! With the help of my kinsfolk | shall secure for you (all) 
the sensuous pleasures you long to obtain, O vanquisher of foes ! (36) Occupy you this city 
with nine gates, O lord, enjoying for a hundred years the sensuous pleasures made available 
by me. (37) Whom else save you should | delight—him who is ignorant of enjoyment, unwise, 
unmindful of the future life and heedless about his duty for the morrow—a mere brute? (38) 
It is here (in the life of a householder) indeed that one attains religious merit, worldly riches 
and sense-gratification, the joy of having a son, the privilege of eating the leavings of a 
Sacrifice (which confer immortality on the eater) and fame as well as worlds thatare free from 
misery and sin (and are attainable through sacrifices), all of which are unknown to 
recluses.(39) The wise declare the life of a householder as the asylum affording protection 
in this world to the manes, gods, Rsis, human beings and other living beings, as well as to 
the householder himself. (40) What woman of my category, O brave one, would not accept 
for her husband a renowned, generous, charming and beloved personality like you? (41) 





Dis. 25 ] 


squsaannannensnaneetsssounsnnsennsssensernion vennaneanenanseecannnemmanneeeeeeee 
What woman's mind on this earth would not 
serpent, O mighty-armed one? It is in order 
creatures (like me) with your Smiling glances 
(in this world)." (42) 


cling to your arms, resembling the body of a 
to wipe out the agony of helpless and forlorn 
imbued with compassion that you move about 


: IR Soa 
ait ct Seri AT ART ame feat sfaga Ue USEEIa at WHT: 1x81 
setae wfert wa wa a meh: i wie ufiqa: wifingitinfrergel nw 
aarate Roa Ne CER 2 Aa: yafarras aa a: asa: <ul 
Ua att Ue afeier aa | Ua B amet X ann qa avid ive 
wetsseget a omEgNes A fend saad aft avai qaera: ive 
Tet Aett a sMENide AT saegeeemat fwd aft Peanixes 
Get A ee, sleeisscoragat fart «=o arf «| aeeiferaunbad: ise 
fageia gat arefat emus cfaumene aft sqaerthad: 1401 
aga vat a SR Ger Tega aft | reread: 1421 
ST ATA Use Beta ait We: ah am fas ater ana: 142 
Feaftata use great alfa wer: lag am fasd qeta aaraa: 1431 
sree ako §«rateterenarast | aawadratensat at athe TGS 


Narada went on: Having thus signified on that spot their mutual agreement, the couple 
entered that city and rejoiced (there) for a hundred years. (43) Glorified everywhere ina 
sweet voice by panegyrists, Purafjana sported in the midst of damsels and entered a river 
during the hot weather (to refresh himself). (44) For the passage of whosoever was the ruler 
in the city to other territories seven (out of the nine) gates of that city had been constructed 
in the upper (elevated) part, and two in the lower. (45) (Again) five (of these) entrances 
opened towards the east, one towards the south, another towards the north and (the lower) 
two faced the west, | mention their names (to you,) O king ! (46) Two of the eastern gates, 
Khadyota and Avirmukhi (by name), had been built at the same place. Accompanied by (his 
friend) Dyuman, Purafijana travelled to the land of Vibhrajita through these two (en- 
trances).(47) Two more portals in the east, Nalini and Nalini (by name) had (also) been 
constructed abjacently. Accompanied by (another friend) Avadhuta, he sallied forth by them 
to the territory of Saurabha. (48) The fifth entrance, facing the east, was called Mukhya. 
Accompanied by (his two other friends) Rasajna and Vipana, the ruler of the city went 
by this to the lands of Apana and Bahtdana. (49) Pitrhu was (the name of) the gate in 
the south of the city. Accompanied (by his friend) Srutadhara, Puranjana went (thereby) to 
the kingdom of south of Pancala. (50) The entrance In the north of the city was called by the 
name of Devahu. Accompanied by (the same) Srutadhara, Puranjana went (by this) to the 
dominion of north Paficala. (51) Asuri was the name of the gate on the west. Accompanied 
by (his friend) Durmada, Puranjana proceeded by that to the territory of Gramaka. (52) The 
(other) entrance on the west was called Nirrti. Accompanied by (his friend) Lubdhaka, 
Purafijana moved (by that) to the country known by the name of Vaisasa. (53) Two of the 
cit vak and Pesgaskrt (by name), led to blind alleys. The lord of those endowed with 

ly gates, Nirvak an -4 (everything) with the help of these two. (54) 
vision, Purafijana went about and did (every 


panei fayeitrenbad: | Ate Here eH aT Aft SETS 14K | 


a 





-410 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA S. 26 


Ne ee eee ee eee ee ha pewennaaneeneswentennannentaebenteseice, 








Wa wag Gam: Hea aleisae: | atest deleted adearaadd 14s | 
waar fiat aft vclago: | asa wae seat Ge satit uo) 
Sada Wea Sea eid lad! wage wala Beweay weaia uc! 
alageta met fis fasts aa warerard spfacradh 1481 
HMB Ya IAA, Veale | Hfatsrta Seat Barat Werle Plead, | Go | 
wer edt seamgget daadisy watt earwt Aeamy Aled 1&2! 
faseent  ufeeld  wadunfaata: i teaqedes: Feeney sar ieri 
sft SREP Tae ASM TASS Seca MSHA SAMI TatereMnSeaTA: 1241 


Whenever he went to the gynaeceum, accompanied by VisUcina (the principal waiter in 
the gynaeceum), he gave way to infatuation, complacence and joy induced by (the presence 
of) his wife and children. (55) Thus deeply attached to action and beguiled (by his wife), the 
foolish king (Purafijana), whose mind was given over to sense-gratification, did exactly what 
the queen did. (56) Now, on her drinking wine, he too drank wine and was overcome with 
intoxication; and now, on her dining, he (too) took his dinner and on her proceeding to eat 
something crisp, he too ate it along with her. (57) Sometimes, when she sang, he (too) sang 
and on other occasions, when she wept, he (too) wept. Again, on herlaughing, he (too) laughed 
and, on her prattling, he too prattled like her. (58) Now, when she ran, he (too) ran; (and) on 
her standing, he (too) likewise remained standing. Onher going to bed he (too) similarly went 
to bed and now, on her sitting down, he (too) likewise sat down. (59) Sometimes, when 
she listened, he (too) listened and, on her seeing (something), he too saw the same thing. 
Again, on her proceeding to smell (something), he (too) smelt it and on some occasions, 
when she touched (anything), he (too) touched it. (60) Now, when his wife appeared 
sorrowful, he (too) became sorrowful after her like one afflicted. On her rejoicing he too 
similarly rejoiced and on her feeling happy he too (likewise) felt happy. (61) Thus deluded 
by the queen and having completely lost his nature, the foolish king (Purafjana) helplessly 
and involuntarily imitated (the doings of) his wife like a monkey kept for amusement. (62) 


Thus ends the twenty-fifth discourse forming part of the parable of Purafijana, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the SE ea Samhita. 


CIOL: Oh eae ey 


BY Walaanseara: 


Discourse XXVI 
Puranjana goes a hunting to the forest and the 
queen gets angry with him 


Mg saq 
a Ural Tey wi usm dtd ferent fauj usaenmi ¢ | 
Weantqeinenaacrats eRe Uae «= aaa «= ussfema 2 | 
enaehaTeal wUlantaeagie: | Uae area: USITRATSAA | 3 | 


aa Wat wa ay aidgende: i fae 9 sramaeet yea: |X | 





pis. 26 ] 


Rr 8B er ae 
grb Br BRR BRR RA Rh ir hr tio, 9, irk; aeten OOK FOUR - 411 
SERRE Re Be Be Be RBM Re eRe Re BTR ERE BERR RRR REE RRR BEB 
LTE: | aaa | & | 


to ae MEI A aR mages gah genie Fremaa 1 & | 
pect fer, git ama: asin aa aaa aa aw fate | 
ee Areal Peeat | qusareatiat ABTS = - ASIA: | CI 


arada res : 

7 ee tiie quiver aiatemee yy bow, clad in his gold armour, equipped with his 
car drawn by five horses and fit 7a IS eleventh general, Purafjana one day mounted his 
Bericaprastha. The Carnac a Swift marches, and proceeded to the forest called 

de! aeinclereintcnaen pairo Shafts, two wheels, one axle-tree, three flag-staffs, five 
cords, , ONE C anioteer, a Seat (for the owner of the chariot), two (central) poles 
(to which the yoke is fixed), five recesses and sevenfold protection.It was capable of five 
kinds of motion and was provided with appurtenances of gold. (1—3) Leaving behind his 
wife, who (however ) did not deserve such (callous) treatment, the proud king, who was 
totally given up to the passion for game, set about hunting there, bow and arrow in hand. (4) 
Following the ways of the demons, he became hard-hearted and cruel and killed with his 
sharp arrows a number of wild animals in the woods. (5) The scriptures restrict the scope 
of hunting and lay down that a king (alone), if he is excessively fond (of hunting), may kill 
in the forest according to his needs (only) such animals as are fit for sacrifice (and that too) 
on sacred occasions (Sraddha etc.), recognized in the scriptures. (6) The wise man who 
performs his duties thus defined (in the Sastras) is not tainted by that action, O ruler of kings, 
thanks to the enlightenment that dawns on him (as a result of such actions). (7) Full of 
egotism, he who does his duties otherwise (in violation of the restrictions imposed by the 
scriptures) is bound (by such actions). Having fallen into (the whirlpool of) transmigration, 
and deprived of his judgment, he goes down in the scale of spiritual evolution. (8) 


aa faftiernsrot fara: firey: | fagetsug:facat eae: Heol! @ | 
RAI AUS ASA, Waa SRNL | AeA fate fare SAAT 180 | 
ad: ameakerdt fad year acetate: aerate, erga: 1k RI 


STIMAMAGaah qUremaMiata: | Meagan ATT «AA: 1821 
ait oe: «4 WeRs |  auipeNe: 1a eras aul qlevil qeAteriii3 


srk «= «Fa Afea| sft a: Hales WAI: PACT Aa GWT 1ev1 

a adah dead wey yeaa: ale a ale Je AM Vet at cites | 
AS TA GA MG: Hl ATTRA SAA 18 | 

w= adit a wom went Seid ar agerd set divert ae ae 126 


The slaughter of wild animals that had their bodies lacerated by his arrows decorated 


. ied with great pain was something hard to bear for those 
with variegated feathers and © ; ged in) killing hares, boars, bisons, Gayals, 


_ (9) While (enga 

seatichiseaee ntl oie fit for sacrifice, and many other creatures, he felt (much) 
fatigued. (10) Exhausted with hunger and thirst, he desisted from the cruel act and returned 

ome; and when he had finished his bath and duly taken his meals, he lay down to rest and 
was (thus) relieved of his fatigue. (11) He graced his person with perfume, sandal paste and 
Wreath of flowers etc., and, well adorned allover, (now) thought of his queen. (12) Sated with 
refreshments, deli hted with perfume etc., and highly proud of his royal state, and his mind 
Seized with Se = he missed his beautiful wife, who helped him in discharging the duties 
ofa Revechoeid 3) As if sad at heart, he enquired of the ladies of the gynaeceum, O king 





412 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 26 


BeBe BeBe Re Re Re Be Re Ree Re Re RR Re RE BREE RRR BE RE RE BE BERET BEB Be BeBe By Br Ge He Be eB Br He Be Be MB He Hr Br Sr Sr Hr Hr Hr Hr Br Hr Br Sr Hr er Br Br Wr Br Sr Sr Sr Hy Prey 





Vedisat (Pracinabarhi) : "Is everything well with you and your mistress, O charming 
damsels? The household wealth in this house looks not so splendid as before at this 
moment. (How is it ?) What wise man would stay like a miserable creature in his house 
neglected as a chariot without wheels etc., if there was no mother, or wife looking upon her 
husband as God (Himself) in that house. (14-15) Where is that lovely lady, who cheers me 
up when | am drowning in an ocean of misery, brightening my intellect at every step ?" (16) 


VAI Hq: 
aa A weedeat agaaafaiyde PRaat Wai wea We |e 
The ladies replied : O lord of men, we know not what your beloved wife is bent upon 
(doing). (Just) see her lying on the bare ground, O slayer of foes ! (17) 
ARG SAG 
Ten: wat faenag yfaiaagrafat ager wet aatieci 
GRAAL FHV art eda face i van: BeawAafogarahs AVM 181 
aaasAa Waadhisqaatiae: uae eee alagetiear 1201 
Narada went on: Purafijana, whose judgment had been shaken through attachmentto 
his wife, was sorely perturbed to see her lying unkempt on the ground. (18) With an aching 
heart he tried to pacify her with soft words, but failed to perceive in (the behaviour of) his 
beloved queen any sign of anger prompted by love towards him. (19) The gallant youth then 


gradually began to cajole her, skilled as he was in (the art of) conciliation. He touched her 
feet and, having seated her in his lap and caressed her, spoke (as follows). (20) 


RAT Sara 
qi anda ya agian: WA HameacarHmal fRlaneus A aad 1221 
UMmisdietl «ast YAY Nyda: atest A ae adia aRHaAAg: 1221 
a a qa adda quaquiundistamaandgadaatny | 
Teioniaterpddad a: MM yea waka angers 1231 
deret aide da ahufa aisaa wWotHetendinieaqare | 
Ted A aavaqaied fete a uate aa 12x 
ae A a fatten afed fast esitanfaqsacarn | 
Ua Hea syelaedt Gendt fararet POTTS SATU 124 | 
aA seie Gee: dinicaea Si Tae yal ae | 
I Cat ad HaMatisaeienad A wa Ha i2E1 
si at AIeMTad AEG UAH Sted aa Geto Telseseme: IR&| 
Puranjana Said : Unlucky indeed are those servants whom, when they have committed 
some offence, their masters, O fair one, care not to punish by way of correction, recognizing 
them as subject to their control. (21) Punishment meted out to servants by their master is 
an act of supreme grace (on the latter's part). He who resents it is a fool in that he fails to 
recognize it as a friendly act, O lovely one.(22) Therefore, O proud lady with beautiful teeth 
and graceful eyebrows, reveal to us, who are yours, your face with a prominent nose and 
a sweet tongue, hanging under the weight of love and bashfulness, charming with smiling 
glances and decked with dark bee-like tresses. (23) | shall (presently) inflict (suitable) 


punishment, O spouse of a warrior, on him who has wronged you, unless he belongs to the 
Brahmana race. | do not find him immune from fear, much less rejoicing, in all the three 


is. 27 J 3 
gereontsatunensnesenssvesssnereres OOK OURscevezeansnnenguaeeepele 
worlds ( or even) beyond them, if he i 

demon Mura). (24) Never pers Pe 
forehead), dull, cheerless, frowning with a 
even your lovely breasts soileq with tears o 
without their saffron-like hue. (25) Therefor 
| have committed an offence against you i 


er than a servant of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the 
your face without its Tilaka (sacred mark on the 
nger, untrimmed and sullen, nor did I (ever) see 
f grief and your lips, ruddy as the ripe Bimba fruit, 
€, be gracious to me, your loved one, even though 
; n that | went out a hunting of my own will ( without 
taking your leave), seized with a passion for sport. What vcmnant GaninG for es would 


not accept, for befitting Services, her beloved one, who was (ever) under her sway and had 
been deprived of his patience by the vehemence of love ? (26) 


Thus ends the twenty-sixth discourse forming part of the story of Puranjana, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SAER ESAS 
PISS NE i) 


BIA AMAfaansearea: 


Discourse XXVII 
Raid of Candavega against the capital of Puranjana 


and the story of Kalakanya 
ARG Sa 
sa SH weaa fawt:iget wt WW wad afi et 
a wet afest Use gam sear! Hd TAMNaAeeUTAT | 2 I 
qaraye: Ufernen WISI: | 
a mea aad aaa fe Petit sma: | 3 | 
sai Ceteted «= ifeitezsirafa: 1 
ama dt wad ww adernsiadt a hi Ww a adit 
Narada resumed : Having thus brought Puranjana completely under sway by her 
feminine graces, O great king, Puranjani (the wife of Puranjana) enjoyed life, bringing delight 
to her spouse.(1)King Purafijana, O Pracinabarhi, greeted her when she came up to him with 
a bright countenance, having washed herself well and fitted herself with auspicious 
decoration, and (fully) gratified (after a hearty and sumptuous dinner). (2) Embraced by her, 
he threw his arms about her neck; and, infatuated by her secret amatory counsel, he did not 
Notice the rapid movement of time, which was difficult to master, knowing not whether it was 
day or night, his mind being completely possessed by (the charms of) that young woman.(3) 
Lying ona spl endid couch with the arm of his queen serving as a pillow, the over-ambitious 


at = ds, accounted his wife the supreme 
and v _ whose arrogance knew no boun 
shicee eins leeceeth eyeroowere’ as he was with infatuation, he did not know what was his 


and what was alien (to him). (4) 
aid aa ACA: | HoT LR Alcs Aa aa: 1 & 1 
; Reigate «© fatetasisefrererma | & 1 


fea frqarqearendt: | aittaretqunee: Utara: TGA 1 9 I 





414 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 27 


ARAAARAAAAALAAAAATAHKALKLLKAARAANL TK HAKRLKK AW AAA AAA Br Sr Br Br Fr Fr Fr Br Sr Ber Hr Hr Fe Hr Be He He He Br He Se $e Be He Ge Kr Hr Fe Kr Sr Hr Hy Prt o, 


Q usu: warm faqdafaadari at: datsamra gfed: eee: 1c | 
GAM AMG YT Weer At BMI aa weal ae: UsTey Aa: 1 ¢ | 
ay akameRgy | Jeaegeifegi freca | AAT fama gtaead 1201 
SX oa mraftraftelient: | uae: 1 Sars fe etter eT aT 18 
arya | WANS HSM: | Saag aa Hier asia: recat 1 22 


While he thus tasted sensual delights with her, his mind (reason) clouded by passion, 
his youth passed away—half a second as it were, O king of kings ! (5) Emperor Purafijana 
begot through that Purafjani (as many as) eleven hundred sons and one hundred and ten 
daughters. These latter brought glory to their parents and were endowed with a noble 
character and virtues like generosity and so on. They became (collectively) known as 
Paurafijanis (daughters of Purafijana and Purafijani),O ruler of men. By the time (he begot 
all these) half his life was spent. (6-7) That ruler of Paficala duly united his sons, who 
propagated their ancestral line, with (worthy) brides and his daughters with suitable 
bridegrooms. (8) A hundred sons were born in due course to each of his sons. By these the 
race of Purafjana considerably grew in the land of the Paficalas. (9) Through a deep-seated 
feeling of mineness in respect of his sons and grandsons (the heirs of sons), houses, 
treasury and dependants (servants, ministers and so on), he got attached to the objects 
of sense more and more. (10) And, prompted by manifold desires, he worshipped, as you 
did, the gods and manes as well as the lords of ghosts through (a number of) horrible 
sacrifices involving animal-slaughter, after being (duly) consecrated for them. (11) While he 
thus remained unmindful of all that was conducive to his welfare, his mind being attached 
to his family, the period of senility stole upon him—a period (most) unwelcome to those who 
are fond of women. (12) 


Sit Set Teaifeaiaa i eater «= ed: «| BYALA 123 | 

Tater «aga fanfen: oq fag adenmfattiars ext 

a USAT: USat saliaqanht at wade: 1241 

a Gale: acter faq a ad Ba: | Geese «ss reiedaey HT RI 

Staal + Weary Unley aetaen | farat UW STATA: WUTSTATaAa: 1219 | 

a Wa wat agqyeuseg wud: 1 suid aie Jed Glisdl Atacama 1c 
(Now) there is a chief of the Gandharvas, known by the name of Candavega, O king! 
Three hundred and sixty strong Gandharvas (celestial musicians), forming his retinue, and 
Gandharva women, equally strong, half of them fair and others dark (of complexion), pairing 
with them, ravage by rotation a city whichis well provided with all objects of enjoyment (even) 
when it was built. (13-14) When these attendants of Candavega commenced pillaging the 
capital of Puranjana, Prajagara (the serpent) offered resistance there. (15) For (full) hundred 
years that powerful guard of the city fought single-handed with those seven hundred and 
twenty (Gandharvas of both sexes). (16) When his relation (Prajagara) began to lose 
Strength as a result of his combat with many, Purafijana felt (extremely) distressed with his 
(entire) dominion and city and kinsmen (too), and was filled with great anxiety. (17) Being 


the only drinker at his own capital in the kingdom of Paficala and thus receiving the tribute 


eare u his own retainers, that hen-pecked monarch knew nothing of (the impending) 
ear. 


Mea Gedl Hicictetat attest i ude a Tet Weed HAA 1S! 








Distal BOOK FOUR “415 


Be eRe He BEEBE ESE SE SESE SESE RES, SEE MES Be Me Re RE MEME ME Se Mee Re MEME He HEHE Me RR RE RR RRR Re BEBE RE ERR ERE BEBE LEBER LAME EGE BEEBE TERE LEBEL ERE EER 


aaa we fay aitfa aiar ast usta gq aqdlelya aC 1201 

eaaecne AW Seer WAI ad Feed al q Bradt rated 122! 

af wea faygenersmd ge-aei wanda Ama nerf WA 122! 

dat faedese sat aad nalafsoree ad am wa ofl 1231 

AA GMA al qui aitftad afar ascaeala Yami cha: fo a Refs 121 

alaaraqatrattt TCAACaTa | Aeclenaauad A Ua A cfeeslr 1241 

Aa wa A Vs wd A eat Hei uma wet emf aarataqenmaa 126! 
There is a daughter of Kala (the Time-Spirit), who ranged over the three worlds, desirous 
of (securing) a husband. Nobody (however) would welcome her, O Pracinabarhi ! (19) Due 
to her forbidding nature she became known in the world by the name of Durbhaga (an 
accursed woman). Accepted (once) by the royal sage Puru (the youngest son of Yayati) she 
conferred on him the boon of sovereignty, highly pleased (with him). (20) On a certain day, 
when | had (just) descended to the terrestrial globe from the realm of Brahma (the creator), 
she in the course of her peregrination (came and) wooed me, infatuated as she was with 
passion, even though she knew that I was vowed to perpetual celibacy. (21) Enraged at my 
refusal, she pronounced a formidable curse, saying : "Having turned a deaf ear to my 
advances, you shall never stay at one place (long), O sage !" (22) Her will (thus) crossed, 
the maid thereafter approached the lord of the Yavanas, Bhaya (Fear) by name, as 
instructed by me, and accepted him for her husband (with the following words) : “I court you, 
the foremost of the Yavanas, as my coveted husband, O gallant youth ! The hope centred 
by creatures (men) in you never goes in vain. (23-24) Both he who does not part with and 
he who refuses to accept that which offers itself as worth giving or taking—according to 
usage and (the injunctions of) the scriptures—are ignorant and perverse; the wise feel sorry 
for them. (25) Therefore, O blessed one, be gracious to me and accept me, who offer my 

hand to you. To compassionate the afflicted—that is the sacred duty of a man.” (26) 


mlieomiiedad far waar: ifanitdan a afd amured iv 
vo 0 refered «= ofarereifear | arftarefa orenisd areas 1221 
aaermiayeea och aifattiaqi ae A gaat Sear sorefa 12°! 
TANS AA Ma aaa AM Hal aqua slasaaAem Made: 1301 
Sfa sera AS WRASA Alecia ACA SAMI Taras: 12's 
Hearing the words addressed by the daughter of Kala, the lord of the Yavanas, who was 
eager to accomplish the secret mission of the gods (viz., to bring about the death of living 
beings), smilingly replied to her (as follows): (27) “With the help of my intuitive vision | have 
found out a husband for you. The world does not welcome you because you are inauspicious 
and despised. (28) (Now,) moving about imperceptibly, enjoy you the (whole) creation owing 
its existence to Karma (thus treating everyone of it as your husband). Sally forth with my 
army and you will bring about the destruction of (all) created beings. (29) Here is my brother, 
Prajwara (mortal fever), and be you sister to me. With you both and followed by a formidable 
army | shall range over this world unperceived. (30) 


Thus ends the twenty-seventh discourse forming part of the parable of Puranjana, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


at f=, = a 
PIS RS 











416 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28 


wr 


BER Re Be Re Re RRR Re RR RRR RRR RRR BE Re Re RB RE MY EBT Be Re Be Me Me Me Be Br Ke He He Br He wr Se Se Be Se Re Re Se wee Be He Me Br Pe He Be Re Re We MB BA Fr tr ar ay, 





STATS aan Seale: 


Discourse XXVIII 
Puranjana is reborn as a woman and attains liberation through the 
teaching of his friend, Avijnata 
ARG Sa 

fie waa a afee path: i sean  faeerccittrar ¢ | 

q wel g@ Wa weg yieequinitmet woe 2 | 

aor ays eR sedi aay: gee: wal Pearce! 3 | 

Taya A aaa: wadelfear i ae: sfasa qyel Wea Awl WA x | 

qa | sueIarearmafsart = «=—- eta: | STaTUTefaetrenaM, Hetil Adda: 1 & | 
Narada continued : Accompanied by Prajwara and the daughter of Kala; the hordes of 
the lord of the Yavanas, Bhaya by name, who were the agents of fate, O Barhisman, ranged 
over this globe.(1) On a certain day, O king, they besieged with (great) speed the capital of 
Purafijana, rich in (all) earthly enjoyments and guarded by the old serpent (Prajagara). (2) 
The daughter of Kala too took possession of the city of Puranjana by force. Overcome by 
her, any man would become powerless at once. (3) The Yavanas (the troops of Bhaya) 
entered the city, which was (thus) being forcibly enjoyed by her, through the (various) 
entrances on all sides and oppressed the entire population very much. (4) The city being thus 


tormented, Puranjana, who loved it as his own self, and who had a large family and was 
troubled with the feeling of mineness, fell a prey to manifold agonies. (5) 
eae! Asst: aut fase: ae edwyat  wWerdaaddend € | 
fasiiot wut died sfaperaedr! GM Waa A Adasen I © | 
Wa SA MW UHeMkResa | dasa A SY cdeatlatwarii ¢ | 
Hadaetrea  adaaigs maaifanneatdae: Geni wed! e | 
Tldaeaisaral Hlohaaed | Bd Washa Wet at dated: 120! 
TAS We TAN: WeOhed: | dale at a Heat wg: Prafaatdar 1221 
Embraced by that maid (the daughter of Kala) and divested of (his) glory, Purafijana felt 
(very) wretched, his mind being engrossed in the pleasures of sense. Nay, forcibly robbed 
of his power and affluence by the Gandharvas and the Yavanas, he lost his power of 
discrimination (too). (6) Seeing his city destroyed, his sons and grandsons, servants and 
ministers rebellious and disrespectful, his wife cold and indifferent, his body caught in the 
snares of that maid and the land of Paficala overrun by the enemy, he was plunged in 
anxiety which was hard to overcome, and found no remedy for it.(7-8) Miserably hankering 
after the objects of enjoyment, rendered insipid by that maid, and affectionately taking care 
of his progeny and wife, the king lost his spiritual moorings as well as the affection of his 
people and reluctantly proceeded to quit that city, which had (now) been taken possession 
of by the Gandharvas and Yavanas and devastated by the daughter of Kala. (9-10) (In the 
meantime) Prajwara, the elder brother of the lord of the Yavanas, who bore the name of 


Bhaya, made his appearance (there) and set fire to the entire city with intent to please his 
brother. (11) 


qa Peas wt: waftese: i atefan: Hela saad Aras: 1221 





Dis. 28 ] BOOK FOUR 417 


BeBe BBA REBEBE SESE BER BAER Me SB Me Be BeBe Me He He eRe He eMC RR REA AM RR Re Re Re He He Re Re Re He RE ERA RE ERE BERR RE BEEBE REDE REE LEB AE BEBE BER REE 

TANTEI | TA | SATE | Gat | SeaRage: «= QT ISA 1231 

a 3h BIST TA Uepageday: | qternd  qacnletiad AN ey! 

Farfrestererant ag 6 trercidcdtes: igeefieht «oo usrquecl «SCE RG 

gq: Gig «= often aerate ahaisre qeaarohee 126! 

ae Fat Migs Wy Hakefticeat see aa fi safe 101 

wart Walt aaa gefeti ated ae Aer aenasired 12! 

qT Wem Yeh area wife went ats eP qdaen alee aaa 122! 

saved unfegt safe attenenfetat i adine «qedetet «6 dag Ferher 1201 

ou JT akeat det analataram: ated ufa wa fata saleet 1221 

: When the city was in flames, Purafjana, the head of his family, suffered (untold) agony 

with the entire city, his own retinue, the mistress of the family and his sons and daughters. 
(12) When Prajagara's own abode was besieged by the Yavanas and the city was occupied 
by the daughter of Kala, the said guard of the city felt sorely distressed as he closed with 
Prajwara. (13) When he was unable to defend the city while on that post and found himself 
in great straits, he shook violently and sought to fly away therefrom even as a serpent would 
try to escape from the hollow of a tree on fire. (14) With his limbs enfeebled, and himself 
deprived of his manliness by the Gandharvas, he actually wept when intercepted by his 
enemies, the Yavanas, O king ! (15) Puranjana (the master of his house), whose mind has 
been perverted by the thoughts of 'I' and 'mine' in respect of his (body and) house etc., felt 
(very) wretched when the hour of separation from his wife came, and (anxiously) thought of 
his daughters, sons and grandsons, daughters-in-law, sons-in-law and retainers, house, 
treasury and (other) belonging, whatever (still) remained his in name only. (16-17) (He said 
to himself,) "When! am gone to the other world, how should this widowed mother of the family 
eke out her existence, lamenting the lot of her children? (18) (Entirely) depending on me, she 
would not take her food until | had been fed nor would she bathe until | had taken my bath. 
(Nay,) she would get awfully frightened when | was angry and would hold her tongue out of 
fear when scolded by me. (19) She would admonish me when my judgement failed, and 
would grow emaciated through grief when | was away from home. (Now) will she be ableto - 
follow the way of the householders (when | am no longer with her), even though she ts the 
mother of heroic sons? (Very likely she will not; rather she will try to follow me to the other 
world by ascending my pyre.) (20) And how will these helpless sons and daughters, who 
have no one else to depend upon, survive when | am gone? On the other hand, they will 
perish like the inmates of a broken vessel in mid ocean.” (21) 


Wi FUN qa Wend aed Paw ASAMAMAElT 1221 
Uyeda dane: Sh Aa srasaaque: Berit YRraigM: 1231 
ui 4 fageiana 9 sae SGA: 1 set WMatY Get faeitot spit vat 12ut 
fanemin: yaw gat ACME AfercdaMIssas: AA Yee WE 1241 
aq agqaaista Gael «aseer | Hortishae: Hal: Meds aL 126 | 
sma «oaafa wat asefa: at: | Madhya WHeTASEad: 1291 
aaa wae vel aya west facda usfiee aenht 1221 
saan | diduot |S ait | aereat: | afer Paster Usa Usa: UGTA: 1281 








418. SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28 


Ree Ree Re Re Re Re Re Re Re Ree Re RE Re RR ERE Re RE ER RR RE RR Re BR HA Be Pe Be ME Te MY BMT Be Be NE BY We We Fr Se Wr Ae Br We Fr Se Se Mee He He He Me He He He Hear He; y, 


ai UW Wade sterafadavm aaa: BA Pa Wa slasyya: 1301 
UWhRAMVEAT Teasetae | Mena «Ast ATE L138 
Snre: «elena IATA ET eal Wd sedate AP: 1321 
While Purafjana was sorrowing thus with a feeble mind, even though he should not have 
done so, there came up the lord of the Yavanas, Bhaya by name, bent upon seizing him. (22) 
When he was being taken by the Yavanas to their own place, bound as a beast, his 
attendants (too) followed him, sorrowing in extreme perturbation. (23) When the serpent 
(too), that had been held up (till now by the Yavanas) deserted the city and came up (to his 
master), the city was completely destroyed after him and reduced to the elements. (24) 
(Even) while being forcibly dragged by the mighty Yavana, Purafjana failed to remember his 
old friend and companion (Avijfiata), seized as he was with infatuation. (25) The sacrificial 
animals that had been mercilessly slaughtered by him (now) chopped him with axes in anger, 
remembering that cruelty of his. (26) Steeped in ignorance, to which there was no limit or end, 
and having lost his memory, he suffered (untold) agony (in hell) for numberless years, his 
mind being perverted through attachment to his wife. (27) Mentally clinging to her alone 
(even at the last moment), he was then born as a most beautiful girl in the house of the (then) 
ruler of Vidarbha, a veritable lion among kings. (28) Malayadhwaja, a ruler of the Pandya 
kingdom, who had conquered (all) his enemies' cities, married this princess of Vidarbha, who 
was Offered as the prize of valour, after vanquishing all the other princes in battle. (29) 
Through her Malayadhwaja begota lovely daughter with dark eyes and seven younger sons, 
who became the seven rulers of the Dravida kingdom. (30) A hundred million sons were born 
to each one of these latter, by whose descendants the earth will be ruled over for a whole 
Manvantara and (even) beyond it. (81) Agastya married the first-born daughter (of 
Malayadhwaja), constant in virtue; of her was born the sage Drdhacyuta, who (in his turn) 
had a son, Idhmavaha by name. (82) 
fared aaa: amt weifstwaeac: | stkueatag: HOt A WIA Hora 133 | 
fecal Fert. Gar, AT aes Afetaron | staead WSR Visa Write 13% 
TA Usdel AM aaa acer! qquaaieeMaquaarcal Te 1341 
raltstiaiennc: GUauieuiech: |adad: Aides aT shed: 13a! 
aaratacaair «afore feahatiqaea st seslesacdasla: 1301 
ae facet cmneet ffaddd:iqgst sewer fatraranteraa: 1321 
ae Wiiianar feet ated fe: iad waft arieeleet <r 13el 
a aMmedaissae atditpdaissar | fase. we garatarant faa =z ixol 


Matadket Te gon Ti fend wp 8 faadrqe set 

Ut Aa ae Uk ae amssami dian  fageamenguam =F 1%rI 
Having divided the earth among his (seven) sons, that royal sage, Malayadhwaja, betook 
himself to the Kulacala mountain, eager to worship Lord Sri Krsna. (83) Abandoning her 
house, sons and luxuries, the lovely eyed daughter of the king of Vidarbha followed the lord 
of the Pandyas, even as moonlight follows the moon. (34) (Three) rivers, Candravasa, 
Tamraparni, and Vatodaka by name, flow in that region. Cleansing the impurities of both his 
body and mind with their holy waters everyday, and subsisting on bulbs and seeds, roots and 
fruits, flowers and leaves, as well as on blades of grass and water, he practised austerities, 
which gradually emaciated his body. (35-36) He triumphed over pairs of opposites such as 





Dis. 28 ] BOOK FOUR 419 


Be We Be Be Ge Ge Be He He Wee Be Ke We Be Ws We We Ke Ke He Mr Hr gy 
¥ SORES SESE BE SORE ME SESE Be Me Me Me Re Re Ree Be Ree Re MRR RE RAE REE R RRERRMA ALR BAEER IE R 


heat and See storm and rain, hunger and thirst, the agreeable and the disagreeable, 
pleasure and pain, viewing all with the same eye. (37) With his latent desires eradicated 
through asceticism and worship, and having controlled his senses, breath and mind through 
the religious vows (of purity—both internal and external, muttering the divine name and 
sacred texts) etc., and the various forms of self-discipline (viz., non-violence, truthfulness 
etc.), he united (identified) his self with Brahma (the Infinite). (88) He sat motionless like a 
stump at one place for a hundred celestial years. (And) having found (supreme) delight in 
Lord Vasudeva, he ceased to be conscious of everything else. (39) With the light of pure 
wisdom imparted by the divine Sri Hari Himself as a preceptor, which shed Iustre all round 
in his heart, O king he perceived the Self, whois the witness even of the activities of the mind, 
as illumining the body etc., and (therefore quite) distinct from them—even as a man sees 
himself apart from his severed head etc., in a dream—and verily grew indifferent to 
everything else. (40-41) He realized himself as one with the transcendent Brahma and the 
transcendent Brahma as identical with himself and (then), giving up even this conscious- 
ness, actually rose above (quitted) this world. (42) 


Uft est = aasif | eae eon aden sie at ufaeadt 1x31 
dakar = aaa Suityafenteer | asrau ofa ae fare adare Ixy 
stadt rare AAAS | UPONRTAAATATEI AAMGAAOTALT, 1S | 
aa | ASEM «ated i ondinifaneeet «BET WT ae ise! 
aM edt daway fagasfy: 1 aaa fata qat sete a ixel 
shsthts ue erga age: aaaepat fesadi urguefa isl 
wa fasadt aren faftasarn ufaqiufaa wea seayuradad ise 
fafa aeadt fact qa ag: Hea snetar ara fasadt wat aa i4o! 


aA YSdt: HAG AAU Ba! Aaa ANH AA AAe Fadl AAT 1481 

Renouncing (all) sensuous enjoyments, the aforesaid Vaidarbhi (the daughter of the king 
of Vidarbha), who looked upon her husband as a veritable god, lovingly waited upon her 
spouse, Malayadhwaja, who was conscious of his paramount duty (viz., that of propitiating 
the Lord). (43) Clad in tatters, and emaciated through fasting and other vows, her hair stuck 
together in knots, she shone beside her husband like a subdued flame by the side of a 
flameless fire (live coals). (44) Going up to her most beloved spouse, who was Seated ina 
Steady posture even when he had expired, the lady waited upon him as before, little knowing 
that he was dead. (45) When (however) she did not feel any warmth in the feet of her husband 
while serving them, she was much perturbed at heart like a doe that had strayed away from 
its herd. (46) Lamenting her lot as she was now friendless and miserable, she felt greatly 
alarmed and wept loudly in that forest, bathing her breasts in tears. (47) "Arise, stand up, O 
royal sage ! Be pleased to protect this earth, girt by the ocean, (terribly) afraid as she is of 
robbers and renegade Ksatriyas.” (48) Weeping and wailing thus, that young woman, who 
had followed her spouse to the forest, fell prostrate at her husband's feet and shed (profuse) 
tears: (49) Piling up a pyre of fuel, she laid the body of her husband (thereon) and, setting 
fire to it, made up her mind (proceeded) to follow him to the other world, weeping (all the 
time).(50) That very moment an old friend of hers, a Brahmana who had mastered his self 
(appeared there and), soothing her with sweet words of consolation, (thus) addressed the 


weeping woman, O king. (51) Mele Sava 
car et EN BY ars TAY ae areata | Safa fee ara At Aart ferred = 1421 


420 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 28 


We Re ROW We He Re We We Re Ree Ne ROR RR ERR Me HORE Be Me We We We We Ke We He Me ee He Ve We ee Vee ee eee ee eee Re Wee Ree We He We He He He 9, 











afr unfa dienes wal fear ai Venhaws Ata Ta: 1431 
suad Uw ad VER AMER ay ate: $= aeaUftaen ex 
a @ faa at aed Ta aramid faa, weasel: wenfatahtd fara qu 
UR avagaeue  fretseqise@e usfaat wasepid ater 14a 
uSfenat sia ek: Sn aa wai asisaat alsa Hofbsrdae: 141 
feaUTE fraraiknyesian ere | Mera: Tara fast Aragqeat 141 
afered UT WS ANUNsaderfa: | deargictealt Sra aa ardteet st 14a 


The Brahmana said : Who are you and whose daughter may you be? And who is the 
man lying (on the funeral pile), whose death you mourn ? Do you know me, your friend, with 
whom indeed you moved about of yore ? (52) Can you recall yourself as one who had a 
companion, Avijfata by name, O friend, leaving whom you went in search of an abode, 
addicted as you were to earthly enjoyments ? (53) You and!, O noble one, were swans living 
on the bosom of the Manasa lake and remained there for thousands of years without any 
shelter. (54) Leaving me, O friend, you came down to the earth with your mind set on carnal 
pleasures; and in the course of your excursions you saw an abode erected by some woman, 
with five pleasure-gardens, nine entrances, one porter, three surrounding walls, six families 
of merchants and five market-places. It was built with five materials and had a woman for 
its mistress. (55-56) The objects of the five senses constituted its gardens and the nine 
appertures locating the Indriyas constituted its nine entrances, O king. Fire, water and earth 
served as its (three) surrounding walls; the mind and the five senses were its (six) merchant 
families. (57) The (five) organs of action constituted its market-place ; the (five) elements 
served as its undecaying materials. Dominated by the intellect, the man who entered this 
abode ceased to be self-conscious. (58) Overpowered there by (the wiles of) the woman 
(the mistress of the dwelling) and enjoying life with her, you forgot your divinity, heard of in 
the scriptures; and it is through her fellowship that you have been reduced to this most 
wretched state, O master of your self ! (59) 


41 a facta wa dk: Yedaia ufacd Ge Sel AAW sal igo! 
Ta at Aa Be aaa fad adi awa awa ag gat agaraanieriiee! 
He Waa Uted adore faer at: 14 At usaha Haahes aq ara 12! 
a USS SeTAMeHATeaiaarar: | feemapaaatct adaraaaat: 163 | 


You are not the daughter of the king of Vidarbha nor is this hero your husband. Nor are 
you the spouse of Puranjani by whom you were held captive in the city of nine gates. (60) 
It is (nothing but) a piece of illusion created by me. under which you thought yourself 
(formerly) as a man and (now) regard yourself as a virtuous lady; (really speaking) you are 
neither. You and | are a pair of swans; (just ) realize our true nature (going to be described 
hereafter). (61) | am you and you are no other (than me); mark you, you are just the same 
as |. The wise never perceive the least difference between us. (62) Just as a man sees 


himself (his image) differently in a mirror and in the pupil of another's eye, the difference 
between us two is of the same type. (63) 


wd a Bisel eal wear Mica: | erecta Asraa ya: Byer ext 
ae eraIgearc Unie «= -ahet eaarfret Sat sam fasuraa: 1641 
Sid AMEMad A RASH Ged aq GSATeAMASEaaSeMA: 1221 





DESMA ER Ts is ee ecc eo BOON FOUR on 


= SESE MERE RE ME MERE MERE MEME He ERE REE AER AE Eee ARERR RE REMEBER BE AE REEMA HEME MTB 





Admonished thus by the fellow- 
established in his own self and reg 


to his having parted company with his friend. (64) O Pracinabarhi, | have imparted this 


spiritual truth to you in an indirect manner; for the glorious Lord, the Maker of the universe, 
loves to remain incognito. (65) 


swan, the swan of the Manasa lake was (once more) 


Thus ends the twenty- 


eighth discourse forming part of the parable of Puranjana, 
in Book Four of 


the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramaharmsa -Samhita. 


ck ‘> x f.> ‘3 * 
IPSS SSL 


SH Nenlasran Sear: 


Discourse XXIX 
The Dialogue between king Pracinabarhi and the sage Narada (continued) 
Wealtalecara 
Weed ads anand maadeiarea aA ad aeatfedt: | 2 1 

Pracinabarhi said : O divine sage, we are unable to follow your teaching correctly. It 
is the wise alone who can rightly grasp it; not we, who are deluded by attachment to the 
rituals . (1) 

AR sad 


Ue wed fieree Saaeer: oO! wnfefreaee SEMIS | | 
aistagidedetres Ce RA: 1a faa gfsrainfal fear: 1 3 | 
Gal fryer Gee: seta vac Aa feeenatt aamqa atftafa i x | 
af aq weet faemoretia aqpet amferattsergaryetsatertorst | & | 
we sheer wad owt a apa awrecqda: sm: usafddtent: | & | 
gees 0S feguahaeraee| Uae: oe fava amet Fa MHI © I 


Narada replied : One should understand Puranjana (lit., the maker of a city) to be the 
Jiva (an embodied soul), inasmuch as itis the Jiva that produces a stronghold for itself in the 
shape of a body with one, two, three, four or numerous feet or without any feet. (2) The friend 
of the Jiva referred to under the name of Avijnata is (no other than) God, so-called because 
He is not fully known by the Jivas as having names, actions or attributes. (3) When the Jiva 
wished to enjoy all material objects, it thought the human body endowed with two hands 
and two feet and nine appertures as the best among all. (4) One should understand the 
young woman (Purajijani) to be (no other than) the (human) intellect, which gives rise to the 
Notions of 'I' and ‘mine’. Identifying himself with tt the Jiva in this body enjoys the (various) 
Sense-objects thrqugh the senses. (5) The (ten) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and 
the five organs of action), which bring about (all) knowledge and action, are the male 
companions (of Purafijani); their activities are her female companions and the vital air with 
its fivefold activity is referred to as a (five-hooded) serpent. (6) One should understand 
Brhadbala (the eleventh mighty warrior waiting on Puranjani) to be (no other than) the mind, 
the ruler of both the types of Indriyas. The kingdom of Pancala represents the five sense- 
Objects, in the midst of which stands the city with nine gates. (7) 


aft afer aot aa fregerfaies & ant afeatir aenferametaa: 1c 1 


ained his self-consciousness, which had been lost due - 


a 





420 . SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 29 


WER Re Re Ree Re Re RRR Re eRe ROR Re Ee Re RR RR RR RRR RR RR RRR TR Re RR Hee eRe HEM He He SE HERE We Mee Be Ve We Ke We We Ve He Fe He Fe Her SEW ERE Me Be He eH we ey 
Le, 


sifu ates smefafa usrat: chet: | afarom afar: chut Sa ale: Ba: 1 <1 
um saetent oe firaftrereadi welessletat oa Aa uaa Pic 
wu faviistd asa fares Tata: 10 | 

aie aie ae URI: ERM sea! wolsage Tere facon asafasa: 1221 
sam taenisa feet «seer! feqedferm: aot sad cae: Ga: 1221 
vad a qd a wet usneditet aga 9 caari— atarepeeTTTgSTL 123 1 
seat Agaabgetart sree wa: i scent ge: siket Prefs set iexi 
aed ae Trgseraiset a A AO weet GAA get aia Heit a eu 
sui oe Cfaaferda | Se at aT oT ae Sita aT: 1261 
aq ae fafead Worn fafa aide aeiuspisse 8 daguditanrdd 1201 


The two eyes, the two nostrils, the two ears and the penis and the anus are the (four) pairs 
of entrances with the mouth (as the ninth). (It is through these gates that) the Jiva goes out - 
(to the objects of senses) accompanied by the Indriyas (located in these appertures). (8) (Of 
these) the two eyes, the two nostrils and the mouth are the five gates located in the east (in 
front of the head). The right ear has been spoken of as the southern and the left, the northern © 
gate. (9) The two openings below have been called the western gates and they are - 
designated here (is the present context) as the penis and the anus. The (two gates) Khadyota 
and Avirmukhi (declared as) constructed at one place (side by side) in this city correspond 
to the two eyes; and through these, aided by the faculty of vision, the Jiva (the master of the 
body) perceives colour, which corresponds to (the realm called) Vibhrajita. (10) The two 
nostrils are (the gates) Nalini and Nalini and odour has been spoken of as (the territory of) 
Saurabha. The olfactory sense is (the companion of Purahjana known by the name of) 
Avadhtta; the mouth is (the gate called Mukhya); the faculty of speech is (the companion 
going by the name of) Vipana and the organ of taste is (the friend known as) Rasajna. (11) 
The use of the tongue is the territory mentioned in this story by the name of Apana and the 
food of various kinds is the realm known as Bahtdana. The right ear is the gate called Pitrht 
and the left has been referred to under the name of Devaht (the northern gate). (12) The 
scriptures dealing with the path of worldly activity (the cult of rituals) and those preaching 
quietism (the cult of worship) have bean spoken of as (the dominions of) South Paficala and 
North Pancala respectively. Listening to these through the ear, which has been spoken of 
as (a companion of Purafjana under the name of) Srutadhara, the Jiva takes severally to 
the path of the manes (leading to the realm of the moon-god or heaven) and the path of the 
gods (leading to the divine Abode). (13) The membrum virile is the western gate called Asuri; 
the act of copulation is the territory called Gramaka (which is only another name for carnal 
delight). The faculty of procreation has been spoken of as (a companion of Purafjana under 
the name of) Durmada; while the anus has been referred to under the name of Nirrti (the other 
gate in the west). (14) The Infernal region is the territory called VaisSasa, while the organ of 
defecation (located in the rectum) is the companion named Lubdhaka. (Now) hear from me 
about the two entrances leading to blind alleys. They are the hands and feet wherewith the 
human soul severally works and moves about. (15) (The region of) the heart is the 
gynaeceum and the mind has been spoken of as (the principal waiter in the gynaeceum 
under the name of) Vistci (VisUcina). Identifying itself with the qualities (Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas) of the mind, the Jiva gives way herein severally to complacence, joy and 
infatuation.(16) According as the equilibrium of the intellect is disturbed (in the dreaming 

state) or it disturbs the senses in its turn (in the waking state), the Jiva (the embodied soul), 
that is affected by its qualities, is compelled to follow its changes, although (by its essential 





Dis. 29 |] BOOK FOUR ~~ 423. 


er te ROR RE RCC ewe Ke He ROM Re KER Ke RR He ar 
ot SERENE SESE ME MTSE RRB RE Re Mee ERE RE RET HEMEERRRREEERERREREREAELEABRER RADA AAR 


nature) the Jiva is a (mere) witness. (17) 


tel || - (afea Paes: Wace: | fRencheren Rerporeact: UBMYARE: 1261 
TARA = eitet «= aa: | USeaeinae: AAMAS: 1231 
step ate agent Serer | Wenreat se: USGA 120 | 


The body Is the chariot having the senses of perception for its horses and coursing swiftly 
(on the face of it) like the year, though (really) motionless. The two varieties of Karma (good 
and evil actions) are Its two wheels; the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) are its three 
flagstaffs and the five Vital airs (Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana) are its five 
cords.(18) The mind is its (single) rein; the intellect, the charioteer; the heart, the seat (for 
the occupant of the chariot); the pairs of opposites ( just as joy and sorrow, honour and 
ignominy and SO on), the poles (to which the yoke is fixed); the objects of the five senses, 
the recesses (into which the weapons are deposited); the seven constituent elements (viz., 
chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow and semen) make the seven protective sheaths; and 
the five organs of action (the tongue, the hands and feet and the organs of copulation and 
defecation) are Its five kinds of outward motion. (In this way) the Jiva runs after the mirage 
(of sense-gratification), followed by the ten Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the 
five organs of action) and the mind (the inner sense) as his army and unlawfully enjoying the 
five forms of sensuous pleasure, which have been figuratively spoken of as the slaughtering 
of animals. (19-20) 


aawrsusat: met  auetead: | deere weal wera waa: Ba: | 
Seu: ORHAN THA IAAa 122 | 
HOhA ATI MAMestheal trad | AI We Yq: AAA Aaa: 1221 
sme STATA Aa: | Waar: swat fefaet vax: 1231 
The year, which symbolizes the (passage of) time, is (referred to under the name of) 
Candavega (the chief of the Gandharvas); the days and nights (comprising the year) have 
been spoken of as the three hundred and sixty male and the same number of female 
Gandharvas, forming his retinue, who steal the life (of a human being) by rotation. (21) Old 
age is personified as the daughter of Kala (Time), whom the world does not welcome. Death 
in the person of the Yavana chief (Bhaya) accepted her as a sister for (help in) the destruction 
of the world. (22) Mental anguishes and physical disorders are the Yavanas, the mobilized 


troops (of the Yavana chief). And the fever of two kinds" is (personified as) Prajwara (the 
brother of the Yavana chief) who is described as having a swift career in tormenting living 


beings. (23) 


wa agadd adamant: | feRaA: Ad ae ae eal Aataa: 12x! 
STO eA TA ATA ae Prior: iat aarieareareraareata | adead 1241 
Bessmaafaga Wiad Ut WEL! eat? fawetd WUY Spd: Gay 12a! 
Tuna A Ael SwAfeT Heise: | Ys HOt ated at amennifstrad 121 
EAC CE) T hietad | :lechi- ferararanda: Menthe Hrd 12 | 
afer wire eit aferatererreret: | cat Aqateteat AMET Wa: 1281 
eet ze ata: aaa Te Wella fact afes aUsdleqna aq i301 


aM Baa wa saaare sa | saeet at neat at arta fas Prensa 132 1 
eee a a SFC 


: Sitajwara (fever accompanied with fits of cold) and Dahajwara (inflammatory fever) are the two types of fever obviously 


referred to here. 








424 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29 


BR RRR RRR RR RE RE RRR RE REE RRR RE RR ERE HR BRE BER HE RM We We Ve Ve Fe We Br We We He Hr We Vr Be We Sr He Hie He Hr BER MBER He Be BEM He He Ke He He He 41 He g, 
eee eeeeeoeees_woeY“rrvwCwOo0oOoO—_F TT TT a ef 


Afflicted thus by manifold sufferings, brought about by divine agencies or other fellow- 
beings as well as those relating to one's own body or mind, and enveloped in ignorance, the 
Jiva dwells in the (human) body for a hundred years, bound by the sense of 'l' and 'mine'. 
(Essentially) attributeless, the Jiva ascribes to itself the qualities of the vital airs, the Indriyas 
and the mind and remains contemplating on the trivial pleasures of sense and performing 
actions of various kinds (in order to secure them). (24-25) (Thus) not realizing the Lord, its 
supreme teacher and very self, when the Jiva, that is (really) self-seeing, gets attached to 
the modes of Prakriti, it identifies itself with those qualities and helplessly performs Sattvika, 
Rajasika and Tamasika actions and is born (in the various species of life) according to those 
actions. (26-27) Sometimes through Sattvika actions it attains to spheres abounding in light: 
now (through Rajasika pursuits) it goes to worlds which lead to suffering and involve exertion 
through action and now (through Tamasika actions) it is hurled into regions dense with 
darkness (ignorance) and sorrow. (28) The deluded Jiva is sometimes (born as) a male, now 
(as) a female, and now it is (born) without sex either as a god or as a human being or in the 
sub-human species, the birth being determined by its past actions and the mode of Prakrti 
(predominating in it at the time of death preceding that birth). (29) Just as a poor dog seized 
with hunger and wandering from door to door (in quest of food) receives (good beating with) 
a cudgel or cooked rice—whatever is ordained by fate—so does the Jiva whose heart is 
possessed by (the demon of) desire reaps a welcome or unwelcome destiny, ranging by 
paths high and low through the upper (celestial) or the lower (infernal) or the middle 
(terrestrial) regions. (80-31) 


RCE CoTSEMILL aU Hedy | sla A Slaade: AMrehiarferismar 1321 
aor fe geet at feel Weased| d See a sted aM Gal: Safa: 1331 
dcidd: Udi: Hd wd haewisgd wladagd wa wu sama iaxi 
ag glaaast dat Raddinaze feeedo we feat ser i34i 
AMSAT UASAaoa | aaefeeestaesel Va UAT AT 1361 
amgea wate wufpam: wanfed: aera amd wa a wafeeda 13! 
istered = UT Mees: | Yuad: seem eer weed: 132! 
aA UTA Ws areal fagteiera: | Wain wstauremsede: 13e 
detetana  xvemftakadgessaka uta: aaa 
TT a awafagqa qa Menvlena Wardsqenaaihalel: 1¥o | 
Uren fei vaet: wares: ia ait eh mega derive! 
Tsai: Matta Piet Aq: | aetea: seneqan Affe: Pacnea: 1x2! 
Tage «Ue: Use: me aadfeg sad deat wearer: 1x31 
3tenfa areata aera: | OAS A Usaha UI UAT YY I 
Weta «= Gat Mi | Sela dafeeelated usd a fae: UL IK4l 
WMaMaavMad: | A Set Aft ate ae a uaa ive! 


There is no (such thing as absolute) freedom for the Jiva from even one of the three types 
of sufferings, viz., those brought about by divine agencies, those inflicted by one's fellow- 
beings and those relating to one’s own body or mind. Even if there is a remedy in particular 
cases, if only proves to be the precursor of another suffering. (32) Just as a man carrying 
a heavy load on his head may place it on one of his shoulders (in order to get relieved of the 
burden), so are all remedies. (The remedy, employed to counteract an evil, itself proves to 





is. 29 ] 
Ova watiaial eta aera BOOK FOUR 425 
ESSER IGS R GERE SEER HERRERA RE OHM RE Be REE RE AA RE RARE BR AERA ADE RE RAI AA RE ERE 


be asource of fr esh trouble). (33) Evenasadream inadreamconstitutes only a change from 
one dream experience to another, but does not bring about the cessation of the dream, So 
mere action (divorced from the realization of Truth) is no ultimate remedy for (the sufferings 
TE anc by one's own) actions, both being conceived in ignorance, O pure-hearted 
monarcn ! (< ) Just as for aman roving about in the dream-world with the mind, which 
conditions his soul, there is no cessation of dream experiences, so also (the vicious circle 
of ) transmigration does not cease (for the man whois buried in the sleep of ignorance) even 
though the phenomena of the world have no reality. (35) Now freedom from ignorance— 
ignorance, which brings inits train a chain of evils in the form of transmigration to the eternally 
existent soul, IS Secured through supreme devotion to the Lord, the (supreme) Guru. (36) 

Contact firmly established with the Lord through Devotion will automatically induce aversion 

to the pleasures of sense and bring enlightenment. (37) That contact through Bhakti, 

depending as it does on the stories of the immortal Lord, becomes an accomplished fact 

before long, O royal sage, forhim who devoutly listens to or reads such stories everyday.(38) 

In a place where there are pious and pure-hearted devotees whose mind is impatient to 

repeat and listen to the praises of the Lord, O king, there flow in all directions streams of pure 

nectar-like stories of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Madhu) recited by exalted souls. 

Hunger and thirst, fear, grief and infatuation never afflict those who drink in such stories with 

intent ears knowing no satiation, O Pracinabarhi ! (39-40) Ever harassed by these natural 

enemies, people do not indeed take delight in the ocean of the nectarine stories of Sri 

Hari.(41) Brahma (the lord ofall divinities presiding over procreation) himself, Lord Siva (who 

lives on Mount Kailasa), Swayambhuva Manu, Daksa and the other lords of creation, 

Sanaka and other sages vowed to perpetual celibacy and expositors of the Vedas—Marici, 

Atri, Angira, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhrgu, and Vasistha, including myself—all masters of 
speech—have not been able even to this day to behold the supreme Lord, the Seer (of all), 

in spite of our efforts to perceive Him through asceticism, worship and concentration of 
mind. (42—44) Moving about (freely) in the vast expanse of the Veda, the depth of which 
cannot be easily sounded, and worshipping the forms of Indra and other gods endowed with 
characteristics (such as the thunderbolt etc.) as indicated in the texts of the Vedas, we fail 
to know the Supreme. (45) When, contemplated upon in the heart, the Lord showers His 
grace on some particular individual, the devotee so blessed gives up his faith, however 
deep-rooted, in the worldly usage as well as in the Vedic rituals. (46) 


aMIChHAY afeatasiaedicniiang | isis «pe: saeraRigasadg ive 

@ ore a fae a aa at ores: | omental «= a emnicifge: Ive! 

areied aa: sea: area fase Ken Geert ad ara ae | 
aan ear acat faa aaictadtar ise 


aiteyarant 0 wa epee MOT aa: att FUTIfAE 140 

a 8 fraqnsren ad a wanvatai sft aq a a fae at faa a eet: 1421 
Therefore, O Pracinabarhi, do not regard rituals as real—rituals which, though their 
accounts are alluring to hear, have no relation whatsoever with the (ultimate) Reality. They 
appear as real only through ignorance. (47) Men of impure (clouded) understanding, who 
speak of the Vedas as devoted to rituals, are not (really) conversant with the Vedas, 
inasmuch as they do not know the truth about the Spirit, that Is their own essence and where 
dwells Lord Janardana—in other words, which is the same as Lord Janardana. (48) Having 
strewn the whole terrestrial globe with blades of Kusa grass, their ends turned towards the 
east, you have grown arrogantand proud of your extensive slaughter of animals. You know 
nothing about the ritual nor of what is higher than that (viz., wisdom). That alone is (classed 
as) the ritual, which conduces to the pleasure of Sri Hari; (and) that alone is wisdom, which 


[S64] B. M. 16— 





426 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 29 


Ree Wee Bee We Bee Hee BORE ES ERE MEG BEBE REDE BE MCR RE Me BE Ge PORE BENE We We Me Me Ve Be Re Ke We We We Be Be He We EME He Kee We We We Pe He Me Me We We Ve He He eRe Me WRK He He He He 9, 
———— LE 


leads to faith in Him. (49) Sri Hari is the Self as well as the lord of (all) embodied beings. 
and He is their independent Cause (too). The soles of His feet (alone) are their (true) 
asylum; for in them lies the safety of men in this world. (50) Indeed He is the most loved 
_ one, nay, the (very) Self, from whom there is not the least fear. (And) as a matter of fact 
he(alone) is wise, who knows this (truth); (and) he who is wise is the (true) preceptor, nay 
Sri Hari (Himself). (51) 
ARG sad 
ua wa fe deal wad: geadism A aad Ta Pana gaan 1421 
aes Tara at fafa wh veahrroramy gerne | 
Ta GHAaMaiserned ad Gs WT Wa GelHaUiay 143 | 
Narada continued : Thus (far) indeed has your question been answered, O jewel among 
men! Nowhear from me as | tell you a hidden truth which has been fully ascertained. (52) (Just) 
find (the identity of) the deer fondly consorting (with its female companion) in a garden of 
flowers grazing tiny blades of grass with its ears charmed by the sweet humming of Swarms 
of bees, going about unmindful of the blood-thirsty wolves before it and pierced from behind 
by the shaft of a hunter. (53) 
[ areae: J 


GaA-AaH SHU SRO STIS GIATAaaIad Hadad HMA 
Vegeta fafa faeitya aefefiditta ard ysatroramitdadia- 
THA MAesMG AIAN + FHyxMIe sleqecisearart, 
HIooaayaerwreas Tee Aewd Fa Wa WMA Gel: Hara Sa: WOT ahs 
Ulaeata AAA Use, Saeed SPASatil 14s | 

a a feast qreisanenisdsd fae ee molest a fad | 


Vagismaenagama suite gaat fam = wBATT GY! 
(The import of this is given below.) 

O king, you would do well to perceive yourself as one seeking after a dose of sense- 
delights such as the pleasures of taste and copulation—obtained as a result of actions done 
with an interested motive, and most insignificant like the odour of the honey in flowers—in 
a house full of women sharing the nature of blossoms (that fade too soon) ! Nay, pairing with 
women, you have given your mind to them, your ears completely lured by the exceedingly 
charming talks of beloved women and children, resembling the sweet humming of swarms 
of bees. You enjoy life at home setting no value on the moments of time culminating in days 
and nights that prey upon your life like a pack of wolves ahead of you; and here is Death, 
the hunter, stalking you and striking you with his veiled arrow from a distance an lo ! your 
heart has been pierced with the same. (54) Thus pondering the career of the deer, restrain 
your mind within the four walls of your heart and (the outward flow of) the stream of your ear 
in the mind. Bid adieu to the life of a householder, where you (mostly) hear stories of 


unrighteous (libidinous) people; (try to) please the Lord (the shelter of all living beings) and 
gradually withdraw from everything else. (55) 


USAT 
arctan se Ta aeNad deren: fee a wafiedfe 146! 
eaasaA {4 fax dioaetedt verti waist fe woh aa Afsana: 1401 
euivaraa 4 gaifte faa Mion a ye a wat ied 


_ 


renmnrot 


ein ebinasie 


eS Se We Re Re MORK We Ree Ke He He Ee 
SESE NE REAR ERLE RE RENEE ERE ERE REE REE RE REE ERNE REE RE ARERR OR AER BE RAC 
: id WA wal giant afad seb adel a wena uel 


_ King Pracinabarhi said : | have heard and pondered, O holy sage, on what you have 
said. (Surely) my preceptors (who instructed me in the rituals) are not aware of this; (for) had 
they known It, wherefore Should they have failed to teach the same to me? (56) The great 
doubt raised in my mind by their words on this Subject has been fully resolved (by you), O 
(worthy) Brahmana. Even sages are bewildered in a domain which is beyond the reach of 
the senses. (57) Leaving here the body by which the Jiva performs (certain) actions, he reaps 
the (good and evil) consequences (of those actions) ina future life through another body. (58) 
This doctrine of the knowers of Veda is heard of everywhere. (But how can this be 7?) 
(Moreover) whatever action, recommended in the Vedas, is (actually) performed goes out 
of sight and IS NO longer visible. (How can a thing which has altogether disappeared yield 
good or evil consequences?) (59) 


ARG 3arq 
aad oat wa AU yesh Were fea aE WALI G0! 
Waa A eet ae | afarented Yer AMetdawl aT ie2l 
Tit oT aeemagiit ae gaa we at aa gaia: 162 
aerated farrqakfsated: itd sreest arf mead fawafafa: 1631 
Tt 8 F Ut eeeENA aafaquest at |= oem ext 
ware ae Usifewigat «See Seayisat A wa: aBpAefa gu) 


Narada replied : The Jiva itself experiences (the good and evil) consequences of its 
actions hereafter through the same subtle body, (mainly consisting of) the mind, by which 
he performs (those) actions and which continues uninterrupted (even in the lives to 
come).(60) Just as (in a dream) a man ceases to identify himself with this (physical body)— 
which remains lying asleep and breathing (as heretofore)—and experiences the fruit of his 
actions, which are stored in his mind (in the form of impressions), so does he reap the fruit 
of his actions done in a previous life through another body similar to this or belonging to a 
different species. (61) Whatever body the Jiva cleaves to with his mind, saying: "These (wife 
and children) are mine and this (body) is I", he (also) ascribes to himself the actions 
performed through that body, whence follows his rebirth. (62) Just as (the existence of) a 
(directing) mind is inferred from both the types of activities of the Indriyas (viz., perception 
of the objective world and reacting upon the same), so are the actions wrought through a 
previous body (and surviving in the form of impressions) inferred from the (diverse) 
propensities of the mind. (63) What has nowhere been experienced and is unseen and 
unheard of in this life is sometimes perceived with the mind in its actual form and character 
(ina dream ora reverie). (64) Therefore, O king, be positive in your mind that such an object 
was experienced in a previous life by that Jiva identified with a subtle body; tor an object that 
has not been experienced (before) can never (even) flash on the mind. (65) 


Wow «Aqee Safa | wierd VR A Ata A fae: ee! 
sept «oa fafa aR ae AeA aarhieionensray 1 ge | 
at madara = vadthsetre: | rena atien ata ae Geet Sma: 1 ect 
aaah cafe  wiaardatth | masdicaqeaanred 1G 
we uate aralsd ea aadiad | aaa Aeerisenezreygt MAreAry lo | 
Ufrestaaetg UTA: | tesa = A SARA 192 1 
TY aredseulencatarentadt dal fog A RA AA: Hal VaAAt Ga 10z 


> °428 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 





[ Dis. 29 


We Me We Hc BRR RR REM He 4, y, 
Wr 


af giaaas det fadai ead fayana wsisrairat ger is) 


The very mind of a man, God bless you, reveals (the nature of) his former existences 
as well as the future ones in the case of the man who is going to be reborn and even go 
(indicates) the liberation of the man who is not going to be so reborn. (66) Sometimes (in a 
dream) a thing (altogether) unseen and unheard of in this world in relation to a particular 
place, time or action (such as a sprout of barley on a burning flame, the sun shining at deaq 
of night or the flying of a creature living on dry land) is seen flashing on (one's) mind. How 
this happens should be inferred (from the attendant circumstances, e.g., a disturbed sleep) 
and does not disprove in any way the proposition enunciated in verse 65 above.(67) Such 
objects alone as are perceptible by the senses flash on the mind in groups in order of 
succession and disappear (when they have been enjoyed). (For) all embodied beings are 
(invariably) endowed with a mind (full of impressions of past experiences). (68) (As a rule, 
things appear before the mind only successively; but) on a mind established in the quality 
of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas and staying by the side (in the presence) of the Lord 
(during meditation) the whole of this universe flashes (Simultaneously sometimes), being 
united as it were with the Lord, just as Rahu (which has been recognized as a planet in Hindu 
astronomy and is nothing but a mass of darkness) appears (before our eyes) in conjunction 
with the moon (during a lunar eclipse). (69) The feeling of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ (with regard to the 
physical body), inhering in the Jiva, does not cease so long as the subtle body—which has 
existed from time without beginning and which is a product of the three Gunas and a 
conglomerate of the intellect, the mind, the Indriyas, (the five senses of perception and the 
five.organs of action) and the five subtle elements—persists. (70) During sleep, in the 
unconscious state and in agony as well as at the time of death and high fever the I- 
consciousness (though persisting) does not manifest itself due to the suspension of sense- 
activity. (71) The senses being not fully developed during gestation and infancy too, the 
conditioning ego appearing in the form of the ten Indriyas and the mind in a young man is 
not (distinctly) perceived in those periods any more than the orb of the moon on the last night 
of a lunar month. (72) Even though the world of senses does not (really) exist, (the cycle of) 
birth and death does not cease, for the Jiva who is (ever) engrossed in the thought of the 


pleasures of senses, any more than the reverses experienced in a dream (until one wakes 
up). (73) 


tw usgiaa fos fad weafaqaqius data aml sila serftettad ix! 
a Uestearqied «= farqerit 1 ed eich wa goa Ge ur feria out 
aM qUisieeha Aaa «| asiferaaronsta smeeiiafa aa: 19g! 
Wdet 4A fadd Aaa HAMA Wa VASA YAR aylaqq iv! 
BOI ENTGIC™ a HAvafaqdsachd | Mla Havas aI: HATA: 1c! 
ATA IS Ae «| SM URI fae ferqerereran aa: 1199 | 


In this way the subtle body, made up of the five suptle elements, and (further) developed 
Into sixteen modifications (in the form of the five vital airs, the mind and the ten Indriyas), and 
which is a product of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), is spoken of as the Jiva 
when the same Is endowed with consciousness. (74) Itis through this (subtle body) that the 
Jiva assumes and casts off (physical) bodies and (again) it is through this that he 
experiences joy and sorrow, fear, pleasure and pain. (75) Just as a caterpillar does notleave 
its foothold (until it has caught at another) and leaves it (only) after it has firmly set its foot 
on another, the Jiva does not give up (its) identification with the previous body (the one he 
casts off) even while dying until it takes another body (earthly or aerial and so on) with the 
exhaustion of Karma (responsible for the existence of the previous body). Itisthe mindalone, 


eR Re Ke Re Ree Me Re Me Re Re RRC RR REREAD LR RE  ERER RERE RE BE RE BEBE RE REMEBER RE BREA Me Be BEE He 


Dis. 29 J an Se We KEK He He BOOK FOUR : 429 


We We We Ke Hea 8, 
* Wr He Hr 
* SSSR OREM A Re Ae He te Me ae He Oe He Meee AeA Arar te eee de AH He Re We We We We Be Se Hs 


O ruler of men, that brings about the birth (and death) of living beings. (76-77) When a Jiva 
resorts to len “gain and again, thinking of the pleasures enjoyed (by it) through the 
senses, It Is bound by such actions of the body so long as they continue to be performed by 
it through ignorance. (78) Therefore, in order to get rid of this bondage, worship Sri Hari with 


all your being, looking on this universe as one with Him inasmuch as it proceeds from Him, 
stays in Him and is (also) dissolved in Him. (79) 


HAY Sarq 
WMTATTE TETAS Seana sexe eas feet ads col 
aera uate: warreniferarct 1 arfagar Waranaa 989 Hfaensra cet 
TARA — at TREO | AAG SAMS WEA ACTA 1S 


Maitreya continued : Having (thus) revealed the truth about the swans (in the shape of 
the soul and the Oversoul) and taking leave of king Pracinabarhi, the glorious Narada, the 
foremost among the devotees of the Lord, then proceeded to the abode of the Siddhas (a 
class of superhuman beings naturally endowed with mystic powers). (80) Leaving instruc- 
tions for his sons to take care of the people, the royal sage Pracinabarhi (too) retired to the 
hermitage of the sage Kapila (at the mouth of the Ganga) for practising asceticism. (81) 
Constantly and devoutly adoring the lotus-feet of Lord Govinda with a concentrated mind and 
completely rid of attachment, the hero attained (after death) a form similar to the Lord's. (82) 


Weenie 86d «= eafdurmaaia: stada: soja feea faqerd ict 
Wee «Yad WN | tafdadqah:- gaara | 
a: aidaratenrasia ange ae wa watt Amadedaed: 121 


STATA aaa Aad | Ue faassen: GaRoasya a Aa: 1241 
sfa si . z . aay fz 1 qe aq fara : x Cat feat . ~ 


AAMAS: 1291 


He who reads (to others) and (even so) he who listens to this allegorical dissertation on 
the Spirit, delivered by the celestial sage (Narada), O pure-hearted Vidura, Is rid once for all 
of his subtle body. (83) He who assimilates, as sung (by others), this self-purifying 
discourse—that issued from the lips of the sage Narada (the foremost of celestial seers) and 
Sanctifies the whole world through the glory of Lord Visnu and which confers the highest 
reward (in the form of final beatitude)—is freed from all bondage and no longer revolves in 
(the whirligig of) metempsychosis. (84) Thus have | understood the meaning of this 
wonderful allegorical teaching on the subject of the Spirit. With the help of this the self- 
identification of a Jiva (embodied soul) with Buddhi (that has been depicted here as a 
woman) is eradicated and all doubts regarding life after death resolved. (85) 


Thus ends the twenty-ninth discourse entitled “The Dialogue between king Pracinabarhi 
and the sage Narada," forming part of the Dialogue between Vidura and Maitreya, 
in Book Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SSE 





430 » | SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 30 


31a faranseara: 


Discourse XXX 
Bhagavan Visnu confers a boon on the Pracetas, who then return to their 
city and marry the foster-daughter of the trees 
fagt Sara 
J waited HAA Pal: Hrelaafes: 1a watts eft fakgary: ster ary gt 
fe agade wa aa whacmatseadatd: | 
steal «2a CORR «aaa g: Wk Ae: | 2 

Vidura said : What reward did the sons of Pracinabarhi, mentioned by you, get, O holy 
sage, by propitiating Sri Hari through (the repetition of) the hymn sung by Sri Rudra ? (1) 
Having accidentally met with (Secured the presence of) Lord Siva (who lives on Mount 
Kailasa), | am sure, the Pracetas, who were able to win the grace of that divine Personage, 
the favourite of Bhagavan Narayana (the Dispenser of Liberation) must have eventually 


accomplished the supreme object of their life (in the shape of finai beatitude). What (else) 
did they achieve, O Maitreya (pupil of the sage Brhaspati), either here or hereafter ? (2) 
WAY sara 
Jaa SaSee faqueRenthur: sa ATT STII 3 I 
aasaeera RRC MTT: | AGTATfeNYeHRS WA WAG Se |X | 
qovleearEt teqefrange: | Utara afore: pee fatafar feat: 1 & | 
Alaa bihavifayso wetentieadet facatenite: | 
5 CICICTE vs afaal fe 1 fa: | & | 
UMMadsysAveenemee weifasa Uadl AAATAISSE!: | 
Stead: Get se Ade Wa Usiealeedal ATUactc: | © | 
Maitreya replied : In obedience to the commands of their father (king Pracinabarhi) the 
Pracetas propitiated Lord Sri Hari (the Creator of all bodies) through worship in the form of 
repeating the hymn sung by Sri Rudra and austerities carried on in water in a lake almost 
as extensive as the ocean (vide IV. xxiv. 14). (3) At the end of a myriad years Bhagavan 
Narayana (the supreme and eternal Purusa) appeared (before them) in His placid form 
(consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), soothing by His (very) effulgence their 
agony (caused by long and severe austerities). (4) Mounted on the shoulders of Garuda (the 
king of the birds), He looked like a cloud settled on a peak of Meru (the mountain of gold), 
was dressed in yellow and had the Kaustubha gem suspended from His neck, by the 
splendour of which (and above all by His own effulgence) He drove away the darkness from 
(all) the quarters. (S) Not only His cheeks but His entire face shone brightly with brilliant gold 
ornaments presenting a variety of attractive hues (due to the various precious stones 
embedded in them): He wore (on His head) a glorious crown and was waited upon by His 
eight weapons (viz., a conch, a lotus, an arrow, a bow, a mace, a sword and a shield, 
appearing in living forms, though usually adorning His eight arms) as well as by (a number 
of) attendants, sages and rulers of gods (Brahma and others), His glory sung by Garuda like 
the Kinnaras (through the music of his wings). (6) Encircled on the bosom by a wreath of 
sylvan flowers whose splendour vied with that of Goddess Laksmi, adorning the space 
enclosed by His eight long and rounded arms, Lord Narayana (the most ancient Person) 
spoke to the sons of Barhisman—who had sought His protection—in a voice (deep) as the 





Dis. 30 ] 


ge te Me HBR SE BEBE BEE TENE GE EDEN He He He He He 









MEME ME ME KEKE HEHEHE Me He He 8, H, 





We Oe Hi SEWER REM Me Wee MEME HERE MORE RE MEM ROMER RE AOAERERE BER HEBER REE BERE BE BME We Be We Mt 


rumbling of clouds (as follows), casting a merciful look at them. (7) 


“ 


at quited wx at ai a eae aaea 

2 _ OW Tere: | aedagemmigsise a a: 11 

x Oa T WATT Aa wagered aa ae Beer! e | 

gu earth UT Se: AATeeT: | WaRAs HMAEREA Nat A BAA 1 Qo! 

ae Mquesrety Weiract: 1 set a sat aifieteraa sfaertr 1221 

atfaat erga: UNA HET TW: 1a wararadidur firevat yufaeata 1221 
. The glorious Lord said : Seek you from Me any boon you choose. God bless you, O 
princes, Observing as you do the same sacred vows by virtue of your amity. | am (really) 
pleased with your mutual affection. (8) The man who.will remember you everyday at dusk 
will not only have the Same affection for his brothers as for his own self but will cherish friendly 
feelings for (all) living beings. (9) And | will confer the desired blessing as well as a brilliant 
intellect (even) on them who will glorify Me every morning and evening with a concentrated 
mind through the hymn taught by Sri Rudra. (10) Inasmuch as you have joyfully carried out 
the command of your father, your bright renown will accordingly pervade all the (different) 
worlds (comprised in this universe). (11) An illustrious son will be born to you, who will be 


inno way inferior to Brahma (the creator) in point of virtues and who will fill all the three worlds 
with his progeny. (12) 


US: TAA GM HM HHS | At AUfagt syeHet AAT: 1231 
aaa Wa Us aA: wguafiemn tei Wear fest a catfad: 12x! 
waft §8sifest: fia amqaddiat meat amlel amged arfeeie4 
agarenmaiomt ade a: AaeMriswyewenigiea  wercceatarrean 126 
feared agent CRSA SAAS: | MA MAA AI a aA aAErAA 12191 
31a Wea Va Gequnee: | scares wg ffaer fread: 12¢! 
Tefal aie gat Haledon AgMlacamat A Asa Ber Ac: 1291 
Teaaayed | a | Mal gelaTfaf: 1A ahd a ale A ee All Ta: 1201 


The sage Kandu gota girl with eyes charming as the lotus through Pramloca (a celestial 
nymph). And the (spirits presiding over) trees, O princes, took charge of the girl, who had 
been abandoned (by the nymph). (13) Moved with compassion, the celebrated moon-god, 
the king (of herbs and annual plants), put his index finger, dripping with nectar, in the mouth 
of that girl, wno was oppressed with hunger and crying. (14) Commanded by your father— 
who is (now) devoted to My path—to beget children, marry that girl with lovely hips without 
delay for the said purpose. (15) Let that girl with a lovely (slender) waist be a wife, (equally) 
devoted to you all, who are observing the same vows and are possessed of a similar 
disposition; and she too (| am sure) will observe the same vows as you all and is possessed 
of a similar disposition (so that there will be no fear of conflict either between yourselves or 
between you and her and you married life will be quite happy). (16) For a million celestial 
years with undiminished strength of body you will enjoy by My grace earthly as well as 
heavenly pleasures. (17) Thereafter, with the impurities of your heart (in the shape of lust. 
anger and so on) burnt through unceasing devotion to Me, and recoiling in disgustfrom those 
hell-like pleasures, you will ascend to My (divine) Abode. (18) In the case of those whose 
actions are dedicated to Me and whose hours are spentin talks relating to Me, even though 
they have entered the life of a householder, home life is not recognized to be a source of 
bondage. (19) For, through the aforesaid talks, given by the expositors of the Vedas. |. the 


BOOK FOUR 431». 








432 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


[ Dis. 3 
We Ve Ge He Pe We We Be Ge Ke Ke Fe Fr Be We Be eRe Wee Me Se Ree RK Ge Be Gee Te He Me Tee Ee Wr We Be Ke Se Fe He We We Be Ae We We We We We We We We Ve He We We We We We Be He He We We Ve He He Hr We We We We We 0 


We We Hey, 


all-knowing Lord, enter the heart of such devotees as if in an ever new aspect. This 
(manifestation of Mine in the heart) is (the same as the realization of) Brahma as (is evident 
from the fact that) those who attain to Me never given way to infatuation, grief or joy. (20) 
WAT Sara 
wa samt yest wet Sea: = Sele: | 
AER AAA ATA STATO Prey Teal Getay 1221 
Maitreya continued : Even as Lord Visnu (He who is supplicated by men), the Bestower 
of (all) the objects of human pursuit and the greatest friend (of all), spoke thus, the Pracetas, 
who had been rid of all impurities in the shape of Rajas (passion) and Tamas (ignorance) by 


His (very) sight, addressed Him (as follows) with joined palms in a voice choked with 
emotion. (21) 


Fada Hy: 
aat qa: Hallas Prefudtenqureae | 
Walearertgastayra Walaa AA: 1221 
qa we wz: was wed fava | 
aat SIRI a eay, Tetaranoaaes 123 | 


fee wa ateaiameaa Hera sd ada 12%! 
SHCAIMa AM: Masala Aa: HAMA Ae BAHT 124! 

Srohaacntismiodee | wdudearaa adgseente arfat 1261 
waa cadealaepare Tata | stifaehd A fest fHaaeqeniud 1201 
unerd fe fayfanie: dag age: | aeqedd I MAGA WRT 12 CI 
aay «=|: ew AMAA srfedismeea Hea aa arfera: 129 | 
salad aSeaeditad! sd: wdiseat Was sarmuartiqerifa: 1301 
at gGuimesaia AM aad: WIA Paedeyde Bista sla tera 1321 
UsdsaM Gl UNSiSMaA Pad | aeahyearare aenteh fH quite 1321 
aad Aaa WS WA se Hay: | MamasasM BE: Bal Wa Wa 1331 
qos oad a wai agadaqiwacisagea aatat fqarfare: 3x 
WSkd HA YSRIMIA: Wa ad: i fAdt aA WAY Ala GA MAA 13k 
WA ANA: Matar Ws: | dead AeHwg YAS: UA: WA: 1361 
var fered esa detat oreatesar | vier fee A Wad daa arm: 1301 


Aaa ey 


The Pracetas said: Hail, hail to You, who relieve Your devotees of (all) afflictions, whose 
excellent virtues and names have been declared(by the Vedas) as the source of all blessings 
and who surpass in quickness both mind and speech ! Hail again to You, the way of whose 
approach lies beyond the range of all the senses ! (22) Hail to You who are unconditioned 
and serene by virtue of Your being (ever) established in Your essential nature, and in whom 
duality falsely appears due to (the existence of) the mind ! Hail to You, who for the purposes 
of creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe assume various forms (the forms 
of Brahma. Visnu and Siva) through the attributes (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) of Maya! (23) 
Hail to You, known by the name of Sri Hari and consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and 

Tamas, whose realization puts an end to (the cycle of) transmigration ! Hail to Sri Krsna, son 
of Vasudeva, the Lord of (all) devotees ! (24) Obeisance to You who have a lotus sprung from 


“ 
~~” Zz 


ill 


et 


@ 
is. 30 | 
Oe aera See MBE GIES ME He He He HEHE He He He Me Be Hi He 9 wry, BOOK FOUR 433 
Bn a CR RRB RSC BCC 


avel ! Obei 

ea Pace i conte veut are adorned with a wreath of lotuses ! Obeisance to 

es | (25) Salutations to Y Pair ol lotuses ! And obeisance to You, O Lord with lotus-like 
MES YOncarncl ou, who are clad in stainless robes yellow as the filaments of a 
Saar. 26) T =) iy eter our obeisance to You, the abode of all creatures as well as their 
Seer. ( ) =: aie 0 are afflicted (with threefold agonies), You have revealed Your form, 
which Bs sf Se a all miseries ! What other favour could be bestowed (on us)? (27) Only 
this mucn's ie © done by masters who are fond of the poor that they remember the latter 
at the opportune moment as their own. O Destroyer of all that is inauspicious; for such 
remembrance brings solace to those who are thus remembered. Seated within the heart 
even of the most insignificant creatures as their Inner Controller, how could You fail to know 
that which Is sought by us (Your votaries) hankering after some object ? (28-29) To us, that 
have won the pleasure of the Lord (Yourself)—who is not only the teacher showing us (the 
way to) final beatitude but (our) goal too—that (Your pleasure) alone is the desired boon, O 
Lord of the universe | (30) Yet, O Lord, we do seek one boon from You—who are beyond 
(even) Prakrti (the ultimate cause of the world). And indeed there is no limit to Your glories: 
that Is why You are extolled under the name of Ananta (the Infinite) ! (1) When the celestial 
tree of Parijata Is easily got, a bee does not resort to another. (Even so) having directly 
reached the soles of Your feet, what other things should we seek (from You) ? (32) So long 
as we revolve in the whirligig of birth and death under the impulse of our actions, dominated 
as we are by Your Maya (deluding potency), let us have in every life the fellowship of Your 
loving devotees. (33) We are not prepared to equate with the fellowship of Your loving 
devotees, enjoyed even for halfa moment, the delights of paradise nor (even) final beatitude 
(freedom from birth and death), much less the blessings sought by mortal men. (34) (For) 
in the company of such devotees are sung the delightful stories (of Sri Hari) which slake the 
thirst for enjoyment, and we find no enmity with nor fear of any kind for any being. (35) In 
their midst is glorified Bhagavan Narayana Himself, the goal of the recluses, through 
beautiful stories again and again by men who are free from attachment. (36) How can the 
meeting of such devotees of Yours, who go about (from place to place) with the intention of 
purifying the sacred places with (the touch of) their feet, not be welcome to him who is afraid 


of transmigration ? (37) 
ai oq Wana wa fae wey: aoEAAT | 
Giga va qaiiand are wht Wal: Ize 
aa: welt ma: water fama dels Acl{qu | 
sTat att: «= Weel eT aT WIAA 138 1 
at: oad OT eT IO | 
wGé wane wat quire a ued Tat Io 
aq: waspinad Fag Ase ACgifeaaegarar: | 
separ «(aif qua: Waa waissHaH UIT: xe! 
ar: aaa We YEN WT Aiargeal Aas Ge Ara AA: 153 
© Lord, we have, through a moment's association only with Your 


b <4 (the Source of this world), found today our refuge directly in You, 
Nee Hee Sas ee of birth and death, so very difficult to cure. (38) Whatever 
we have properly studied (atthe house of our teacher), the efforts we have made to propitiate 
Our teachers, the Brahmanas and the elders by constantly waiting on them, the Salutations 
we have offered to (all) worthy men as well as to our kinsmen and brothers, nay, to (all) living 
beings in an uncavilling spirit, the austerities duly practised by us in water for a long time 


As for ourselves, 











"434 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA bee 
We Be Ve We We Be We Ve He Be Ge We Vi BeBe Ke RRR REE BRE SERE LEMERE EBERE TERE RE BEBE BEBE GEE BE EME EME GEESE SESE Be 0 We We We We We We We He We Ve Be We He ar We SOR IER He ag, “tr 


without food—all this, O Lord, we desire to convert into a means of pleasing You, the all- 
pervading Spirit. (89-40) Swayambhuva Manu, Brahma (the self-born) and Lord Siva (the 
Source of the universe) and others whose intellect has been purified through asceticism ang 
Self-Realization (constantly) extol You, though unable to perceive the end of Your glory. 
Hence we (too) glorify You according to our own (poor) lights. (41) Hail to You, the Supreme 
Purusa, the same to all and untainted by Maya. Obeisance to Lord Vasudeva, who is 
(absolute) Sattva personified ! (42) 


HAY Sava 
sft osetia eft: | Site ANU: | 


x 


shed aAagraayal wat meraraatata: 1s 
aq fala «Aimee 4 Sarda: | Slaatperghaeat Ti Wt Weepftrathest: sx 
adisaredt «oo Usaerqed «eT nel «fied ad PadH gard xu! 
STARA AL Ses FAAS: | ATA: AAAS GAL Sfewtal Aa: 1k 
qTAaRIST A gat wit dedi Alissige Wed sales: MAIaT ive! 
a ad sa stearate | aa ARCATA ATA IT: 1S CI 
TAM Gat Wa Maat arefag¢i a: wast so ger: a call caeitiad: 1s 
Ql Waa: Adal asteisifeal Sati Galtad aes HAT aatagqad iho! 
4 ssiekerenetie alga gqaisdig a a adsenad 142 
sia seed Ae URS Afedra Ageia Faseara: 1301 


Maitreya went on: Thus glorified the Pracetas and (highly) pleased with them, Sri Hari, 
who is full of affection for those seeking refuge in Him and is possessed of irresistible might, 
said, “Be it so!" and returned to His own (divine) Abode, even though the princes, whose eyes 
had not been sated with His sight, did not want that He should go. (43) Now the Pracetas 
emerged from the water of the ocean-like lake and were filled with anger to see the earth 
covered (all over) with trees, that had grown (very) tall as if to block the way to heaven. (44) 
Then, like Kalagnirudra (the god of destruction presiding over the all-destroying fire) at the 
dissolution of the three worlds, they breathed out fire and wind through their mouths in rage, 
O king, in order to strip the earth of all vegetation. (45) Seeing the trees being reduced to 
ashes, Brahma (the creator) arrived (there) and pacified the sons of Barhisman by words of 
wisdom. (46) Seized with terror, such of the trees as had survived (destruction) bestowed 
their daughter upon the Pracetas under the advice of Brahma (the self-born). (47) Bowing 
to the commands of Brahma, the Pracetas too married Marisa (the daughter of the trees), 
through whom Daksa, ( a mind-born) son of Brahma (who himself owed his existence to the 
birthless Lord Narayana) was reborn as a result of his having slighted the great Lord 
Siva.(48) He was the same Daksa who begot, as directed by God, progeny of his choice at 
the dawn of the Manvantara presided over by Caksu (the sixth Manu), the former creation 
having been dissolved by flux of time. (49) Even while being born, he overshadowed with 
his own splendour the brilliance of all resplendent beings and they called him Daksa 
(dextrous) because of his proficiency in rituals. (50) Having installed him (to the office of the 
chief of the lords of created beings), Brahma (the beginningless creator) appointed him to 


the task of extending and preserving the creation, while he (in his turn) charged all the other 
lords of creation with their respective duties. (51) 


Dis. 31 ] BOOK FOUR . 435 


Sr Be He He Me Ke We Se Hr Ge We Se He He ews Kee Se He He He wr ee Me He He He MAAR PPPS Ce SCRE LEAAALA ALAR RAR A ee et ek th 





Thus ends the thirtieth discourse in Book Four of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


wh Peek Pet BS 
PISS SS 


37 2eh rant SeaTa: 


Discourse XXXI 
The story of the Pracetas 
WAY sara 

at saalaaet «6 steetestartta aed sew arat fges Wiss Ter! 2 | 
ata = eT. ATTA eTaT | Ueikeat fefat Aenea facgisuera sisties: 1 2 1 

Afahstasrerearereaean fSTaTaa, WraAAMAaAS, | 

ursae seer aif: 9quatet cal A ANG: 1 3 | 
aardt a sera suena wigs aemnest qardhaagqat x | 


Maitreya continued : After that (i.e., after enjoying earthly and celestial pleasures for 
a million years—vide verse 17 of the last discourse) when wisdom dawned on the Pracetas, 
they remembered the words of Lord Visnu (vide verse 18 of the same discourse) and, 
leaving their wife (Marisa) to the care of their son (Daksa), immediately quitted their home 
(by way of renunciation). (1) On the seashore in the west, where (the celebrated sage) Jajali 
had attained perfection (in the form of God-Realization) they took a vow of enquiry into the 
Supreme Spirit, which culminates in the realization of the same as the one animating 
principle permeating all life. (2) The sage Narada; who deserves the praise of gods and 
demons (alike), saw (called on) the Pracetas, who had fully controlled their breath, mind, 
speech and sight, who could remain squatting in a particular posture as long as they would, 
keeping their body absolutely motionless and straight, and had concentrated their mind on 
the transcendent Brahma untainted by Maya. (83) Seeing him come, they rose (from their 
seat), fell prostrate at his feet, welcomed him and worshipped him with due ceremony. And 
when he was comfortably seated they spoke to him (as follows). (4) 


Wadd Ha: 
ard 2% adsa feeat To att Walaa Geel saya aa 14 | 
wees wan fyaatast Wlae Wee WawM saat wats & | 
aa: wehameesdt  caaesti dare aeart get warm © | 


The Pracetas said : Welcome is your visit (to this place) today, O celestial sage ! Thank 
God that you have appeared before us. Your going about (from place to place), like the 
revolution of the sun, O holy one, brings fearlessness (to the world). (5) What was taught (to 
us) by Lord Siva and Bhagavan Visnu (who Is beyond sense-perception) has almost been 
forgotten (by us), strongly attached as we were to our home, O master. (6) Therefore, kindle 
(once more) in us the light of spiritual wisdom, revealing the truth of things, whereby we may 
easily cross the ocean of mundane existence, which Is so difficult to cross. (7) 


Hag Sara 
sft saaat ys waa Yl aagqarecta  amfastenset gar | < 1 


Maitreya went on : Requested thus by the Pracetas, the divine sage Narada, whose 





436 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 31 


BEC MERE REE RCRE RE RE We SOR Re Be He He He Fe Br Me He Ke Kee Pe Ve Me PRE RED Ke Ke DRC RE Ke Ge We We He We Gr He He Ke Ge We Fe We We We Ke Ke SSE SER BeNOR He He Me Re HM HH He He He, 


mind had entered the most glorious Lord, addressed those rulers of men (as follows).(8) 


ARNG Sad 
asa aia qatar deer ada:iqot ate fame ead sitter: 1 ¢ | 
fe wufahatade sleatfanaiae: | anifial aetsiks: gets fagerger i120) 


saa wae at fe aafafarafats: | qe at fe favre acheter 128 
fe a ana aie zeararant ifs a safes a arsed aft: 1221 
Saat w«aaemren wdatereda: i ade yart etaenssme: fra: 1231 
aa aides gated ACHAT: 
STUNT BOT E-On ata Aalsorrayqaayn 12% | 
aia waar an: ws dem sofa are 
qa wit femgah am wea Yate: 124! 
Uda 4 4odeiidied: Ww aaeud  Afaqde sa 


aM AVM Adit WI A Aad | 
Wi ow sa wma wea = yale: 1201 
a mie 8 86=s SEN a RTL 

asa see UIT aTeMI ch MTT AAT 1 LSI 
Narada said : That birth, those actions, that period of life, that mind and that speech 
alone of human beings are worth anything in this world, through which Sri Hari, the almighty 
Lord and the Soul of the universe, is resorted to. (9) Of what avail to a man in this world are 
the threefold birth—viz., through good parentage, through investiture with the sacred thread 
and through consecration (as a preparation for the performance of a sacrifice)—duties 
enjoined by the three Vedas, or even a span of life extending to the life-time of a god ? Again, 
of what use Is learning or asceticism or flowery speech, or the (unique) faculty of attending 
to a number of things at one and the same time? Or, what benefit shall a man derive from 
a penetrating intellect, strength of body or the keenness of the senses? Or what shall a man 
gain by (the eight forms of) Yoga (such as Pranayama), Sankhya (the knowledge of the Spirit 
as being distinct from the body etc.), Sarhnyasa (renunciation), or a study of the Vedas? And 
what benefit will flow to him from other means to the attainment of salvation (such as sacred 
observances and dispassion) if all these are not employed in the service of Sri Hari, who 
bestows His very Self (on His devotees)? (1 O—12) Truly speaking, (the realization of) the 
Self is the culmination of all blessings. And Sri Hari (alone ) is the beloved Self of all living 
beings and it is He who enables the Jiva to realize its true character. (1 3) Even as the stem, 
boughs and side-branches of a tree are nourished by watering its roots and just as all 
the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as the organs of action) are nourished 
by sustaining life through food, so by offering worship to the immortal Lord all are 
worshipped.(14) Even as water (in the form of rain-drops) emanates from (the rays of) the sun 
during the rainy season and returns to the same source in the dry season and just as (the 
physical bodies of all) mobile and immobile creatures evolve from the earth and return to the 
earth, so does this animate and inanimate creation (which is product of Matter) proceeds from 
Sri Hariandreturms to Him. (15) As sunshine has no existence apart from the sun, this (material) 
creation is (no other than) that (well-known) absolute (unqualified) essence of the Universal 
Spirit (wherefrom it has evolved), inasmuch as it appears (like a phantom only) at times (and 
remains out of sight at other times) even as the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as 





all 


is. 31 ] 
ee hawa cane ee hea eee ‘ BOOK’ FOUR’: :-- 437 . 
GGL HERR RRR RH ARERR REM RAE AAEM BER AR ASE LEBER AER IDEAL 


the ee of Bey appear (to function) in the waking state and remain dormant in sound 
sleep. AS a me er of fact, however, (the three modifications of the ego in the shape of) the 
five gross ° malts? the five organs of action and the five senses of perception as well as the 

hantom Of diversity arising from it are (ever) absent in Him. (16) Just as clouds, darkness 
and light PE oe O rulers of the globe, and disappear in the sky by turns so do the potencies 
of ee : e form of Rajas, Tamas and Sattva appear and then disappear in the 
Absolute. So does the process (of creation and dissolution) continue uninterrupted.(1 7) 
Therefore (since He is the Cause of all), worship you as one with yourselves Sri Hari (the 
Ruler even of the highest gods, Brahma and others) Himself, the one (undifferentiated) Soul 
of all embodied existences, who is (the same as) Time (the efficient cause), the Unmanifest 
(the material cause) and the Supreme Purusa (the doer), and who has by His energy (in the 
shape of Consciousness) cast out the material creation. (18) 


east = AANATT Odea a oa al | Gdfsarasrreat qa qa WaAled: 1221 
MASA AH HATA TAA ALTA felt aA: I 
PeRreerranierisaa aft  fsqqaer: wat f&% 1201 
1 weit pete a scat efemrmeaire wag: | 
saponin uel  faaeaft  uonfesay aire 
fragt 86 defiass §«= fgcecdiay. «= faqertsy §9©=_ aeayt: | 
1 ota fayseatier menqgiegsiqae 86 hda: 1221 

By kindness to all living beings, by remaining contented with anything whatsoever and 
by taming the senses Lord Janardana is soon propitiated. (19) Lured into the heart of pious 
souls—rid of all cravings and (thus) purged of all dross by their constantly growing 
devotion—the imperishable Lord surely does not escape from it any more than the ether 
locked in it, (thereby) proving His amenability to the control of His servants. (20) Sri Hari, who 
loves the destitute looking upon Him as their (only) wealth, and knows the bliss inherent in 
Devotion, does not accept the worship of those foolish men who through their pride of 
learning, affluence, pedigree and (remarkable) deeds show disrespect to such destitute 
devotees. (21) Howcana man who has any sense of gratitude in him give up even for a while 
(the thought of) Him who has no regard (even) for Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity 
and His own Consort)—even though She (ever) waits on Him—much less for kings (rulers 
of men) and gods seeking Her favour—inasmuch as He is perfect in Himself—but who is 
(nonetheless) subject to the will of His servants ? (22) 


WAY Sara 
sf wade Way sacha: | Maal Helen AA asyal YP: 1231 
Sst aapeahraid aa creromeql ahaa Ade made aid AA: 12¥1 


Usted adda a ongear| weadeat ANG Male aitenida 1241 
Maitreya resumed : Having thus told the Pracetas what has been reproduced just now 
and discoursed on other topics relating to the Lord, O Vidura, the sage Narada (son of 
Brahma, the self-born) returned to the abode of Brahma. (23) Having heard the praises of 
Sri Hari—which wipe out the sins of the world, and which were uttered by the mouth of 
Narada—and contemplating on His feet. the Praceitas too attained to His realm. (24) I have 
thus repeated to you, O Vidura, the dialogue between the Pracetas and Narada, containing 
the praises of Sri Hari—which was all you asked me. (25) 
Sy Sava 
we 8 sdMueal qreated: 1a: frat fala 9 ATadH 1261 


cS | 








438 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 31 


RRR BRA AAA A AAR AE RELL EE BABE SEER SEIS, SES AEE ERE ER EASES RR HER RH BB RR 8 te 9, 


a  anaemfseraiera adi yaar fase ga tat wamET 101 


Sri Suka continued : | have thus told you (all) about the posterity of Uttanapada, the 
(younger) son of Swayambhuva Manu. (Now) O jewel of kings, hear about the line of 
Priyavrata (his elder son) as well, who, having received instruction in spiritual lore from 
Narada, and stibsequently enjoyed the sovereignty of the globe, divided the same 
among his sons and duly attained to the divine Abode. (26-27) 


st oq) oaeNfautcafiat arm 86 erenfitarqacen | 
yaguaisynce yee yet at eT et: RCI 


Vidura was overwhelmed with emotion when he heard the sacred story, interspersed 
with an account of the invincible Lord Sri Hari, as told by the sage Maitreya (the son of 
Kusaru). With his eyes full of tears he bore the sage's feet on his head and installed (animage 
of) Sri Hari's feet in his heart. (28) 

fagt sara : 


AIS veal Vaal Heuer alae: unt satis ee: 1291 
Vidura said : Your merciful self, O great Yogi, has brought me within sight of the other 
shore of (the ocean of) ignorance, where dwells Sri Hari, who (Himself) goes to meet those 
that have nothing to call their own. (29) : 


ARP Sava 
gama aT fated TTS ST feet: seat ardtat Prdarara: 1301 
Udel: AOE Ua afta sada ae: whe afrsertargqard 132! 
TAC AHASSEATA: 1321 


ER: 36 Aa. 


Sri Suka went on: With these (polite) words (expressive of gratitude) Vidura bowed low 
(to Maitreya) and, taking leave of him, proceeded with a peaceful mind to Hastinapura with 
intent to see his own kith and kin (and bless them by his hloy company). (30) He who listens, 
Oking, to this narrative of kings who had given their mind to Sri Hari, should (bids fair to) attain 


longevity, affluence, glory, security, the way to (eternal) happiness as well as worldly power 
and prosperity. (31) 


Thus ends the thirty-first discourse entitled "The story of the Pracetas", in Book 
Four of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
Known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita, composed 
by the sage Vedavyasa and consisting of 
eighteen thousand Slokas. 


nt Pct et SS 
PDIP SER HS 


_ END OF BOOK FOUR 


rat * > 7 . $ 
PISSED 








UDG: Chel: 
SINT Wasser: 


Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana 


Book Five 
Discourse | 
The story of Priyavrata 
UaHara 

fyaadl wUrTad SANTA: He AIT GAY: HAaeM: DTM 12I 

qo qatasri mem feria qeafutagsa dat sfaquéfrie 

edt wa «fami §=6saagciteaeat: | wratddfanmt 4 pert Wea: 31 

ayaisd Her We eRMMaMay | danas sieht a afareari 1 
The king (Pariksit) said: Priyavrata was a (great) devotee of the Lord and revelled in 
the Self. How did he, O sage, rejoice in family life, which obscures one’s true nature and 
Subjects one to the bondage of actions ? (1)Certainly it is not desirable, O chief of the 
Brahmanas, that people like him, who are free from attachment, should get identified with 
their home in this way. (2) Indeed, O Brahmana sage, exalted souls whose mind has found 
peace in the (cool) shade of the feet of Sri Hari (enjoying excellent renown)cannot conceive 
a fond attachment to their family. (3) | have this great doubt in my mind, O holy Brahmana, 


is wi hildren and so on, attained 
as to how Privavrata, who was attached to his wife, house, cnilare 9 On, od 
perfection and (what is still more difficult) come to develop unswerving devotion to Lord Sri 


Krsna. (4) 


+ arr et STUV AAA MARU ASAT SAAT TATA ATA Me aHeTt 

— we cat Rraaat Ueat A wat fatty | ale ala & UST S Usa: fade: 
UUM ARE aera | ATA eifereraronsat ter 
ufture TATA TOTOT AT ATUTATT CARAT AAT ATT AGA TAT ATE TATA TT 
“ Fe era AAPA TTL ASMA TAT LUT STS ART ATA ST 


WRIA aarAraT: 1 & | 





ft 





440 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 1 


We RRR, Re Re Be Re Re Re Re Re Re Ree Ke Re REA BET Re Bee Be Be Re HL Ke By By Be Be Me Me He Be Wr We Ge Br er Br He Se Ke Be Wr Ke Ke Fe Ke Sr Br He Hr Ke Ke Sr Ke Br Bee Mr Re Rr Be Be Be He ERR HH Be te ae oy 
eee Lt 


Sri Suka said : What you have stated is (quite) right. They, however, whose mind is 
engrossed in enjoying the (sweet) honey of the charming feet of Lord Sri Hari (of exalted 
fame) do not generally give up their most blessed path (habit) of listening to the narrative of 
the Lord, who is the beloved of His devotees and ascetics of the highest order, even though 
it may be (temporarily) obstructed by some impediments. (5) And it is a well-known fact, © 
king, that when that prince Priyavrata—who was a supreme devotee of the Lord and had 
through the adoration of Narada's feet easily come to know the true nature of the highest 
Reality, and was about to undertake a vow of (lifelong)contemplation on the Spirit—was 
called upon by his father (Swayambhuva Manu) to rule over the earth because of his being 
a unique repository of hosts of excellent virtues mentioned in the scriptures, he did not 
welcome it, although the command (of his father) was inviolable; for he had through constant 
absorption of his mind in Lord Vasudeva completely resigned all the activities of his senses 
and organs of action to Him and he thought that on his assuming the reins of government 
(the true nature of) his self would be obscured by (contact with) the non-self, even though 
the latter has no reality. (6) 


aq © Wearteca wea  wianta uftaeurqeantaatadanemeuura 
aeatrRactrmasraRasd: CaNateadaiel A aA aA Wada seutdka 
fanrrataRraqremarangethtigsnn: oir afer a ae: Tea aA ANT Tee aaa 
TeUATSAa UNA | 6 AAS aT WH Calde cards fade Weed ervey Aquesan: 
Petaraaes Ae faargaranafedatereadetie | way Utd Agata c: 
Yara Ma ladurMnadnasta: Maadaaqered Aqaderalacich sid SlaTaq 1 Qo | 


Thereupon the glorious Brahma (the self-born), the first among the gods—who kept 
himself acquainted with the designs of all the worlds, being ever engaged in the thought of 
promoting the creation, which is a product of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti)—-came 
down (to the earth) from his abode (the Brahmaloka), surrounded by all the (four) Vedas (in 
visible form) and his retinue (consisting of the sage Marici and others). (7) Shining like the 
moon and being worshipped at many points on his way through the heavens by the foremost 
among the gods, who rode in their aerial cars, and glorified along the route in separate groups 
by troops of Siddhas (a class of heavenly beings endowed with supernatural powers from 
their very birth), Gandharvas (celestial songsters), Sadhyas (another class of celestial 
beings), Caranas (celestial bards) and sages, he approached the prince, illumining the 
(entire) valley of Mount Gandhamadana (by his brilliance). (8) Recognizing there from his 
mount, a swan, that he was no other than his father, the glorious Brahma, Narada (the 
celestial sage) quickly rose and waited upon him with articles of worship along with the father 
(Swayambhuva Manu) and son (Priyavrata), his palms joined (in prayer). (9) The glorious 
Brahma too, the first among embodied beings, who was offered (many an article of) worship 
(by Narada) and whose hosts of virtues, coming down to the earth (to bless his devotees), 
and excellent glories were sung in appropriate words, spoke as follows to Priyavrata, casting 
at him a smiling look full of compassion indeed. (10) 


ALATA 
Framer ita et arf, Gade 
aa vat dd we aeltde ad faa ue fesqiees 
a ada caigadca faa at 4 aimdidor adtaar ari 


ara: Ud: tadl al od fae ATA YATLI V2 





pis. 1] 3 


CHART TRT ATTA OE LMR M Ene OOS FIVE 441 


rd 
MARAE SS SS PTT ee TL Se We We Pe We Kee See ee Ee He Be He Be 


Se RU cd Miler wer wer ware 
qara yur 4 deanmeraates sae «| TAN 
Tate wat auraterafi Weed at gatfrar:1 
ua wet oaferivara ower ada fend ATH: 12 
eye warsy gd Qa oa wendagi 
aaa =—- AMeleeaa THA sa AAAMT:1241 


The glorious Brahma said : Listen, dear child : | speak this truth to you. You ought not 
to find fault with the Lord, who cannotbe known through the ordinary means of cognition, and 
whose bidding we all compulsorily obey—I as well as Lord Siva (the Source of the entire 
universe), your father (Swayambhuva Manu) and this great seer (Narada, your preceptor).(11) 
No embodied creature Is capable of undoing what He has ordained, through asceticism or 
erudition, through Yogic power or intellectual acumen, through affluence or religious merit, 
with the help of another or by oneself. (12) Living beings, dear Priyavrata, ever maintain their 
connection with a body, bestowed on them by the unmanifest Lord, for (going through the 
experiences Of) birth and death, grief, infatuation and fear, joy and sorrow, as well as for doing 
work. (13) Fastened strongly, dear child, to a big rope in the form of the Word of God with 
the tight strings of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), as well as of duties and denominations 
bearing the stamp of these Gunas, we all bear offerings to God even as quadrupeds with a 
string passed through their nostrils bear loads for human beings. (14) Taking whatever form 
the Lord has ordained for us according to our attachment to actions dominated by a particular 
Guna (mode of Prakrti), and conducted by Him even as the blind are led by one endowed 
with vision, we undergo pleasurable or painful experiences decreed by God, O dear 
Priyavrata. (15) 


Hadtstt Mag yaIRae SAN AAT AAAI: | 
aay  owierardis: fe aadet WT Feat 
ad wane atau lead: AW AR aesanda:! 
fafa oye: fe YJ ail eel 
a: ween fafinieat yey fava ada yet 
areata «attra «sister aftety ert faretigaivadi ec 
wi STATS TAIT TATA Fafsiareaae: | 


eRe arm «YeTtafeery «= faqetay: Watt ws eet 


s destiny without identifying himself with the body, even a liberated 
n reaped, even as one who has woke up from sleep 
Still remembers what one experienced in a dream, but he no longer indulges in actions or 
Cravings which may invest him with another body. (16) He who has not been able to subdue 
his senses is exposed to the fear of rebirth even though he may roam about from forest to 
forest; for the six (internal) foes (in the shape of the five senses and the mind that have not 
been controlled) are (ever) with him. (On the other hand,) what harm cen the home do to 
the wise man who has subdued his senses and delights in the Self ? (17) He whois keen 
{0 subdue the (above-mentioned) six foes should in the first instance Strive to conquer them 
While remaining at home; for he alone who has ensconced himself ina Stronghold is able to 
Overcome even powerful enemies. When these (internal) foes grow weak, the wise man may 
roam about at will. (18) Resorting to the citadel of the lotus-like feet of the Lord whose navel 


Reaping the fruit of hi 
Soul maintains it till that destiny has bee 








442 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Bee Re Re Re RR RR RRR RR RRR RRR BB Be Re BBE BB He BB Ge Me He Hr BY BY Br He Sr ST seenneeennnenennmnneres oe 1 
Rk 


is the seat ofa lotus, you have thoroughly conquered the six enemies. (Therefore, first) enjo 
on this earth the blessings bestowed (on you) by that Supreme Person and (then), Wholly 
freed from attachment, be established in the Self. (19) 


Sri Suka continued : Thus instructed, Priyavrata (that eminent devotee of the Lord) 
most respectfully accepted the command of the glorious Brahma (the preceptor of the three 
worlds) with the words "Very well !," his head bent low as a token of his smallness 
(humility).(20) The glorious Brahma too, who was duly honoured by Manu, left for his abode 
(the Brahmaloka), contemplating on his own asylum (the supreme Brahma)—whois beyond 
the ken of speech and mind and is incapable of being dealt with—while Priyavrata and 
Narada kept gazing on him with a serene look. (21) 


Ti utd ufatarine: qitarqadiasahacenmisctatrerat $sreenng 
TIANA AGAATMAIA SANTA sit BF aa B wadtufattyaresare- 
PrahiaenntreenisRacerigRVese NIT Wad ste Esa S Aa MTA 
Ufeeletch MASA SACTATS a AAA Heal ASAI | VB SIA MA gledt Usa avacHHuy 
SEITE TEES TLS LSS al a ala 
Gaya ATT Ter aS q sic 
Wa Wants: Late at aafereerelt: er ack arcaPweraraderererced 
PAA: UNAS AHA AMAT | VE AMSAT S AT SATA: UAT: Meh ctsital temTaraT AeA 
Wad aq Maat mua ahr feaafarceauonfanteraawasadcariry vray 
UR aA TA WTA MAM YAMA A WRT AAT AA aI AGTAOT MAT: I V9 | 
TATA SANA AS: VAT ATA AAA AG LAT Slat AANA: 1 2S 1 


Manu too, whose ambition (of bequeathing the kingship to his son and retiring to the 
woods for meditation and worship) was thus fulfilled by Brahma (the highest of the gods), 
appointed Priyavrata (his son) with the concurrence of Narada (the foremost of celestial 
Sages) to maintain stability of rule on the terrestrial globe and himself gave up the desire of 
enjoying home life, which is like a most fearful lake full of poisonous water in the shape Of 
Sensuous pleasures. (22) Thus appointed by God's will to do work, the emperor (Priyavrata), 
whose impurities of mind had been burnt, nay, who had become (extremely) pure by virtue 
of constant meditation on the feet of the Lord, the most ancient Person—whose supreme 
glory is capable of destroying the bondage of the entire creation—ruled over the earth just 
in order to show his great regard for the exalted (by obeying their command). (23) He then 
married a daughter, named Barhismati, of Viswakarma (the architect of the gods), a lord of 
created beings; and how wonderful that through her he actually begot ten sons—who were 
evidently as great as he in amiability, virtues, actions, comeliness of form and prowess—as 
well as a daughter, Urjaswati by name, who was younger than all of them. (24) They all bore 
the names of the fire-god, viz., Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajhabahu, Mahavira, Hiranyareta 
Ghrtaprstha, Savana, Medhatithi, Vitihotra and Kavi. (25) Three of these—Kavi, Mahavira 
and Savana—were lifelong celibates; they took to a study of the science of Self-Knowledge from 
their very infancy and (eventually) entered the order of recluses. (26) Continuing in that ASrama 





pis. 1] 44 
EHERERERERSRORO RATA ELE eee BOOK FIVE : 
SER RBI RR RR tte tert te tte tet tet het tE AA EREAEEEE EERE EERE EI 


e of life) and giv 
ieined shouts sell icant self-control, these foremost seers indeed wonderfully 
Se aiiivinglbeingerann ie y with the Lord, who is the very Self, nay, the Inner Controller 
0 interrupted and supre om they realized within the heart, purified by virtue of their 
a4 rming lotus-like ae Hes Devotion resulting from their ceaseless remembrance of the 
cna Sabena of Bhagavan Vasudeva, the abode of all species of living beings and 
Bee aivata each tee (27) By another wife too he had three sons—Uttama, Tamasa 
an , wnom presided over a Manvantara (associated with his name). (28) 


RAGA errs eafastatteefar teary af tere TTT TSATE eM RAAT ATE 
TArara TSH Tema sats oaPraeteento hah Se MIeANVa pat eraraata— 
TACUTA TAA STAA TATA RA THEA: TAHT | SAITOH Sa ARTA 
TUT! VI | i 


(Three of) his sons being thus given to Self-control, the high-minded emperor (Priyavrata) 
ruled over the globe for 1,10,00,00,000 years. (During his reign) the enemies of righteousness 
were scared away by the very twang of the bow-string pulled by his stout arms, possessed 
of (inordinate) strength, which consummated all his efforts without any obstruction. Nay, like 
aman who has forgotten his self, he had his judgment clouded as it were by Barhismati's daily 
growing expressions of excessive joy (on his visiting her), her rising from the seat and going 
forth to meet him, amatory gestures natural to women, smiles and glances half-concealed 
by bashfulness and delightful jokes etc. (29) 


macerated qihhapaearry rare aH a Waa car fe 
WIA AAA adiageqmMaMetwra, Maat wa What wriiatt fet afteamifa 
Aaa Ura qadenag fEdta $a UE: | Ro 1A ATS | ARMATURE AT FATT 
STA Aa Wa Hal: AAT Yar Flor: 138 | Weaerayncnictpylnlsylen yeaa ALAUT 
Fae aiant rea : : 


afteriurqadricrnrtaentearargemarmynsnnncteraat § AaASI 
Sthoafersadarhiraht faedti33i seat distedt aire Weeseaadig cea AA 


IATA | 3% | 
Sdfar: Geran semre dai daaiieear Nraeeqey 
fat faerie: wpeledta aarp A Seti Se A | 
(Once he observed that) even to the extent the glorious sun-god lights the earth's surface 
(viz., up to the Lokaloka mountain) in the course of his circuit round Mount Sumeru (the 
mountain of the gods), he shines only on one-half of that portion and leaves the other half 


S wever) did not like this. His superhuman glory having been 
prouded In/darknes hee Fi: Lord, he thereupon like another sun made seven 


en i is adoration 0 
elute oueed hoe after the sun, in his effulgent car, as swift as the sun, determined 
to turn night as well into day. (30) The tracks that were sunk by the fellies of the wheels of 
his chariot came to be the most celebrated seven oceans, which divided the earth into (what 
are known as) the seven Dwipas (or main divisions). (31) The Dwipas are (severally) known 
as JambUdwipa, Plaksadwipa, Salmalidwipa, Kusadwipa, Krauncadwipa, Sakadwipa and 
Puskaradwipa As regards dimensions, each succeeding one is twice as large as the 
Precedin one and is placed beyond the ocean and encircling it. (32) The seven oceans 
(Sev < It water, the juice of sugar-cane, wine, clarified butter, milk, fluid curds 

STUN ele e for each of the seven Dwipas. They are 


oat as it were on oy é 
See ae ane Ree nse: ed by them and are situated one beyond and encircling 








444 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Dis. 
LKeAReRRRRAR RRR RR RRR RRR RRR LER BBR Be Be BB BE Be Be Hr Be Be Br BL AY Br Br Br Br Br Hr Br Br Wr Wr Br Br Br Br Be er Br Br Hr Hr PS, 
eee" I 


each of the seven Dwipas severally.* Priyavrata (the spouse of queen Barhismati) Severally 
made his dutiful sons—Agnidhra, Idhmajihva, Yajhabahu, Hiranyareta, Ghrtaprstha 
Medhatithi and Vitihotra by name, each the ruler of one of these divisions—Jambtdwipa and 
so on. (83) And his daughter, Urjaswati by name, he gave away to Usana (the sage 
Sukracarya, the preceptor of the Asura kings); it was of her that Devayani, the celebrated 
daughter of Sukracarya (nicknamed as Kavya or Kavi) was born. (34) Such an achievement 
on the part of devotees of the Lord (who measured the three worlds in a couple of strides) 
devotees who by resorting to the dust of His feet have been able to conquer the six senses 
(the five senses and the mind)—is not to be wondered at; for even a pariah immediately 
shakes off his bondage if he utters the Lord's Name only once. (35) 

A UAHA TATA TAHA Cha Sa ALOT ATA a rer TOT ea aa OT Te TE AT ATT 
wot «6 etree «same 1 3a1 | et eee = aefatraferdtsefataa- 
Taenfaatasnfararesae dacseren attaran feastaqst ai ferfterhtia Te arsrenk | B19 | 
Tea VAI ATA Ua Aaa: Gas sat aarara fawsa waar a afee 
Yana denelayiaaaea waa Mredhtaal efe yettehttasnyural wad Aaa Vaal 

1321 

Thus possessed of immeasurable strength and prowess, king Priyavrata once felt 
(much) disgusted at heart since he regarded himself very unhappy as it were on account of 
his contact with the world of master ( a product of the three Gunas), which dogged him even 
after he had taken shelter under the feet of the celestial sage (Narada), and said this (to 
himself); (86) "Oh, what a wrong | have done in that | have (allowed) myself to be hurled by 
the senses into the terrible and deceptive pit of sensuous pleasures—which are products of 
Avidya (nescience) ! Therefore enough, enough of these! Fie upon me, a veritable ape for 
the amusement of this woman!" In this way he condemned himself. (37) In the light of 
wisdom, recovered by the grace of the Supreme Deity, he proportionately divided the earth 
among his devoted sons and abandoned the queen, whom he had enjoyed as a source of 
pleasure, along with the imperial fortune, like a dead body; and, disgusted at heart (with this 
world) he followed once again the path (of renunciation) chalked out for him by the divine 


sage Narada, realizing in his heart the glory of the pastimes of Sri Hari (that had given him 
the strength to renounce his all). (38) 


ae & Al Ud Yorn: — 
Wadiod wi al y palfgrvany 1 ar afhienieorat wy aa aren! 38 | 
We sd at altightaanfatsa: 1 dha a yatided get ge fasts: ixot 
WH feta a fest adam aah fiat qeerenfta:ixe 
at AEA ATR WAC aed Tar frraaass Wes eATT: |g 


These are the verses actually sung of old in praise of Emperor Priyavrata :— 


__~ The relative position of the seven Dwipas and the seven oceans should be understood as given below. The first in 
order is Jambtdwipa, which has a width of 8,00,000 miles andis girded by an ocean of salt water, equal in width to Jambudwipa. 
Beyond the ocean of salt water and twice as much in width (i. e., 16,00,000 miles wide) is Plaksadwipa, which is in its turn 
enclosed by an ocean containing the juice of sugar-cane and equal in width to the latter. On the other side of this ocean and 
twice as large in extent (i.e., 32,00,000 miles wide) is Salmalidwipa, encircled by an ocean of wine as large as the Dwipa itself. 
Lying immediately after the ocean of wine and twice as large (or 64,00,000 miles wide) is KuSadwipa, surrounded by an ocean 
of clarified butter equal in width to KuSadwipa. On the outer coast of the ocean of clarified butter and twice as large (i.e-, 
1,28,00,000 miles wide) is Krauficadwipa, girded by an ocean of milk equal in width to the latter. Beyond the ocean of milk and 
twice as large in extent (i.e., 2,56,00,000 miles wide) is Sakadwipa, enclosed in its turn by an ocean of fluid curds as large as 


the Dwipa itself. On the other side of the ocean of fluid curds and twice as large (i.e., 5,12,00,000 miles wide) is Puskaradwipa, 
itself encircled by an ocean of pure water equal in width to the latter. 





pis. 2 ] 


pear Be BBR R RAE LE BEBE RE BO LR BB HR Bete Be op BOOK FIVE 445 
a S—~—~— CATE TRC See Re TERRE ES SEE E ETRE EE ETE EERE SEOREE 


"Who else than the almighty Lorg 
his attempt to disperse the da y could do the work accomplished by Priyavrata, who in 


rkness (of night) produced 
the seven oceans out of the tracks 
sunk a ee he cece sueels of his chariot), nay, who divided the earth (into so many 
Dwipas) - i wooo living beings (inhabiting the same) and fixed the limits of 
every Dwipa by allocating Sep te 


sao (wWers, Mountains and 39-40) Devoted 
to the servants of the Supreme Person, he loo forests (to each). ( ) 


subterranean worlds, the heavenly regions and 
through actions (performedina Previous existe 
powers)." (41) 


ked upon as akin to hell the fortunes of the 
the terrestrial globe as well as those acquired 
nce) or Yoga (concentration of mind or mystic 


Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the story of Priyavrata's conquest, 
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


ISSN mes 


ay tgdtarseara: 


Discourse Il 
An account of Agnidhra 
yp Sas 
wa oak ager aaqyneat ada siete srqgidiea: ust sikaacuidarann: 
WNT I2| AW A walfataqeinam: qerahantsraciava wad fayagqui 
UAAyAAR aa Ge SAAT AURSINTeTaaYaI1 AquenaA wiarifaqes: Wala 


Marit qafaht  arareranfvararrai3! a aarsraraaaatacauiter 
Tic? = > Trae lu > TrUMpU “So - rHi tie T: Wrermr aratst: 
orayesmraa paAGhas SHO OAGTRICICELL 2 T AUT 1S VASAT 


father (Priyavrata) being thus engaged (in the practice of 
dhis commands, duly protected the people of Jambudwipa 
as his own progeny, keeping his eye on Dharma (righteousness). (1) Seeking (an abode in) 


: tting a worthy son), he collected (all) the requisites 
for eam of the manies (|. exceae ation of mind and asceticism adored the glorious 


Sti Suka began again : His 
Devotion), Agnidhra, who followe 


ji him) an Apsara (celestial nymph), Purvacitti by 
Cremost of all created beings) sent “aT So me 1 Apsara (celestial nymph) Roa 


Name, who used to sing in his co that charmingly resounded with 

‘ full of lotus beds) tha gly re 

hamitage. It containes ponds aaa sation of ducks), swans and the like, that were 
wate ile 


> 


446 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


SHAAALLALLKHALALAAALAKAKAALLKANAKLLKHA ALLAAH HLAAHLAHHA AHHH Sr Br Br By Br Br Br Sr or sannweenseeneeesoee 2 
& 


awakened (in their turn) by the notes uttered by pairs of land birds perched on golden 
creepers intertwined with the boughs of densely-growing trees of every description: and 
Purvacitti sauntered about that garden. (4) The steps she took in the course of her 
exceedingly graceful stroll exhibited the charm of her gait and at her every pace the beautify 
ornaments she wore about her feet made a jingling sound, hearing which the prince Slightly 
opened both his eyes—resembling a pair of lotus buds—till now closed in the practice of deep 
meditation, and espied her. (5) Like a female honey-bee the celestial damsel was enjoying 
the (sweet) odour of flowers not very far (from him), and carving a passage for Love (usin 
flowers for his weapons) into the minds of men by (the witchery of) her gait, sport, bashful 
and modest-glances, musical voice and (graceful) limbs—all ravishing the mind and eyes of 
(both) gods and men. And her full breasts, head of hair and girdle were thrown into a state 
of charming agitation as she walked with quick paces, when assailed by swarms of honey- 
bees maddened by the sweet fragrance of (her breath in the form of) words—accompanied 
with a smile—that escaped from her mouth and which were (Sweet) as nectar and 
(inebriating as) wine. The prince succumbed to the dominating influence of the most powerful 
god of love—who had found an open door to his heart the moment the prince saw her—and 
addressed her like a dunce in the following words:— (6) 


ai wa faatdta a fee aPreed ver arenfe eft srreaccreaare: | 

fara faut aqet qeeremtsa far at repre fates waarqi © | 
Sonat wad: MATA «| _ ta@etetatataAaad | 

mea Gaeta at fra fast: aura a wsftrat da fawatseqi¢ 
rer sa wad: uta: vota Wafdt a Aeeastanig | 
qasaiadhcitn: Mrisiast: Wa Wg sa Aaya: 1 e | 

aa Ut MUGEN WaaaIqat Yyorama qs 

meal Haaeimgidesing’ GaAs: GI WT Achet W201 

fe aad eis eared aes pent aefe aa gfe: fara A 

Ugiseu: Oriana sey Basa |aT A areitmafriee! 

tie Yast Wed ach A aa semcaraaaraual 
aaa visa fautt aeaqd araragqefe aatier 

Sl Assmatmatentace Ald fae: cereale At Guilt 
Semmaiet fgsceanntareaystrnt at sa 71231 
asa aM cHreisted: Udet feet way wad usaasferoit AI 

Wat 4d Ete dwsictamet aeistren eft ca]e we teh ex 

WU We MUyeKd We Mad aA aval wader 
aq diseta war ue fia vei fee ar udtefa a a vara A124 | 
Tot wasnt ciad festeaadt afar eat at a faarfa ar 

WM ueysaeta aqijad a fad aa: uftacd fear: afeea: 126 | 

"Who are you and what do you intend to do on this hill, O great sage ? Are you the 
inscrutable Maya (deluding potency) of the all-powerful Supreme Deity? (Pointing to her 


eyebrows) O friend ! do you wield that pair of stringless bows for your own protection or are 
you in search of (some) unwary game (creatures like me, who have no control over their 





Dis. 2 ] | 

qsseasensabeseteessterssitacesssrestesss si) 5 lel 
RR Re th ret re ee 

SLA Sis hhh Akh Rah eee el AKA AKE 


enses) in the forest ? (7) (Point 
= our worshipful self, es f Ks ¥ a8 he ee sidelong glances) These two arrows of 
gentle and lovely (even) without hilt eran Seen ie shape of eyes), are (vely) 
intend to aim them at, wandering as you do ieee! SEUDASSUILEL WV eaeoncel whore OU 
conduce to the good of us dull-witteg a A the forest. May this expedition (valour) of yours 
These pupils of your worshipful self are te (8) (Pointing to the bees hovering about her) 
alongwith the Upanisads (embodying it cnanting about you the (hymns of ) Samaveda 
Lord (thereby). They (eagerly) resort 2 : sate teaching) and incessantly glorifying the 
as hosts of Rsis (holy s ages) accept ther es owers of flowers dropped from your locks even 
a school. (9) (Pointin recensions of the Veda traditionally followed by their 
ow g to the sweet jingling of her anklets) We simply hear, O th 
(dulcet) notes of the partridges locked up in the ca simply hear, O sage, the 
. , ges of your feet—notes which are distinctly 
heard though (their source in the shape of the birds is) invisible. (Referring to her loin cloth 

Wherefrom did you get the yellow splend OEE Cntig toler tata) 
. be plendour resembling that of a Kadamba flower on your 
beautiful circular hips? (Pointing to the girdle) They are (also) girdled with a belt of fire ! But 
(by the by) where is your bark-covering ? (10) (Pointing to her conical breasts) What lies 
treasured up, O holy Brahmana, in (yonder) two horns of yours, which you carry (in your 
bosom)—though you are (so) slender at your waist—and upon which my eyes are riveted ? 
(Again) unique IS the scarlet and fragrant paste on your horns, with which, O beautiful one, 
you are perfuming my hermitage ! (11) Be pleased to show me your native place, O great 
friend, the inhabitants of which carry on their bosom in this way such a strange pair of limbs 
that agitate the mind of people like me, and many a wonderful treasure like sweetness (in 
the shape of sweet words), amorous gestures and nectar (flowing from their lips) in their 
mouth. (12) (Pointing to the betel leaves that were being chewed by her) What is the (kind 
of) food with which you nourish your body ? For from the chewing thereof, O dear one, issues 
(from your mouth) an aroma as of oblations poured into the sacred fire. Surely you are a ray 
of Lord Visnu (the Protector of the universe); that is why your ears (like His) are adorned with 
brilliant ear-rings resembling two unwinking alligators. (And) your countenance is akin toa 
lake with its bewildered eyes resembling two leaping fish, its snow-white rows of teeth 
corresponding to swans and its mass of curly hair appearing like swarms of honey-bees 
hovering close at hand. (13) The yonder ball, which when struck by your lotus-like hand flies 
aboutin all directions, makes my eyes roll about, my mind being (already) confounded. (Oh), 
do you not mind your unloosed braid of curly locks ? (And) lo! this mischievous and lustful 
breeze is blowing off your lower garment. (14) Through what (kind of) austerities did you 
secure this beautiful form, © great ascetic, wrecking as It does the austerities of others 
practising them ? You ought to practise asceticism with me, O friend ! Or may be Brahma 
himself (who is intent on extending his creation) has shown his grace to me (by sending you 
to me for a wife). (15) | shall not forgo you, my beloved friend, who have been conferred on 


me 5 (li ed of the twice-born). Neither my mind nor my eyes turn away 
by Brahmat(tt eas Be pleased (therefore) to take me, your servant, 


(from you), fastened as they are on you. ; 
O arenes damsel ! NGeeORIEL you please, and let these obedient companions (of 


yours) follow me. (16) 
Aig Jara 


arquaad avira: feretats oT UR farted 


WUISATATS | 219 | a Bt d : ara rrateat afaatariy Ast 1 Vs | acy = AT 
Ws vach Calcd 


F 





448 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 3 


SERRA RR RR RR RR AAR RAR RH HB RB BEBE HH RH ER BES ESS SE Be Se Be Be BH Bh Be Be He BY Br He hr ae Hg 
———$—_—_ Se 


Sri Suka went on : By thus employing a language clever in expressing sensual things, 
prince Agnidhra, who possessed the intelligence of gods and proved a past master in winning 
over the young woman, propitiated that celestial damsel by showing her great regard. (17) 
She too, whose mind was captivated by the intelligence, amiability, comeliness, youth, 
splendour and nobility of that leading hero, then enjoyed with that lord of (the entire) 
Jambtdwipa earthly as well as celestial pleasures for a period extending over ten crore 
years. (18) Through her, it is said, that foremost of kings, Agnidhra, begot nine sons—Nabhi. 
Kimpurusa, Harivarsa, llavrta, Ramyaka, Hiranmaya, Kuru, Bhadraswa and Ketumala by 
name. (19) 


SUS: 1 28 1 Se USAGa: SAAT ARTA TATA: Aetreae PTA 
aa feet Aree 1 22 AA feat Aa at Aegheddedal UirMagUast creat Vat Paar ATT 
Wal Cadi aiddal Aaledeq! V3 1 
sf Staerrad Wey URAC Ged Waren arava WA fedratseara: 1 2 
Having brought forth (as many as) nine sons, (one) each year, and leaving them (all) in 
that very house (of Agnidhra), Pirvacitti once more joined the service of the (supreme) god, 
Brahma (the birthless one). (20) The aforesaid sons of Agnidhra, who were well-built and 
strong by birth through the grace of their (celestial) mother, were allotted their due share (in 
his kingdom) by their father and ruled over the divisions of JambUdwipa apportioned to them, 
which were (also) named after them. (21) King Agnidhra, who was not (yet) sated with sense- 
delights, constantly thought of that celestial nymph as superior (to everything else), and 
secured through deeds enjoined by the Vedas residence in the same heaven with her, the 
heaven where the manes live in delight. (22) On the demise of (their) father the nine brothers 
married the nine daughters of Meru (the deity presiding over Mount Sumeru), Merudevi, 
Pratirupa, Ugradamstn, Lata, Ramya, Syama, Nan, Bhadra and Devaviti by name. (23) 


Thus ends the second discourse entitled "An account of Agnidhra" in Book Five 
of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PENSE 
PISS mr 


BIA qdtatseara: 


Discourse Ill 
The descent of Lord Rsabha 
A FAA 
TRNUSAAISUS ASA Wied AMIEnatedaa Li aI F ala seal 
Maas Aa! AIT | AMfeaysI feud estas 
SS SET a eee ah UTAUITeTSaraur para fadu pach ae ee Ua ay Sela 
SAMA PACA Ae OATS OT SAAR: 1 3 





Dis. 3] BOOK FIVE 449 
Fo ARRAS RRR R RR RARER ER ERR RELA EL ELA LE ETE 


Sri Suka began again : Desirous of obtaining progeny, king Nabhi alongwith (his wife) 
queen Merudevi, who had no issue, worshipped with a concentrated mind Lord Visnu (the 
Deity presiding over Sacrifices). (1) The Lord, who is" possessed of a (most) charming 
personality, is difficult to attain even when (all) the means (of propitiating Him)—such as the 
materials, place and time (of worship), the prayers (muttered in the course of worship), the 
priests conducting the worship, the fees paid to them and (the due observance of) the 
procedure (laid down for the worship)—are fully employed. Yet, while Nabhi was (thus) 
reverently (engaged in) worshipping Him witha pure (devout) heart and while the rites known 
by the name of Pravargya (which serve as a prelude to the performance of a Soma sacrifice) 
were proceeding, the heart of the Lord was seized with a longing to accomplish the desired 
object of His servant because of His affection for His devotees, and He revealed before him 
His most independent captivating form, which ravished the soul by its limbs, which were 
(individually most) pleasing to the mind and eyes. (2) The Lord actually appeared with two 
pairs of arms, was Clad in tawny silk and had the splendid Srivatsa mark on His bosom. He 
was distinguished by His peerless conch, lotus, wreath of sylvan flowers, discus, the 
Kaustubha gem, mace and so on and adorned with a crown, ear-rings, bracelets, girdle, 
necklace, armlets, anklets and other (such) ornaments of the body, all made of radiant 
jewels. Seeing the all-effulgent Supreme Person, the priests officiating at the sacrifice as well 
as the directors of the sacrifice and the sacrificer (himself) waited upon Him, their heads bent 
low, with water to wash His hands with (as a mark of respect), receiving Him with the same 
high regard as penniless people would receive a rich treasure. (3) 


mast HY: 

Sha | Wee UeTeaoe «=A Setetacaeufnfad asdf Gary 
Vahrreattiamidien svar we walqerdkaiaritrinadqiat Waray YI 
Teac Henle sre aA TATU Mee och AAS | & | URSA aR aay act— 
UreqaeretaainacradeiaHiga sus Mra AIA feet WA UTA 1S 


The priests said : (Though self-perfect in everyway,) be pleased, O most adorable One, 
to accept again and again (by Your own grace) the homage offered by us, Your servants. 
(Incapable of extolling You,) we have been taught by worthy souls only to repeat the word 
‘Namah! (Obeisance to You). (As a matter of fact,) what man whose mind is engrossed in the 
phenomenal world (which is a modification of the modes of Prakrti) and who is (therefore) 
powerless can hope to determine Your essential character with the help of the names and 
colours and forms of this material universe (which cannot even touch the fringe of Your 
being)—You who are the Supreme Lord transcending (both) Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa 
(Spirit). (4) The utmost he can do is to recount a part of Your multitudinous excellent virtues, 
which drive away the sins of all mankind and are most auspicious (by nature). (5) On the other 
hand, O Supreme One, You are propitiated in everyway through worship offered even with 
prayers lovingly uttered by your servants in a faltering voice, water, undefiled young leaves, 
(particularly) leaves of the holy basil plant and sprouts of panic grass. (6) 


aeraarfr «Oo alt(‘ OC Sear «= aafaaneliterocmme iio! §«8=9- Ie 
USA AAA AAT AAT SAAT ATT STAT TT Fey TMNT STIS TAT AT TUT ere PTA j 
wfaquetal¢ | mee atfergat CAAT: AA: UAfaACa WAAAY SsA WHAchouran tasers 
araanterquencahrenrt wa Arahat waeater acta: 131 Sea A ers ate ateis 
Tsidede waanqetactaa adiqieot stagger 
VARAUTATATATATATOT HAA AAA UO TOT gS AAO TOT IAT STS | Yk I 





450 . SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 3 


BRERA RR RE RR RARER BR RB RB BERR BER BE Be By BTR Be BT HY BY BY HY BEBE MY BY Be BY Br Be Br Br Re Rr Kr Hr Br Rr Hr Fr BeBe We Sr Br Pt Br Br hep, 
—— CO ee OT 


Otherwise we do not perceive any gain worth the name to You even through this 
sacrifice—cumbrous with elaborate details — (being carried on) here inasmuch as You are 
the very embodiment ofall the (four) objects of human pursuit perennially and directly flowing 
in an abundant degree from Your own Self and not conflicting with each other. In our case, 
however, who seek blessing (of various kinds), O Lord, this (sacrifice) should only prove to 
be a means of propitiating You (and thereby fetching the desired boon). (7-8) That is why, 
out of abundant compassion for us, ignorant as we are of our highest good, O Supreme 
Person, who are greater than the greatest. You have appeared here of Your own accord, like 
one expecting homage, with intent to reveal to us Your own glory known by the name of final 
beatitude as well as to bestow (on us) our desired blessings—even though You have not 
been (properly) worshipped—just as a sage would approach ignorant people of his own 
accord. (9) Now that You—the foremost of those who grant boons (to their votaries)—have 
manifested Yourself before the eyes of Your own devotees at the sacrificial performance of 
this royal sage (Nabhi), this itself constitutes a (unique) benediction, O most adorable 
one.(10) O Lord, Your hosts of virtues are incessantly recounted (even) by sages revelling 
in the Self—who have burnt all their sins with the fire of wisdom fanned by detachment 
(dispassion) and who have (as a consequence) imbibed Your nature—inasmuch as the 
uttering of Your praises is the (only) source of the highest blessings for them (since they too 
are not easily graced with Your sight). (11) Therefore, while stumbling, sneezing, falling down 
and yawning, when placed in a sad plight and so on even in (high) fever and while dying— 
when we are powerless to remember You—let Your name descriptive of Your virtues and 
dispelling (all) our sins somehow appear on our tongue. (12) 

fase sitter: Wat vareyiarnran syaraerat cantontant vacquenrata 
Waa Maar: Tacit 231 sl al se Asautsiarsuutsidar Araaratad- 
Wee daidiaaaaatarniadaparqaradte ener: 1241 UW F Aa da WRewendite 
Agta Aart Tetelececmt Cacaela AAT Val Mita guragand | By | 


Moreover, this royal sage (Nabhi), who is desirous of (obtaining) progeny, has resorted 
to You—competent as You are to grant (all) desired boons, including (an abode in) heaven 
and (even) release (from the toils of birth and death)—with the hope of (having) a son like 
You, and regarding progeny as the (highest) object of human pursuit, even as a pauper would 
approach Kubera (the god of riches) with the hope of obtaining husk. (13) Who is there on 
this earth that has not waited on the feet of exalted souls and (yet) who has not been worsted 
by Your invincible and inscrutable Maya, whose understanding has (accordingly) not been 
clouded by that Maya and whose nature has not been obscured by the vehemence of poison 
in the shape of pleasures of sense? (14) Be pleased to ignore, by (Your) undifferentiating 
outlook towards all, O God of gods, the disrespect shown by us ignorant people to You, the 
Supreme Deity, in the sense that You, O Lord of unlimited activity, have been duly 
(respectfully) called here by us, who are so stupid as to look upon progeny as the (highest) 
object of human pursuit. (15) 

AY Jaa 


ga Preheat ware aentiearteniiataract: Marans | 26 | 
Sri Suka resumed : While He was thus being extolled through a hymn couched in prose, 
and when those priests (the adored of king Nabhi, the ruler of an entire subdivision of 
Jambudwipa) bowed at His feet, Lord Visnu (the foremost of the gods) graciously spoke the 





Dis. 4] BOOK FIVE 451 


PRARARARAREAAAERERARERARA HR Ae 


EE TLR EEA RR RAL LAA LAL LALLA OS, 
following words. (16) 


ATTA TATA 
sel AMET vatrenitidearmirntad were war wget saree 
weretenfore: Srararcente merareh yer wfeegeete mika fe Hel ae mee 8 1A 
TAS SMA AAT MMT LATTA: | Re | | 


The Lord said: Oh, sages, (you have indeed placed Me in a difficult predicament in that) 
you, whose Speech Is infallible, have asked Me the rare boon thata son like Me may be born 
to this royal Sage; (for you know) | alone am My compeer, matchless as | am. Nonetheless 
the words of Brahmanas should not prove false either, inasmuch as it is My own mouth that 
is represented by the Brahmana race (the adored of all the other twice-born classes). (17) 
Therefore, not finding My equal (anywhere), | shall descend (on earth) through Nabhi (the 
son of Agnidhra), exhibiting a part of My own. (18) 


AY SAA 
sta Premearen Aegean: ufmfrerardda war 93 afters aaa fasted wary 
cafes: watfadt ard: frafeentiar deat deceat antesifiqere amg 
MATA MUN GeaAA eI Yaa ATATAAATT | Ro | 
Sh AEMad TEI IRAee Heda Vanes Arad BTN AT Faas ears: | 31 


Sri Suka went on : Having thus addressed the consort of queen Merudevi within her 
hearing, the Lord disappeared (then and there). (19) Propitiated by great seers at that very 
sacrifice, O Pariksit (who had been restored to life by Lord Sri Krsna, manifestation of Lord 


_ Visnu—vide |. xii. 7—10), the Lord descended (on earth) in the gynaeceum of king Nabhi 


in a divine form (consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas) with a view to obliging 
that monarch and (also) with intent to teach to the world (by personal example) the sacred 
vows observed by sages that have no covering on their body except the atmosphere, lead 
an ascetic life and are pledged to perpetual celibacy (lit., have directed the flow of their 


generative fluid upwards). (20) 


Thus ends the third discourse entitled "The descent of Lord Rsabha", forming 
part of the narrative of king Nabhi, in Book Five of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


Sia eS 


BA Ada Sears: 


Discourse IV 
The sovereignty of Rsabha 
Hiya sara 


BT BF AAT AAT TTA TARTU ATEN TT AAT ALT TEM TH a Ti TMM ToT 
WHAT: WS AAMT SaaTvAa ATA MTT, SAP: 1 AT SST Feel HOT TAT 
qeegeiaas citsrar aes Porar aren ceigttarteat at Pera eee Seika AT ATT! 2 | 








|| See 





452 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


[ Dis. 
Be Br Re Re Bee Re Re Re Re Re Re Re RR RE RE RRR Re RE BER ER Be BE HERE Be Be Be Be Be By Be BY Br Br Ke Be Br Be He He Br Hr Hr Br Re Be Ke Br He Br Be Hr Be Hr eennenennenennes 


Sri Suka resumed : Now, finding marks of divinity (such as the figures of a thunderbo}t 
and goad in the soles of His feet) manifest in (the person of) Lord Rsabha from His ve 
birth and His glory mounting everyday alongwith (the qualities of) viewing all alike, contro) 
of the internal and external senses, aversion to the pleasures of sense, Universal] 
domination and perfection in everything, the ministers as well as the people, including the 
Brahmanas, and gods too eagerly wished that He should rule over the earth. (1) 
Considering His personality—which was so exquisite and formed the theme of many a 
laudatory verse—majesty, strength, splendour, glory, dominating influence and energy, 
his father (Nabhi) gave Him the name of Rsabha (the foremost). (2) 

Ae SSE: CAA WTA aS A aad daar wranygwydal arivat: Weer 
aN ASAIe ATMA | 3 ATE Berfrerot Grsteanae awa aw agent ARalaay 
Praha: 1 

Envying Him, the mighty Indra did not rain (at all) in his land. Having come to know this, 
Lord Rsabhadeva, the Master of Yoga (marvels), laughed heartily and sent down showers 
throughout his land, known by the name of Ajanabha, by dint of His Yogamaya (divine 
potency). (3) Having been blessed with a worthy son, as desired by him, king Nabhi for his 
part was overwhelmed with a transport of excessive joy and felt supremely happy as he 
fondly caressed the divine Child—who was really the most ancient Person, having assumed 
a human semblance of His own will—addressing Him in a faltering voice as "my child, my 
darling", his mind deluded by the divine Maya (which led him to mistake the Lord for his own 


child). (4) | 
Tet WhnIest WA Georguena ae 
Tecan facta WaMu ate SRA TARTS et aca: Hert 
ASAT | & | 
Having come to know that his son (Rsabhadeva) was popular with all including his 
ministers and citizens, king Nabhi, who was guided by the popular sentiment, installed him 
on the throne for the preservation of moral standards and entrusted him to the care of the 
Brahmanas. (And) worshipping Lord Vasudeva as known by the name of Nara and 
Narayana through austerities which, thoygh severe, caused no annoyance to others as 
well as through the practice of profound meditation with (his spouse) Merudevi at Visala 


(in the holy retreat of Badarikasrama, the modern Badrinatha), he attained oneness with 
Him at the proper time. (5) 


Weal & USA YotHlaeletha— 
St 4 deed wstdaiivarentaqart! smaeramarera eh: weet wor | 
AAMAS: Gat AAA Aged: | ger afte ager avfararqusrariy | 
People cite the following two couplets in praise of Nabhi, O Pariksit (a scion of Pandu) :— 
What (other) man can imitate the celebrated doings of the royal sage Nabhi, attracted by 
whose pious deeds Sri Hari (Himself) became a son to him ? (Again) where could be had a 


devotee of the Brahmanas other than Nabhi, propitiated by whose (liberal) sacrificial fees the 


Brahmanas by dint of sacred hymns made the (very) Lord of sacrifices manifest Himself 
during the sacrifice? (6-7) 


aa e Waseda: at widaaaan: vaeaqeacar aaraetetaaa 
Jean waa Vesemaavacdact wt aaa 
AMIS Viet STATA | ¢ VT Tay Hear wxdt FAS: AAU sratere aw sreatata 
amtagrda! <iday pad yeradt aeradt ucts: Hane saeyhaad: sine gia Aq 
AataTaray: 1 20 1 


Dis. 4 ] BOOK FIVE 453 


Br BeBe BRB SESS RR RR BBB Re Be RB RR RR RR RR RR RR HR RR RR RR RR RRR ERA LAR ELA IRE 


aiaehttahe: verge: froma: | anfagtitse: grees: GUIS: 122 

gia aTateaeiat va nerTadeat Gah wamieiasied aqdamadare- 
Qari TeMA: 1k2 uate Wareitfratae: § frquesrent Herein 
ASISAA AAGteN: HAAN ET ATV AYA: 123 | 


Now indeed Lord Rsabhadeva, who knew His land to be the land of action, showed (by 
His own exam ple) how one shouldlive at the residence of one's preceptor. (Again,) permitted 
(to marry) by His preceptors, who had received (from Him) the boons of their choice (by way 
of the teacher's fees), and teaching (to the world) the duties of householders, he performed 
both the types of religious rites ordained by the scriptures (viz., those enjoined by the Vedas 
and those prescribed by traditional law) and begot through ( His consort) Jayanti, bestowed 
on Him by Indra, a hundred sons, who were His own replicas. (8) Of them the eldest and the 
one possessed of the highest attributes was Bharata, who was indeed a great adept in Yoga 
and after whom they speak of this land as Bharatavarsa (the land of Bharata). (9) Next to him 
came the nine (brothers)—KuSavarta, llavarta, Brahmavarta, Malaya, Ketu, Bhadrasena, 
Indrasprk, Vidarbha and Kikata—who led the (other) ninety. (10) Kavi, Hari, Antariksa, 
Prabuddha, Pippalayana, Avirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhajana—these nine were 
eminent devotees of the Lord who taught (to the world) the conduct prescribed for the 
votaries of the Lord. We shall narrate hereafter (in Book XI), in the form of a dialogue between 
Vasudeva (the father of Lord Sri Krsna) and the sage Narada, their sacred story imbued with 
the Lord's own glory and (thus) inducing peace of mind. (11-12) The (remaining) eighty-one 
sons of Jayanti, who were still younger, were obedient to their father, very modest, highly 
well-versed in the Vedas and habitually engaged in performing sacrifices. Purified by their 
(pious) conduct, they passed for Brahmanas. (13) 


wWarysdda sida: wad Meataqundawt: wactaqyad gyart wa 
fautitarhafvanvan: arlearrd araurnayreraadigel Ga Said Aa: Hrerareny 
erat far: Us aq aaa Yee Meh Mama | LY Ag Pea areata aera pace cite: 12% | 
wate cafafed dace aral Wet wrerctdisiaarier arafefteursitam yee | 25 | 
AASV HAA: Hag heahtararehegnrarad: Aaa Ha AMA ch cal SAT | V9 | TATA AT 
ukvaaarot water, ad A Hyat Yet asectaaanivarisaaicnaat faa 
atféfaaaerd wuddqaadt fagftisrreterfasraradtor! ¢¢1 a Halfaqear wares 
aellad Tet aarewaraurar Wart Prrrtattararcistrtate diets: 
Waa Ua al aa aaa at SraTaA 1 VF I 

sf strarrTad HET TRACE ated WAH A_asears: | ¥ I 


The Lord, who was (rightly) called Rsabha (the foremost), was God Himseli— 
(altogether) independent, eternally free from all evils by His very nature and (ever) enjoying 
absolute bliss (which constitutes His very essence). Yet, performing actions like an ordinary 
mortal, He taught to the ignorant by His own example the duties that had been forgotten 
through (passage of) time; and, remaining equipoised, calm and controlled, friendly 
disposed (towards all) and full of compassion. He ordained the people in household life by 
acquiring religious merit, worldly possessions and fame, begetting children, enjoying the 
pleasures of sense and attaining final beatitude. (14) (For, as a rule,) the world (blindly) 
follows whatever is done by men of topmost rank (in society). (15) Although He Himself knew 
the hidden truths of the Vedas, which represent the essence of all Dharmas (rules of good 
conduct) He ruled over the people according to the (four recognized) policies of persuasion 
etc., following the line of conduct chalked out (for Him) by the Brahmanas. (16) He 








454:. | SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


ee pa bnsaaseunnnnntwenenenntbbaneasanent ie 8 


bigs 3 


worshipped the Lord (strictly) according to precept through all (kinds of) sacrifices, performeg 
a hundred times each and provided with (all requisites in the shape of appropriate) materials 

place, time, age (of the sacrificer), faith and (the guidance of) priests and intended to 
propitiate different gods. (17) In this land (subsequently known by the name of Bharatavarsa) 

(when it was) ruled over by Lord Rsabhadeva, nobody ever sought for one's own use on any 
account anything whatsoever from another—any more than one would have a thing 
(altogether) non-existent—except an incessantly growing and profound love for their Ruler: 
nor did anyone cast a (wistful) look on another's property. (18) On a certain occasion, While 
touring (over His kingdom), Lord Rsabhadeva happened to be in Brahmavarta and (there), 
in a gathering of the foremost Brahmana sages, He thus addressed His own sons—even 

though they were (fully) self-controlled and thoroughly disciplined by virtue of their modesty 
and excessive devotion (to their divine Father)—with a view to admonishing them within 

the hearing (in the presence) of His subjects. (19) 


Thus ends the fourth discourse, in Book Five of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


JID OD 


3Ig USA sear: 


Discourse V 
Lord Rsabhadeva instructs His sons and Himself takes to the life of an 
ascetic who has shaken off worldly feeling and obligation 


IY SAT 

Wa del aed Jele as ammed fagyat a 
aa fest dant a4 ut yale aaetet wade! 
Aectat Sarg aqateratey afer afar 
Werte eat: usin fanaa: wee: arear A121 
a a wast cadet wig 4 eesnarfdag 
Tee Meena «~ wWftgqaat araauiva claia 
To wet: qed feed afefsadtta argunitn 
a WY Aa ad anemisameaft acre sia ee:1x! 
WIaaedacaelsttal aa=t fiarad SIA Tag | 
aeaknaetdad Wt a aia At YATE IG! 
WG Wt: ata waeet  aifaernssargqueffaar 
Wirt meant aged 4 qed eed mada! 
aq oT Wada Wet wit wad: aca faavadqi 
Trestle aa AUTATATET ATTA: 119 | 





Dis. 5 ] BOOK FIVE ~ 455": 
FR SRSA Be Be Be BeBe ABB BAe AOR Be Be Be Re RBBB RRR ERAS IAB IS: 


Lord Rsabha began : This (human) body in the mortal world does not deserve to be 
given up to (the pursuit of) sensuous pleasures, which are (really) a source of misery and 
which are enjoyed even by swine, dogs and other animals (that feed on ordure). It is worthy 
of being devoted, My beloved sons, to sublime austerities whereby the mind is purified; and 
from purity of mind follows the unending bliss of absorption into the Absolute. (1) The wise 
speak of service rendered to exalted souls as an open gate to liberation and the fellowship 
of those who are fond of women as the door opening into hell. (And) they alone are (really) 
great who are even-minded, exceptionally calm and composed, free from anger, kind- 
hearted and pious or again they who regard love offered to Me as the (only) object of human 
pursuit, who take no delight in (the company of) men (solely) engaged in pursuits (merely) 
calculated to nourish their body nor in a household consisting of wife, children and (earthly) 
riches, and who have no selfish interest in the world beyond the maintenance of their 
body. (2-3) An erring soul commits sin only when he endeavours to gratify his senses. | 
(however) do not regard those actions as good, from which has followed this body, which 
though (really) non-existent, is (yet) a source of misery to the Jiva. (4) The real nature of the 
soul remains obscure due to ignorance only so long as the Jiva does not enquire into the truth 
about the Spirit. (Again) so long as actions continue to be performed, the mind remains 
disposed to activity, and it is due to such a mind that the Jiva remains tied to a body. (5) (The 
true nature of) the Spirit being thus veiled by ignorance, the past actions of a man render his 
mind prone to activity. And so long as there is no love for Me, Lord Vasudeva, the Jiva is not 
rid of its identification with a body. (6) So long as the Jiva, oblivious of its (real) self-interest, 
does not come to its senses and realize the activity of the Indriyas (the senses of perception 
and the organs of action) as unreal (something not belonging to it), the fool soon forgets its 
own essential nature and finding a home providing sexual enjoyment (as a characteristic 
feature), suffers torments (of various kinds) there. (7) 


da: fer fagiradd aaftet eqauferng:! 
Tet TeaAagqareartst eat Tetsane ATT IS 1 
el Wieden  HAlqeal q STYeTaA | 
dat owWa: @akaddsee Wad: Wt aAleiiaeta eaqyi<! 
ea owt afe wengqger faqerr gefditea at 
Waa SAAT RTCA fararaar ATAAT A | YO | 
uiinicng a Pret HeegTe | Urea 
fava Yar forereat SENET GE: 188 I 
seqraan 40sec erent |= Per! 
aap | AeTaAaOT SIA TA AT ATER 
aaa Telaaraa4art Wt fagratentistes t 
ara | eget | fer AMT eHRTCTISEATSTH 29 | 
aise QeaU fae ACTA S SAMA AMAT: | 
saa aCe ENA ATI a1 


The union as husband and wife of a man with a woman, the wise speak of it as another 
knot binding their hearts together (apart from the subtle knot, in the shape of identification 
with the body, already existing in their heart individually). It is due to this (other knot) that (over 
and above the body, mind and senses etc.), a man erroneously regards a house, fields, 





S|) Reees 


456 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


[ Dis. 
eRe Be Be Re RR Re RE RE RRR RR RR RR BR A BB BH Hr HE HB Br A Br Wy fr Br Sy Sr Or Br re eeenenanennnens. 


children, kinsmen and wealth as either himself or his own. (8) When (however) the hard knot 
in the shape of mind—formed in the heart of this Jiva by its Karmas (past actions)—gets 
loose, then (and then alone) does it turn its back on this relation of husband and wife and, 
shedding its ego (the cause of transmigration) and freed from all bondage, reaches the 
Supreme. (9) By adoring Me and depending on Me, the pure Self and Preceptor (of all); 
through freedom from thirst for enjoyment as well as by enduring pairs of opposites (such 
as heat and cold, pleasure and pain); by realizing the fact that a living being is beset with 
calamities everywhere (even in the other world); through a spirit of enquiry (into the truth of 
things) through asceticism and by abstaining from actions done with some interested motive; 
through actions done for My sake by hearing My stories everyday; through the fellowship of 
those who look upon Me as their sole deity; by singing My praises; through even- 
mindedness, tranquillity and freedom from animosity; through a desire to give up identifying 
himself with the body, house etc., through a careful study of scriptures dealing with the Spirit: 
by living in solitude; by thoroughly controlling the breath, the Indriyas (the senses of 
perception as well as the organs of action) and the mind; through faith in saints and the holy 
books; through continence, through constant vigilance (in performing one's sacred duties); 
through control of the tongue; through wisdom illumined with realization and penetrating 
enough to perceive My presence everywhere; and through deep meditation, My sons, and 
equipped with firmness, diligence and discretion, a clever man should (endeavour to) tear 
the veil known by the name of Ego. (10—13) Remaining vigilant (all the time), he should 
completely shake off by this means, as taught by his preceptor the bondage in the shape of 
the knot (of egotism) in the heart, which has been brought about by ignorance and which, 


again, is the storehouse where (all) the latencies of Karma lie deposited. Then he should 
desist even from this endeavour. (14) 


umya renga Far Weal ecient Aaqaere: | 
sa fara ered oa | ATA AY, HAyer | 
mH asteaqisd icamda fodaaaset fe mien 
cin: Tae stata AWelvatsaty «atta freee: 
Tae: Yee CTC 2G 
ae aa deltat fauisae safaeramat ada 
set et ET: Sah Ware GTI QI 
Tet FT Sina 7 A eae frat 4 a Meret A at eM 
ca 4 deat wit A Et Wed: aqtagemiect 
A king or a father or a preceptor, whoever aspires to reach My abode or looks upon My 
grace as the (sole) object of human pursuit, should thus instruct his ignorant subjects, Sons 
or pupils, and shouldin no case urge them to actions (done with an interested motive), getting 
not angry with them (even if they do not listen to him and persist in doing such actions), 
knowing that they erroneously regard such actions as the only way to happiness. What object 
would a man gain by directing a fellow-man to such actions? For thereby he would be 
throwing the blind fellow into the abyss of metempsychosis. (15) Men who crave for objects 
of sensuous enjoyment alone, possessed as they are by an inordinate lust for such 
enjoyment, are (really) themselves blind to their (real) well-being. That is why they enter into 
enmity with one another for crumbs of pleasure and have no idea of the endless misery 
(which lies in store for them as a result of such enmity), deluded as they are. (16) Seeing 
such foolish men steeped in ignorance (in the form of worldly activity), no sensible and 





Dis. 9 J BOOK FIVE 457 


teense e Teer T Teer eee ere TT TTT eT TTT TTT ee eee 
aati ee who is himself aware of his own (real) interests, would urge them to 
aaa track a ae again, any more than he would direct a blind man who is following 
3 ie 5 a fath continue on that path. (17) A preceptor is no preceptor, a relation is no 
aii er 'S no father, a mother is no mother, a deity is no deity, nor is a husband a 


husband, who is unable to redeem his pupil, relation, son, votary or wife fallen into (the 
whirlpool of) transmigration. (18) 


sq MI aR qewet ur fe 2 wed an at: 
Ws pdt 2 aaent SINT tt fe ATE | Ureerati:1 281 
Wise eat wet: ad adie warn 
sere wd oud oysui agi | WSIAIAIR01 
Tag ateaqeay samara SRO RES: MULE LER 
wat | aye: «= Waerendtsir §9omerdfet fase aie 
cages wat cared selene aan 
“a: WW: sa fated: «a unitsé fesieaca:1221 


(The mystery of) this human semblance of Mine (assumed of My own free will) cannot 
be easily understood. Indeed (pure) Sattva is My heart, where resides Dharma (righteous- 
ness), and unrighteousness has been left far behind by Me. That is why worthy souls call Me 
Rsabha (the foremost). (19) You are sprung from My heart (which as | have told you is made 
up of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas): therefore, with a mind free from envy, wait upon 
that brother of yours, Bharata, who is a very noble soul; that will be (as good as) rendering 
service to Me and (tantamount to) taking care of the people. (20) Mobile creatures are higher 
than plants, which in their turn are by far the best among (other) created beings (such as 
minerals and stones); and among these (again) beasts etc., (who are endowed with 
intelligence) are the highest. Higher than these are human beings; while Pramathas (spirits 
and genii forming the retinue of Lord Rudra, the god of destruction) are higher even than 
human beings. Still higher are the Gandharvas (celestial musicians); the Siddhas (a class 
of demigods who are naturally endowed with mystic powers) come next; while higher still are 
the (other) attendants of gods (Such as the Kinnaras). (21) (Still higher are the Asuras or 
demons;) the gods with Indra as their leader are superior (even) to the Asuras and higher 
still rank the (mind-born) sons of Brahma—Daksa and others. Of these (again) Lord Siva (the 
Source of the universe) ranks the foremost and He in His turn is an offspring of Brahma (the 
creator, who is, therefore, naturally higher than Siva). | am superior (even) to Brahma (the 
creator), while the Brahmanas (the adored of the other twice-born classes) are worthy of 
adoration even to Me (and therefore superior to Me). (22) 


a wether wyraq wei fam: fara: w I 
ahaa: wed seamen arm 4 AaAMASlas 1 23 I 
at ayer & quit te wet we waa 
Tar au: Uae va aaeadtidanrquayea AALS I 
aasaaaend: wed © eanivanifeadt fei 
oat feq eifedtor ceria aft Afar Rk | 
| place no other living being on a par with the Brahmanas; what (other) creature, then, 


can | regard as higher than they, O Brahmanas (assembled here) ?'! eat My fill the food 
offered to them by men in liberal quantities with reverence, but not so the oblations poured 


[564] B. M. 17— 





458 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Di 


[ Dis. 
PRAKKLLHKKLKAKHRRARRALKKALRLKLAKKKKANHH KLARA K AHL MHL AAS H ASAT SA SA AE AA AAA Ae AA eH eg 


into the sacred fire at a sacrifice. (23) Itis by the Brahmana that My glorious and eternal body 
(in the form of the Vedas) has been maintained on earth and it is in him that the most 
sanctifying quality of Sattva, control of the mind and the senses, truthfulness and compassion, 
asceticism, endurance and wisdom are found. (24) The Brahmanas who are rich in devotion 
to Me, though destitute of worldly possessions, have nothing to seek even from Me, the 
Lord possessed of infinite power and higher than the highest (Brahma and others) and the 
Bestower of heavenly bliss and final beatitude ! What can they have to do with anything 


else? (25) 

Tewada «6 Nahesatr «6th «6a ofarfor 
afd ut ud a  fafaadeiteretqereut Aiea 
WiadiganhMienad  wWalepd A  Ukeet fe 
fat gam a vated args fartaquiviq 20 


With a pure (ungrudging) mind all living beings, mobile (animate) as well as immobile 
(inanimate), My sons, ought to be respected by you at every step as (SO many) abodes 
of Mine; that alone will be My true worship at your hands. (26) My propitiation is the ( only) 
reward of the activities of the mind, tongue, eyes and the other Indriyas. For, without 
propitiating Me a man cannot hope to escape from the greatly confounding noose of 


Death. (27) 
High Sara 
Waa CASAS eras AVM: Wade eTaryauaayr 
s | . e I arc e 3 


Sri Suka continued : Having thus admonished his sons, who were themselves 
(thoroughly) disciplined, for the guidance of the world, the most glorious Lord Rsabha, their 
greatest friend (and well-wisher) installed on the throne the eldest of His hundred sons, 
Bharata—who was not only a great devotee of the Lord but was devoted to His servants aS 
well—for the protection of the earth (His kingdom). (Then) in order to exemplify (in Himself) 
the mode of life of recluses, characterized by Devotion, Self-Realization and aversion for the 
pleasures of sense, and followed by great ascetics given to self-control and retired from 
(worldly) activity, He Himself renounced even at home everything except His body, which 
was the only possession left with Him, and, having absorbed the sacrificial fires into Himself, 
and taking to the life of a recluse, departed from Brahmavarta as if mad, with dishevelled hair 
and having no covering on His body except the sky. (28) Behaving like a stupid, blind, dumb, 
deaf or madman or (even like) a goblin, he put on the appearance of one who had lost all 





is. 5 -<"s 
DE 2) ees BOOK FIVE 459 
LR RRL RRR LR RRR RA RR RRR RAIL LRA EERE 


sense of we ese and, having taken a vow of silence, remained mute even when accosted 
by the Boor aS : 9) In towns and villages, mines and hamlets, flower-gardens and habitations 
at the it 2 ; S, military encampments and cow-pens, in hutments of cowherds as well as 
in the midst of caravans, in mountains and forests, hermitages and other places, wherever 
He happened to be, He was insulted on every road—even as a wild elephant is assailed by 
bees—by vile men, who threatened and (even) beat Him, passed urine and spat on Him 
threw stones, dust and (even) ordure on Him, farted (in His face) and showered abuses on 
Him. He (however) ignored (all) this inasmuch as He never looked upon, as His own self or 
(even) as His own, this illusory habitat in the shape of a body, (wrongly) called as real— 
established as He was in His own glory (glorious essence) consisting in the realization of both 
being and non-being—and roamed about all alone on (this) earth with an undivided 
(undistracted) mind. (30) Appearing ina (charming) form with very soft hands and feet and 
chest, long and rounded arms, shoulders, and neck, an attractive face and other limbs (all) 
symmetrically disposed, and a lovely mouth lit up with a spontaneous and naturally 
captivating smile, He appeared (all the more) lovely with His reddish and large refreshing 
eyes resembling the petals of a fresh, blown lotus. His cheeks, ears, neck and nostrils were 
not only beautiful but uniformly shaped. By the extraordinary gracefulness of His face 
adorned with an enigmatic smile He kindled love in the heart of the women of the city, and 
with the curly yet.matted and auburn luxuriant hair flowing over His face as well as with His 
uncared for and unclean body He looked like one possessed by a demon. (31) 
ate aa a war ced arrange udiutaraanrenaidiary atutcadtta 
atest: Wat Warvatfea trata ~reaateta gala Hr VSAM Sata Stfarettest: 132 | 
wea Fa: Weare reraedt Vet eater Gace ene 1 33 | Ue Wy aaar 
Asia Sarat: IAA: rea: rata Greate SA B¥ Shr AMAT ALT ATA, 
Sarafraitstaccmerraqua set dat ATTY waht args 
WesaaMAaniawar fganeanedakgut atgaaiitr agmaristardel tata 
VAM ATS UT A AGATA ASAT FT SAAAMPA Tad | Be | 
sfi atrarrad WET WRAeeM Meda Ta BIACATARG THATS AA: | 4 | 
When, however, the Lord saw this world directly opposed to His practice of Yoga as it 
were, and the counteraction of such opposition reprehensible, He adopted the mode of life 
of a python (remaining fixed to one spot and working out one's destiny) and not only ate, 
drank and chewed (crisp articles of food) but also passed urine and stool lying down, rolling 
in the faeces till all His limbs were thoroughly daubed with it. (82) The wind perfumed by the 
fragrance of His excrement indeed surcharged with sweet smell the whole area within a 
radius of eighty miles. (83) Similarly, living the life of a bull, deer or crow, he behaved (just) 
like a bull, deer or crow andate, drank and passed urine while moving about, standing, sitting 
or lying down. (34) Thus adopting various modes of life helpful to the practice of Yoga (in 
order to set an example before Yogis striving to surmount obstacles in the way of their 
practice of Yoga), Lord Rsabhadeva, the Dispenser of final beatitude—who embodied in 
Himself the constant realization of the highest bliss—was endowed in the fullest measure 
with all the objects of human pursuit, which were naturally present in Him, inasmuch as no 
veil in the form of a subtle body existed between Him and Lord Vasudeva, the Soul of all living 
beings, with whom He was perfectly identified. That is why, O king, He did not welcome at 
heart the (extraordinary) powers of Yoga that actually came to Him unsolicited in the form 
of ability to traverse the air, acquiring the swiftness of thought, the power of remaining 
invisible and entering a dead body, the faculty of seeing distant objects and hearing distant 


sounds and so on. (35) 





460 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


SSAA a EER SEER ERR EEE EE EE ARREEEEEERERAERTEEERREEEEERRERERER RH EEE ERROR En EE EROS: 6 
Lt) 





Thus ends the fifth discourse forming part of the Narrative of Rsabhadeva, 
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SSI CS 


31g] WETSeara: 


Discourse VI 
Lord Rsabha quits His body 
Wears 
aya wa sean arreadiitcartratsiaadsisnadgaatttr aA: acryrert 
uafaquetdt Aqeparareats tg 1 


King Pariksit said : Surely to those who revel in the Self and have burnt up the seeds 
of (future) actions (in the shape of likes and dislikes and so on) through (the fire of) wisdom 
strengthened by the practice of Yoga. Yogic powers coming unsolicited cannot again prove 
to be a source of evils (such as likes and dislikes). (Why, then, did the Lord not accept 
them?) (1) 

FAAS 
aetad faite at Wes A AAI SegT PASSAT Votentld St Ug esd | 21 tat Aradtq— 
The sage (Suka) replied : What you have observed is (quite) true; but there are some 
(discreet men) in this world who would never feel quite confident about their fickle mind any 
more than a clever hunter would about a deer (trapped by him). (2) Similarly it is said:— 

7 galcnicghaet ate erated | agsrsnfenreaiel ata aT Uyay! 3 | 

feat cad amex aaq as: 1 atm: pata uagqeiaa dyacitixi 

SIA AaAel cia: VileAevaraa: | Hdereya Aayet: Tatqpalcenl A Ag qa: 14 | 

"One should never make friends with (rely on the friendship of ) the inconstant mind; 
for asa result of confidence placed in it the austere vow (of chastity)—maintained for a long 
period—even of Lord Siva* (and other stalwarts like the celebrated sage Saubhari t ) was 
broken. (3) The mind of a Yogi (striving mystic) who has made friends with it is ever alert 
to fling the gates open to Lust and other enemies (such as Anger) that follow him—even 
as a faithless wife would allow her paramours to enter her husband's house and murder 
him. (4) What wise man would admit (the trustworthiness of) the mind, which is the root of 
lust, anger, vanity, greed, sorrow, infatuation, fear and other evils and which binds a man 


to his actions ? (5) 

St faciaisisacayqadanraraatacthaaraaural 
Ahh areata tencat Menqrerancaradera ec aet aca aT AUT 
SRA Gea! & 1 Wea F A Ua aniereer wad wwe AAaratal ee Sat 
START  UsAAT: algdegeanrdavauwlcarey aqesarrtd: 
Semlacidat BWapdwHad Ie ga Yaageistsddia wa feaacio! aA 


* Vide VIII. xii. 24—32. 
t See IX. vi. 39—52. 





is. 6 ] 
Dis: SrA BRR BR AEB BRAT BARR Me Bete be Sete te BOOK FIVE 461 


tr 
Sart tr tr Br Br Br Br Be Br tr Pr er Br Hr Br Br Br Or Br Br Hr Br Br Br Re RR AER ARERR LEAR AA 


: We at cele 2 

ry Ornament of the protectors of the world (Indra and the 
rains ; eu not be perceived on account of His behaving as 
otha nd because He had adopted the weird appearance, speech 
Bh EO GACH tO Ieee renounced all worldly attachments and connections. Now, in 
? lina) Hi ogis the process of giving up the ghost He thought of quitting 
(concealing) Fis body and, constantly viewing the Supreme Spirit—who was directly present 
in Him—as (absolutely) identical (with Himself), ceased to think of His body and gave up His 
SN lee ta (even) with the subtle body. (6) When Lord Rsabhadeva was thus rid of (His 
identification with) the subtle body, His visible form continued to wander over this globe due 
to seeming egotism induced by the vestiges of Yogamaya (the divine will to carry on the sport 
of roaming about the earth as a wandering recluse) and, visiting as directed by Providence 
the territories of Konka, Venka, Kutaka and South Karnataka, traversed the forest of the 
Kutaka mountain stark naked, like a madman, with dishevelled hair and with a piece of stone 
in His mouth. (7) Meanwhile a fierce forest conflagration broke out due to the friction of 
bamboos tossed about by the force of wind and, enveloping the forest on all sides, consumed 
the body of Rsabhadeva too alongwith the forest. (8) 


ae tHe qpanaqarennd algaggeatt ea HAN Sepa Medea 
: Taaaemep yaaa 


Lord Rsabhadeva was the ve 
other gods); yet His divine glo 
aforesaid like a stupid 
and conduct of one w 


fetetag erie dear 
TaaMewaqyerdataceat: was waettigo: a ia adalat 
Fasteil eh AAA OTS SYA AY CATH WAAAY kA 
On hearing about His (queer) ways and imitating them, and deluded by what was 
destined to happen, a foolish ruler of the territories of Konka, Venka and Kutaka—Arhat by 
name—appearing in the Kali age, when unrighteousness will be on the rise, will actually 
abandon the course of his own duty, which is free from risk in everyway, and duly propagate 
according to his own whims an absurd, wrong and heretical creed. (9) Led by him an 
infatuated by the deluding potency of the Lord, many an accursed soul will fall from the 
standards of personal purity and good conduct enjoined upon them by scriptural ordinance 
and, adopting of their own free will impious vows constituting an offence against the gods— 
such as abstaining from bath and Acamana (rinsing the mouth), neglecting personal 
cleanliness and pulling out the hair and so on—will more often than not condemn the Veda, 
the Brahmanas, Lord Visnu (the Deity presiding over the sacrifices) and His devotees, their 
judgment being warped by the Kali age, which is dominated by unrighteousness. (10) And 
assured (of their salvation) by their own arbitrary mode of life—which is not supported by the 
Vedas and which has been indiscriminately followed (as one blind man follows another)— 
they will descend into the dark abyss of hell by their own choice. (11) 


STEAMY THAT TATA ATAAUTTeA: | NI AAPL, Vetrenry aT — 
ag ya: aaeqae = tty aaeaerquanad | 
maha waa War:  anatfer WRVAAANaret 1 23 I 
stat Og | AgTaTacId: daadt at GA GUT! 
aaa: «Yes: HM Meee HET A 
at aqeI HISTAAUS Ped AANA AAT anit | 
a oder: weagaet sada At Hawa 1 kk 





462 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Diane 


SRA AAAEALL ALAA AAAAAAALKLANHARLKLALNKAKHARLKLKAHHARHHH HAHAH HH Br Br Br Hr Br Br Hr Ke He Fr Hr Hr renee ee 


This descent (manifestation) of the Lord was (specifically) intended to give a lesson in 
the art of liberating oneself to those who are steepedin the quality of Rajas. (12) People recite 
the following verses conformable to the spirit of such teaching:—"Oh, of (all) the Dwipas 
(main divisions) and Varsas (subdivisions) of the earth, girt with the seven oceans, this lang 
(later known as Bharatavarsa) is exceptionally holy inasmuch as the people of this land 
celebrate the blessed deeds of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Mura) associated with 
His (various) descents. (13) Oh, the race of Priyavrata is resplendent with glory; for, 
descending in this line, Bhagavan Narayana (the most ancient Person), the Inner Controller 
of all and the Cause of all causes, observed sacred vows leading to Liberation (which cannot 
be attained through religious rites). (14) Indeed what Yogi—who hankers after the mystic 
powers of Yoga, spurned by Lord Rsabhadeva because of their illusory nature, even though 
striving to serve Him—could even mentally follow in the footsteps of that birthless Lord 2" (15) 


gia & TH Macatee TiTad ITE aera Cat 


uae areiate aaraied A Ualixaed wala UAT AT: 1 V9 t 

In this way has been narrated (by me) the sacred story of the Lord bearing the name of 
Rsabha, the supremely adored (even) of all the Vedas, the (various) spheres, the gods, the 
Brahmanas and the cows—a story which wipes out all the sins of men (who hear or recite 
it), and is the abode of the highest blessings. Exclusive devotion to the aforesaid Lord 
Vasudeva is developed in the heart of him who constantly listens to it as well as of him who 
regularly recites it (before others) with (ever) increasing reverence and with a concentrated 
mind. (16) Daily and incessantly immersing their soul—(ever) burning with the agonies of 
mundane existence, full of manifold sufferings—in (the stream of) Devotion and deriving 
supreme solace from it, the wise (devotees) show no preference on any account for final 
beatitude, the highest and everlasting object of human pursuit, even if got without asking 
(offered by the Lord Himself), having fully realized their objects in their very devotion to the 


Lord. (17) 
Wet Uitletet Vad agai ea fra: qerafa: aa a feet a: 
eas War Us Hoel Ufert carter cHfefacen a ufetarrq Vc | 
Pear yd ste aitaag ST: Kreadxata 8 Fact: | 
Tne A: HOvlayaniciciarenaa wad BAW aay ee 1 
sit Aad AegTs URAC Beara TAA INCATARG VSISEATA: | & | 


Lord Sri Krsna (the Bestower of Liberation), dear Pariksit, was surely the protector, 
preceptor, deity (the object of worship), beloved friend, and head of the family of your 
grandfathers as well as of the Yadus, and sometimes (when He represented you as your 
ambassador in the court of the Kauravas at Hastinapura) your servant too. He bestows now 
and then (even) final beatitude on those who worship Him; but He never (except in very rare 
cases) grants the boon of loving devotion (to His feet). (18) Obeisance to the celebrated Lord 
Rsabhadeva, who is (entirely) free from all cravings, rich as He is in the eternal realization 
of His own Self, and who in His (abounding) compassion revealed the true nature of the 
Self—which is immune from all fear—to men whose mind had long remained oblivious of 


their (genuine) welfare, being constantly engrossed in the thought of body etc., (which are 
other than the Seif). (19) 





Dis. 7 ] 


senthPOReOe thei oehnrebnnnmnnnnnnne OOS FIVE 463 


LAER AAAEAA AAR AAA ALARA AAAAAREE AAA ROR 


Thus ends j j 
the sixth discourse forming part of the Narrative of Lord Rsabhadeva, 


in Book Five Of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita. 


GIS ey 


SM Aura sear: 


Discourse VII 
The story of Bharata 


Sa Taq 
We ATMad wat wramatacataera estate: casi 
favaeugferqrad | 81 weary = ar TS ASA: Ta Vaara werfaktear 
aT aTAUT | 2 att Were Yagtaraot preheater sree aaae amafater ad sre 
aqatasttdt | 3 1 
Sri Suka began again : When Bharata, who was a great devotee of the Lord, was 
mentally appointed by Lord Rsabhadeva (before He retired to the woods) to the rulership of 
the earth (the kingdom of his father), he married Paficajani, a daughter of Viswardpa, intent 
as he was on obeying the command of the Lord. (1) Even as Ahankara (the source of the 
subtle elements) begets the five subtle elements, he (too) begot through her five sons— 
Sumati, Rastrabhrt, Sudarsana, Avarana and Dhumraketu by name—who were entirely 
after him. It is from his time that they call this Varsa (subdivision of Jambtdwipa)— 
(heretofore) Known by the name of Ajanabha—as Bharata. (2-3) 


udureadqix! $f aU Wat Aataqed wqfeatad: sarssentemeayiqut- 
Teagan wafafaaiahrqaat urdefafatirmiy) Parad ATATaTy 
ffaagteaagd untae miei w waft aqget adeanicg@m 
Warunrastrarmnda wWealtendit wWeadat wat ada wa wTaaATA 
saa fade aay gaaadivfarmy a Usa aaa 8 dare 
Geuraqasaemad| & | Ua HAfag ica Pay GAA Te TAT HTT a@alter wrata 
arqea AEE aa acaut stad le WaT Mae Talal tH Aetatdt 
Proqeughtahadaraht Geaauur eRreart sate Usa aeaTa Aastra | 19 | 
Remaining devoted to his duty like his father (Lord Rsabha) and grandfather (king 
Nabhi), the said monarch, who possessed an extensive knowledge and was extremely 
fond of his subjects, duly protected the people, who (strictly) adhered each to his 
Prescribed duty. (4) He also worshipped, with (due) reverence at the appointed hours, 
the Lord appearing (both) in the form of Yajfias (sacrificial performances conducted 
without the Yupa or sacrificial post) and Kratus (those distinguished by the presence of 
Such a post) through sacred rites (both) big and small—in the form of Agnihotra, Darsa, 
Purnamasa, Caturmasya and Pasgusoma of both kinds—those complete in every detail 
and those lacking in some particular—undertaken under proper authority and performed 
with the co-operation of four officiating priests (viz., a Hota, an Adhwaryu, an Udgata and 
a Brahma* ). (5) When the various sacrificial performances were duly carried on with special 


nnn EEEEEETEEIEENENNEEEnEEEenmmnes 


*’The duties of all these have been mentioned in the footnote on I. iv. 19. 





464 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Di 
RA Pe ERERARAPARRRADAhAERESDRERENERERERSLEREREDEOREREROREDSERD RASH O RE REE HERE L OS 
kf 


attention to all supplementary rites, and when the Adhwaryus took the oblations (in their 
hands in order to pour them into the sacred fire), the said sacrificer (Emperor Bharata) 
mentally offered the reward, which was expected from a particular sacrifice, in the form of 
a virtue known by the name of Dharma (religious merit), entirely to Lord Vasudeva, the 
transcendent Reality and the Supreme Deity, who Is not only the Soul of sacrifices but their 
actual doer too, being the Ruler of the gods represented by the several Mantras (Sacred 
texts) symbolic of the different deities. And his passions (in the form of likes and dislikes) 
having been attenuated by his sagacity (in offering the fruit to the Lord), he contemplated on 
the deities enjoying a share in the sacrificial offering as so many limbs of (rather than as so 
distinct from) the Supreme Person. (6) When his mind was thus thoroughly purified through 
the extreme purity of his actions, there arose (in his heart) loving devotion—which grew 
exceptionally intense everyday—to Lord Vasudeva, the transcendent Reality, appearing in 
the space within his heart in the form of the Supreme Person (Bhagavan Narayana), 
distinguished by the mark of Srivatsa (the foot-print of Bhrgu), the gem known by the name 
of Kaustubha, a wreath of sylvan flowers, a discus, a mace and So on, nay, remaining 
immovable like a portrait in the heart of his devotees and shining brightly in his own mind as 


the Inner Controller.(7 
wa ut Stayer wader Raat tiqdame 
auerd farsa tad Paced ad Gees Waast | 61 aa Se ala WTA 
Siena aaa IS SISGIG aIcdeat UPreareara SOTAUUT Ie | 
AAT AAU AMAA Mae Peal Vaal AA Aaa Aad: Aastra | ot 
Having concluded at the end of ten million years that the store of merit responsible for 
his royal fortune must have thus been exhausted by that time, he proportionately divided 
among his own sons the hereditary fortune he had been legitimately enjoying (till then), and 
himself retired as a recluse from his own residence, which was the abode of all prosperity, 
to the hermitage of the sage Pulaha (situated on the bank of the river Gandaki and known 
as the Salagramaksetra*). (8) Impelled by His paternal affection for His own devotees 
residing in that hermitage, itis said, Lord Sri Hari reveals Himself there in their desired form 
even today. (9) The holy river Cakranadi (Gandaki or Gandaka) hallows on all sides the 
(various) places of this hermitage through contact with circular (wheel-like) pebbles having 
nave-like marks on both sides (above as well as below). (10) 
aay aa fat a wad: Yoesmmuat fataupqnteacaqetanraiu: 
HaytHciteted atea Wad snieat fafaad sorafagaryeanrs Sayaragra: ATT 
Prefararg 1 22 1 


Duly performing all alone the worship of the Lord through flowers and tender leaves of 
various kinds, particularly the leaves of the holy basil plant, and water as well as through 
edibles such as bulbs, roots and fruits, ina lonely retreat in the grove of the said hermitage, 


Bharata was rid of all craving for the pleasures of sense and, developing (great) tranquillity 
of mind, derived supreme gratification. (11) 


qeadistent qaarscisyuidg-dg Sara — 1 23 


* So-called because it abounds in Salagrama-Silas or sacred stones symbolic of Lord Visnu and found rolling in the 
bed of the river Gandaki. 





2 : 8 
DE aero er BOOK FIVE 465 


ERE RA Be Be BeBe fe Be Bete Be Bete Be eRe AR RAL EL LES 
Fee cing lovetor he ane benumbed (as it were) under the pressure of exceptionally 
se the aforesaid rc, Occasioned by incessant worship of the Supreme Person carried 
onin i esaid manner. The hair stood on their endall over his body as a result of intense 
spl 2 es were bedimmed by tears of love proceeding from an ardent longing (to meet 
the Lord); an IS Consciousness being drowned in the deep lake of his heart, brimming over 
with supreme felicity flowing from devotion—which was enriched by constant thought of 
the feet of his beloved Lord, red as a lotus—he forgot even the worship that was being done 
by him as aforesaid. (12) Having thus undertaken vows of propitiating the Lord and looking 
very bright in his covering of deerskin and with his head of tawny, curly and matted hair wet 
through ablutions performed thrice (everyday), he waited upon the all-effulgent Lord 
Narayana (the Supreme Person)—as manifested in the orb of the rising sun—with hymns 
addressed to the sun-god and prayed as follows :— (13) 


West: aagidad ta wit wae ws 
aera: «yaya eset qemot gaffe ew 


sft APSTTad Agr WHEN aed Wares mcaka wracataata AAAS ATT: 1 I 
The Light (constituting the very essence) of the sun-god, which lies beyond the material 
plane (is made up of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), dispenses the fruit of our 
actions, it is the same Light which evolved this (phenomenal) universe by Its mere thought 
and again, entering it (as Its Inner Controller), protects the Jiva, seeking Its protection, with 
Its power of consciousness. We resort to that Light, which propels our intellect.* (14) 


Thus ends the seventh discourse, forming part of the story of Emperor Bharata, dealing 
(mainly) with the worship of the Lord, in Book Five of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SII 


STSTPA Sea al: 


Discourse VIII 
Bharata conceives an infatuation for a fawn and is reborn as a deer 


Aya SAT 
Uhal qf Aelte Sahsen raraagaHy SCMAAUA HedaayachidA SAAAT | FI 
SH AST TST] GAO aaa ACTA ATT ce AAT | 1 qat Ua Sach Aaeafarg cay 
Fadl Wadetel canvas SqIdd | 31 aI OM WTA: Whldtaactar anata 
aerate ehieranarrasreameca URMAag TAA Aad AeaaretcHa | ¥ 
Having bathed in the great river (Gandaki) and having finished 
(both of an obligatory nature and those demanded by particular 


Occasions) as well as other unavoidable duties (such as easing nature), one day, Bharata 
Squatted on the bank of the river for three Muhurtas (nearly two hours and a half), repeating 
the sacred syllable Om. (1) Meanwhile, on that spot, O king, a deer approached the river bank 


Sri Suka began again : 
his routine of religious duties 


*This explains the meaning of the holy Gayatn-Mantra. 





466 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


; Dj : 
| capatatnearenahahahehthttenreneDOhehthihOnERehe ethene rwenenennenenwewnwey eo: 8 
aE 


all alone to drink water. (2) While it was yet avidly drinking water, there arose a loud, dee 
and hoarse sound—striking terror into the heart of all—of a lion roaring not very far from that 
place. (3) Hearing the sound, that deer, which was shy by its very nature and (already) looked 
with bewildered eyes, felt all the more perturbed at heart, overcome as It was with the fea, 
of the lion, and precipitately leapt across the stream, its eyes Swimming and its thirst not yet 
quenched. (4) 


qa sda sides sewuaanied atarriar at: arate fFrooia, 
AGATA OTAAAS IT CUT AQAA HM Porat Harara4er aT AAT 1 & | 
Even as the déer, which was big with young, took the leap the foetus, that had been 
dislodged through excessive fear, came out of the vagina and fell into the stream. (5) Afflicted 
with exhaustion caused by the premature delivery and the (unusually long) leap (taken by 
it) as well as with fear (of the lion), and (further) strayed from its troop, the female deer 
dropped down in some cavern and died. (6) 
aq BUG Hut saaearnadteanag alarm weiltsita sera 
TAMA AAT | 91 Mea | AT WolHures Salta, Halisnharearaceetearaay- 
USMC: ASAT: THaiaaaa Uae: Hiaaeretort fear: 
fenet Wa VASAT |S 1 Sta Aaa SRV HUTS: HAUT BF VACAT ALOT AOA CATO RAY I: 
URatsid: VU a Aatfeadt aMa arafuatl ward Afwnigaawaa art Hat ae 
Waidaaeyad Wa Aa ACURA USUI  ywTaen 
Seager | FIT Mra: Mela SAAN: HAvTged Wafers Carat aa WHearwrsqpAard | Lo 
Moved with compassion at the sight of the helpless young deer, forsaken (by its mother) 
and being swept away by the current, the royal sage picked it up and took it to the hermitage, 
like a (true) friend, knowing it to be motherless. (7) As Bharata (now) intensely thought of the 
young deer as his own (charge) and conceived an attachment for it by nourishing it, 
protecting it (from wolves and other carnivorous animals), caressing it and humouring it (by 
scratching and stroking its body) everyday, all his routine duties (such as bathing) including 
practices of self-restraint as well as his devotional duties such as the worship of the Lord 
came to be neglected one by one and (were all) actually abandoned in the course of a few 
days. (8) “Oh, torn from its class as well as from its near and dear ones and alas ! brought 
under my protection by the fast rotating wheel of Time, this helpless young deer has accepted 
me alone for its parents, kith and kin and mates, knowing no one else, and has great 
confidence in me. Hence it behoves me (too) to nourish, protect (from enemies), gratify and 
fondle in an uncavilling spirit this fawn exclusively depending on me, knowing as | do that it 
is sinful to forsake him who seeks my protection. (9) Surely worthy and pious souls who are 


given to self-control and are friends of the poor ignore their own big interests for the sake of 
such (wretched) creatures." (10) 


SRUIg iT at aaa! uy a qrennda ax an fasannfiquraneda: 
atvinnetiged wate sta aenrdtuencdaqd urrmamies! fear 
Peer saaarana aerate ae ara a aduta: weanfreds Aa TAT 
STSTS SIE Caled Stiga A Aaa Stal Vv 

Having thus developed an attachment for it, Bharata's heart remained knit with bonds of 


love to that young of a deer even while he sat (on the ground), lay asleep, sauntered (here 
and there), remained standing, ate his food and on other such occasions. (11) When he 





Dis. 8 ] 


thought of fetching (blades of) KuSa grass, flowers, sticks for the sacrificial fire, leaves, fruits, 
roots or water, he repaired to the woods alongwith the young deer, apprehending danger 
from wolves and dogs and other (carnivorous) animals. (12) Nay, when due to its innocence 
it got stuck up at some place on the wayside, he picked it up and bore it on his shoulder out 
of tenderness with a heart full of great affection and, holding it thus on his lap and bosom, 
experienced supreme felicity in fondling it. (13) Even while (actually) performing (some) ritual 
act, the emperor would rise at frequent intervals (to cast a look at it); and, when he had seen 
it, he pronounced his benedictions on it with a reassured mind, saying "May you be safe on 
all sides, my darling !" (14) 
staal weft ijjussfat ga mun: i «amaurmafiadur 
hore vintage recreate ast mya Aeahaciterd Sit Bara! Le | 
aft at A a HUT Wratten qaehtuigase wader voheuanarpdapae 
Haare STATA cafearreay ast sarifieafaies | af atuniearsmat 
Vee at Sat FeAl! gol stk aA qe: Bengqnrsaaa al Awa WHE aI 
waatd! Vcl Prerafa ¢ war cacmeticreeaanenta wa A Wraepaea 
srTotd | 88 sathacaagpaaies at qafreats shonmepant fafarefrestta- 
Petre eae Ceara CAMA TST | Ro 1 eaherenrat At PaTAATIATS SMH fora aT VATENUT 
Utaddiad sara yeareufaeromivt oft! 221 arateaafafe aftfe 
qiact Harareteat vitae: auelarara mip anaealedeHOHend sea | 221 


At other times (whenever he failed to see it) he would feel extremely perturbed like a miser 
who _ had lost his fortune and, sorrowing for it alone with a heart full of agony and 
overwhelmed with grief at his separation from that young deer, and actually infatuated by an 
inordinate longing to see it, pitifully exclaimed, it is said, as follows:—(15) “Oh, will that poor 
young deer, the offspring of a deceased mother, return (to this spot), reposing confidence 
by virtue of its own credulity in me—a wicked and unlucky soul, deceitful as a cheat and hard- 
hearted like a hunter—and overlooking like a saint my wicked nature ? (16) Shall | see it (once 
more) grazing in safety tender blades of grass in the grove of this hermitage, protected by 
Providence ? (17) May it not be that a wolf or a dog or. any other (carnivorous) beast roaming 
allalone (such as the tiger) or going about in herds (as for instance the boar ) will devour it ?(18) 
Lo! the Lord (the sun-god) who has the three Vedas for His body and whorises for the welfare 
of the whole world is going down; but the pledge of the doe is not yet returning to me. (19) 
Will that prince of a deer (ever) come back and delight me—an unlucky soul relieving the. 
sorrow ofits kith and kin by its manifold, delightful and charming fawn-like sports ? (20) When 
| closed my eyes in jest putting up a false show of meditation, it would approach me greatly 
agitated and, feeling indignant through love, would strike me with the end of its horns, soft 
as a drop of water. (21) When, on the KuSa grass—uwith the offering for the sacred fire placed 
on it—being polluted (by it through the impure touch of its mouth), it was scolded by me, it 
got much frightened and instantly abandoning (its) playfulness, would sit (motionless) like 
a young hermit with all its senses fully controlled. (22) 

fe a mR aretid amnteaorna aaa:  wafataperandad- 
TRNAS SATA AUT AT PUN AA KUT Yea A eat: 
rage fier wanfontarat cart wiht! WI aeRacet wartguiat 
WOR | ATS ATTRA PAVIA: URafaiext fe 
ATS SASTRY PaRS ASE APIS TT eae ettteh aaa ayaa 
PRES rcerr ear erate AAT TT THAT: FATA CTE T TAU | 


"Oh, what austerities have been performed by this fortunate Earth, who by the series of 





468 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


SEERA AAA AAA LAAR LEHRER AAA AAR HAH Lit S88 eit st eisie ee es 


[ Dis..g 
Srirtr fr tr trey, 
impressions imprinted (on her bosom) by the feet of that docile young of a black antelope With 
their tiny, lovely, most propitious and soft hoofs not only reveals the tracks of my fortune to 
my wretched self, robbed of his wealth and therefore miserable, but at the same time adorns 
her own person on all sides and turns it into a sacrificial ground” for the twice born seeking 
after heaven or final beatitude. (23) (Observing the dark spot in the moon, which is likeneq 
by poetic fancy to the figure of a deer, and imagining it to be his own pet deer) May it be that 
the glorious moon-god (the lord of the stars), who is (SO) kind to the afflicted, is Protecting 
(has taken under his own fostering care) that young deer, whose mother died from fear of 
a lion, and that has strayed from its abode ? (24) (Deriving solace from this idea as well as 
from the cool and refreshing moonbeams) Or is it that he is soothing—by the cool and placid 
slobber, in the form of nectarean rays flowing copiously from his mouth through iove—me. 
the lotus of whose heart has been burning with the flames of wild fire, in the form of agony 
caused by separation from my pet (that was like a son to me), and who had followed (in 


search of) that young of a deer." (25) 
TANI AUT SATE A fasifyra: S aeTararay 
WIEENAAAUal HMA VIA Woipun slag: Aan: serautaarcdar 
Wearhetantarasieqan sae AAA AT aA eles AATINESTUT RT Tree Hts 
AM eH TOT eT eT TAS UM MUTA STATA SALA aIet Ula: Chlcl: HUA 
BTA | 2G aera Uysal aaa aoe aN TATU BT Wats fer t 
Mend Us FAT Herat Fda A Fast eyfaheanraaeNAara | Yo | aay S aT Bray 


Safed Seat We TATRA PTAA GRAS | 28 | 


Troubled at heart with such fantastic ideas, Bharata (who was engaged in austerities for 
union with the Lord through Devotion and spiritual enlightenment) was diverted from the 
practices leading to such union as well as from (devotional) practices in the form of worship 
of the Lord by his own (evil) destiny appearing in the form of that young antelope ! Otherwise 
how could there appear (such a strong) attachment for the young of a deer, that belonged 
toa different species, in (the mind of) one who had already left his own sons, so difficult to 
part with, as a direct impediment to (the attainment of) final beatitude. While the royal sage 
Bharata was lost in self-oblivion, the practice of Yoga commenced by him having been thus 
interrupted, and his mind (ever) engrossed in the thought of nourishing, protecting, 
humouring and caressing the young deer, the hour of death, which is difficult to overpass and 
which approaches with terrible speed, arrived even as a serpent would run up to the hope 
of a rat. (26) Continuing even at that time to look intently on the deer, that was lamenting by 
his side like a (real) son, with his thought fixed on that animal alone, Bharata, on quitting that 
body (the body of a royal sage) simultaneously with the deer, attained (in his next birth) the 
body ofa deer as any other mortal would do (under similar conditions). Of course the memory 
of his previous life did not leave him as did the dead body. (27) Recollecting—by virtue of the 
sustained endeavours (in his previous existence) to propitiate the Lord—even in that 
incarnation the cause of his being reborn as a deer, and repenting bitterly, he said (to himself 





* The sanctity of a tract of land inhabited by the black antelope is proclaimed by the Smrtis in the following words :— 


afer] eat AM: Porenfery waty Frater | 


“Acquire the knowledge of your duties in that land where resides the black antelope." 





Bisse BOOK FIVE 469 


a acct Teer tre Te eee Teer Tee TTT eT Ter errr eee e tee 
as follows) -— (28) "Oh, how painful it is that | have strayed from the path trodden by the self- 
poised in that, even though | had completely shaken off all attachments, and, strong-willed 
as | was, had retired to a lonely and holy forest, my mind—which had been wholly devoted 
to and thoroughly concentrated in Lord Vasudeva, the Self of all (individual) selves, in course 
of time, every hour of which was (fully) utilized through diligent application to sacred pursuits 
such as constantly listening to, fixing one's mind on and duly chanting His names and 


praises, worshipping Him and incessantly thinking of Hi Pap 
of a deer, a fool that | was." (29) : g of Him—slippedin no time after'the young 


ala aPTErTad Fert wee Aen vay weaaRaswarseara: | cI 


With this feeling of remorse fully disguised, Bharata (reincarnated as a deer) forsook his 
mother (the doe) and returned from (the mountain of) Kalafjara (his birth-place) to the 
hermitage of the sage Pulastya and Pulaha, also known by the name of Salagrama-Ksetra, 
a site consecrated to the Lord and a favourite resort of hermits naturally given to self- 
control.(30) Awaiting his death (every moment) and terribly afraid of attachment, he lived 
there too all by himself, subsisting on dry leaves, blades of grass and low shrubs and looking 
forward to the exhaustion of the stock of Karma responsible for his birth as a deer, and 
(eventually, when the hour of death arrived) cast off his bestial form, a part of which had been 
laid* (by him) under the water of the holy river (Gandaki). (31) 


Thus ends the eighth discourse, forming part of the story of Bharata, 
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samuhita. 


GIPRSAE IS 


31 AAHTS2ATal: 


Discourse IX 
Bharata reborn for a second time in a Brahmana family 


Ayn Saat 
ST meatad. fESTaTS ST WAT WaanAG LEA AMAA 
seat ayahigd a adtaat wafamie! ae wt Wael wuTad Tatlvay 
eTETERAEETTENTe remeTeioT fered MATE: aH ATG TST TREAT Tee: 
aarefaedat wre fearqereTr: 
SVIATATS Cite ea | 3 I 


: i in the water of a holy river or lake or the ocean is believed to confer great religious 
* Death with half of one's body immereee ferred to in the scriptures under the name of Ardhajala. The great Bharata 


merit on the dying soul and the posture has been re 


was evidently put in mind of this purificatory process while casting off the form of a deer. 


\ 5.) ' 





470 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis, 9 


SRE EEL RARER ERE AEE AA SSSR BR BR Br Be tr tr tr tre ~ 
& 


Sri Suka resumed : Now from the loins of a certain holy Brahmana—the foremost in 
the line of the (celebrated) sage Angira ( a mind-born son of Brahma)—who had (duly) 
controlled his mind and senses, was richin asceticism and the study of the Vedas, liberality 
endurance, modesty, the knowledge of rituals, freedom from jealousy, knowledge of the 
Spirit (as distinct from the body etc.), and felicity (arising out of piety) were born: through 
the same mother nine sons—(all) like himself in learning, good character, purity of conduct 
comeliness of form, generosity and other virtues—and a son and a daughter (born as 
twins) through the younger wife. (1) Of these twins the male child was, they Say, (the same 
as) that supreme devotee of the Lord, the foremost of royal sages, Bharata, who, having 
shed his bestial form, had in that last incarnation attained the state of a Brahmana. ( 2) 
Apprehending his fall through attachment to his people in that incarnation too and 
(therefore) terribly afraid of such attachment—remembering as he did, by the grace of the 
Lord, (the story of) a series of his previous incarnations—he showed himself to the world 
as an insane, stupid, blind and deaf fellow, clasping firmly with his mind the Lord's lotus- 
feet, that break asunder the fetters of Karma in the case of those who hear of those feet, 
think of them or utter their praises. (3) 


TAMAS aT STS FAT: TAA STAT ST MA AAI Mat Papert So 
a 0: vtoreds adfrearmfimantt aafsemagisa fe wed faq: 
Tava ¥1 a ale ae = faqurencaritata wt ania Scrat, ae carat: 
AIA Nieadal Alaa WAH AMM aAAaAAaAAA WMSATATS | & | 


The Brahmana, whose heart was knit with (ties of parental) affection to the child, actually 
performed all the Samskaras (purificatory rites) up to the ceremony of Samavartana* 
(returning from the house of the preceptor after finishing one's study of the Vedas) according 
to precept even with respect to such a (stupid) son indeed, and, on the boy being invested 
with the sacred thread, he further instructed him well in the method of personal purity, rinsing 
his mouth (after easing nature, eating something and on other similar occasions) and other 
rules of conduct—even though they were not liked (by the boy)—believing as he did that a 
son must be instructed (in the rules of good conduct) by his father. (4) The child, however, 
did everything (taught by his father) topsyturvy as it were in the very presence of his father, 
with the result that the Brahmana, who wanted to start instructing him in the Vedas (as soon 
as the rains set in) was able to teach the boy the three-footed (holy) Gayatri-Mantra (sacred 
to the sun-god) along with the Vyahrtis (the mystic syllables BhGh, Bhuvah and Swah, 
prefixed to the Gayatri-Mantra each time it is repeated) and the-sacred syllable OM, the 
(very) crown of the Vedic texts, only in a disjointed fashion (without proper intonation) 
although he learnt it continuously all the (four) months of spring and summer. (5) 


Wa waa aterm: vitereqanaatrametaersyaureita- 
Halon patra sre ae Mayet weateaaame: YAAIMeT Tas Aaa ater: 
airman et Ye Ua Wad Soded: 161 sta adtaet fesradt camsiord feat aacaT 
SI Tae Ulett! 9 | 

Having thus fondly given his heart to his son, who was his very self, he taught him 
personal purity, the recitation (with proper intonation) of the Vedas, austerities, self- 
discipline, service of the preceptor and offering worship to the (sacred) fire and other duties 
of a religious student observing celibacy for a limited period only, even though they were 
Cerne 

“The Brahmana had no intention to marry the boy obviously because he was stupid to all appearance. Hence there waS 


no occasion for the performance of other Sarskaras beyond the ceremony of Samavartana, which is in ordinary cases closely 
followed by the nuptial ceremony. 





Dis. 9 ] BOOK FIVE 471 


Be Br BeBe HHL Se Br BER He He He He He Be Ge Ke Ge Be BeBe He Be Ge He He He Ke Ree Ke KEKE CR KR RGR HG RECA REE RE RE RE REE RE RE REBEL BERGE RE BEBE REBEL BEBE BEBE BE 





neglected by the boy—clinging to the ill-conceived notion that a son must be taught (under 
all circumstances). But, before his ambition (of seeing his son a learned man) could be 
realized, the Brahmana, who was himself steeped in error, was snatched away by the ever- 
vigilant Death at his very home. (6) Thereupon the younger wife of the Brahmana entrusted 
her twin-born children to (the care of) her co-wife and herself attained to the realm where her 
(deceased) husband had gone, by (ascending his pyre and) dying after him. (7) 


Treat ant wdaafacera faarmta udafsanaar 4 urfserat weafahter 
WCAG! 61 A a wWepdgreuyesisisaeteayarearon al 
aeTeaier wurad Haier a a ara: wesat mata fated Aaaar ar areal aAgesar 
amemet = 86g Cet (ef eC (GsssiC PPTL 
Pragati fare 


Tae Ca TEETH: ee wale-amhrarat- 
Teefadeeyart: 181 MitdraraTcaneteg SUR da: denis 


fone wererghtte ixarasqerent fraarcieol war q aca avert aataeat 
3 eart: Taurqianrte Seanad Prafaretate ata far 4 as feud =aafirafata ae 


HUTT ATH eit HOT CATAL A ae AI aS Aaa | Ve I 


On the father's death, the brothers (of the boy)—-who were ignorant of his greatness and 
who had concluded the knowledge of the three Vedas (throwing light on rituals alone) to be 
the highest knowledge and attached no importance to the knowledge of the Self (which is 
the highest knowledge)—decided to give up their insistence on teaching their brother, taking 
him to be a dunce. (8) As for Bharata, when he was addressed as a lunatic, a dullard or a 
deaf fellow by the common people, the two-footed brutes, he spoke words befitting such a 
description and would do work as desired by others when compelled to do so. (Nay,) he 
would eat any food got through forced labour or by way of remuneration (for services done 
by him), by begging or without asking, no matter whether it was scanty or plentiful, tasteful 
or bad, but never for the gratification of his senses. For, having realized his oneness with the 
all-blissful Self—that is of the nature of absolute Consciousness, ever without cause and 
shining by Itself—he never identified himself with the body in joy or sorrow occasioned by 
pairs of opposites (such as honour and ignominy). (9) He roamed about like a bull, bare- 
bodied alike in heat and cold, as well as in storm and rain, yet stout and muscular, with his 
spiritual glory concealed under ( a coating of) dirt that he had put on by lying down to sleep 
on the (bare) ground, and because of his never rubbing or washing his body—even like a 
precious jewel (whose splendour had been obscured by dust)—his loins covered by a dirty 
rag, and a still dirtier sacred thread on his person, and slighted by men who were ignorant 
of his worth by being (contemptuously) called a Dwija (a member of the twice-born classes), 
the son of a Brahmana (a Brahmana in name only) and so on. (10) When, however, he was 
seen seeking his morsel of food (livelinood) from others through work done on wage, and was 
(accordingly) set to work at the field even by his brothers, he did the same. But he never cared 
to know whether the ground was level or uneven and whether he did more or less ( than what 
was required of him), and ate as ambrosia even broken rice, oll-cakes, husk, worm-eaten 
grains and the charred remains of boiled rice etc., sticking to the bottom of a cooking-pot and 


other such things. (11) 
ate HalhaHae Gaeaacnied USAMA IH: | LVL ARI & Saver 
UR: Vaal cape: Unease Pit Ppt MATS SIMA eT a Sieh hea Faeyr 
aN TATRA: ALATA OTA Le WA TAT | 83 ISS Tt CAA AaaIcaTA ayy 





472 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Di 
RHAAAEAEALALHLLALARAAH ALLA LA AL LAKLALALA LAH AH HALAL HA HH BARR AR RA A ire S. 9 


Sir trirtr tras, 
ardent redhtt ARIMA AREAT WT ao SeArTEq AT PerenharaaM: | kX | 
Now onacertain occasion a chieftain of the Sudras (thieves), desirous of anissue (a male 
child), proceeded to behead a human victim (as a sacrifice) to Goddess Bhadrakalj. (12 
Pursuing at dead of night the tracks of the man intended to be sacrificed, who haq 
providentially escaped, the servants of that chieftain were unable to find him out in that dark 
night and by chance saw Bharata (the son of a Brahmana who was foremost in the line of 
the sage Angira), busy guarding the fields against (the intrusion of) deer, boars etc., froma 
shed overlooking the fields. (13) Finding him faultless in every limb and (thus) feeling assureg 
that the purpose of their master would be accomplished, they bound the sage with a rope and 
took him to the shrine of Goddess Candika, their faces blooming with joy. (14) 
31g We Calakriseaedt AMasseoTa RUTH factHilahtre aca 
erat [TA TAT CAT Sf ACTA TH STATA ATA AEA ASM MEU Teg TUTTE AUT 
A USNUy ARH: Yt SUAMAATY: (kG AM Gansu: Teaayrgaaay sat 
TAHleh ALAA Uae AA AAA AA oH UT VTA UTaS | VE | 
Then the burglars washed him according to their own traditional usage, provided him with 
a new piece of cloth and graced him with jewels, sandal paste, a wreath of flowers, a sacred 
mark on the forehead and so on, and, when he had had his meal, they seated the human 
victim (with his head bent low) in front of Goddess Bhadrakali according to the standard rules 
of animal sacrifice, offering incense, light, a wreath of flowers, parched grains of paddy, 
young leaves, sprouts, fruits and sweets etc., (to the goddess) and loudly singing (devo- 
tional) songs and hymns and sounding clay and wooden tomtoms (as an accompaniment 
to their music). (15) Then the thief officiating as a priest to the chieftain of the Sddras took 
up a most fearful and sharp-edged sword, that had been (duly) consecrated by pronouncing 


on it a Mantra sacred to Goddess Bhadrakall, with a view to sating Her with the inebriating 
blood of a human victim. (16) 


ext faett feerfaennon malian aqadyna Manaratares Mawar adyddec: 
Qa AAAs AINA Aesaghageul SOTA AGU Agaratale Ua eat 
Uschiet | V9 YMA ayNAMactanysHletacuplectseere Viaureranravatahaawt 
SdaMmad Nese faqs da seed Udaet eer Atarfear faqaureitonrt 
Tetkeaaatag aaa Ae Wit Palatdaacaectaten Cage: Ue sit Aad A 
fasten a fit-e-gacitetar | 8¢ | Cate Gel Heehtraifiena: Hea Wetha 1 23 UAT aT 
Udigtlant Arad aus: walyngoat strufaasty faqadcerenmunaqgeeca-ettt 
Teerdecn = aI Matetadiiakargeaaas Auta: uftcearomt 
AMT AVA GAIA A APTACNAS ATA | Vo | 
Sd AAA HETGTT URAC Sea THAAD TSTARG TTAS ATA: | F 
Perceiving the immolation, not permitted even when falling in the category of a slaughter 
permissible in the face of imminent danger to life, of the son of a Brahmana sage, who had 
actually become one with the Infinite, and who not only bore enmity to none but was friendly 
to all living beings—a most horrible act on the part of those Sidras, in whom the qualities of 
Rajas and Tamas naturally predominated, nay, whose mind had been puffed up with the 
pride of wealth, which taints one's souls, and who wilfully trod the evil path, disregarding the 
Brahmana race—who represent a ray of the Lord—and delighted in acts of violence, the 


same Goddess Bhadrakali suddenly emerged (from the image), Her (divine) body severely 
burning with the spiritual glory of the Brahmana, most difficult to bear. (17) With Her arched 





Dis. 10 ] BOOK FIVE 473 


Sr Sr Be Br Re See Re Be Be ewe Be Me Be Ke Re Be Re Re He Pe Be Re Re Re Rr Be Re Re Re Re RR RR RRR RR RR RR RE RE REALE LLL ELA LL LER 





eyebrows thrown up in the vehemence of extreme indignation and intensity of rage, curved 
teeth and wild bloodshot eyes She assumeda most dreadful aspect, as if intending to destroy 
the (whole) world, laughed a terrible horse-laugh in great anger and, springing up from the 
altar and lopping off the heads of those wicked sinners with the same sword (with which they 
were going to behead the Brahmana), drank to satiety along with Her retinue the exceedingly 
hot and inebriating blood streaming forth from their necks. Then, overpowered with 
intoxication through excessive drink, She sang at the pitch of Her voice along with Her 
attendants and also danced and played with the (amputated) heads like balls. (18) Even so 
indeed does an act of transgression against exalted souls in the form of an attempt to killthem 
recoils in its entirety upon the offender himself. (19) Nor is this any great wonder, O 
Visnudatta (a name of Pariksit, who was so-called because of his having been restored to 
life by Lord Visnu Himself appearing in the form of Sri Krsna), that perfect equanimity should 

reign even on the eve of being beheaded in the mind of sages who are at the same time 

devoted to the Lord, who have succeeded in resolving the exceptionally hard knot existing 

in their heart in the form of self-identification with the body, mind and senses etc., who are 

friends, nay, the very Self of all living beings, who bear enmity to none, and who are protected 

on all sides by the (ever) vigilant Lord Himself with the help of His equally Vigilant weapon, 

the great discus (SudarSana), and through various forms (such as that of Goddess 

Bhadrakali), inasmuch as they have resorted (for protection) to the soles of His feet, where 

there is no fear from any quarter. (20) 


Thus ends the ninth discourse, forming part of the story of Jadabharata 
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


DG RESIS 


ST SOTATSearea: 


Discourse X 


The meeting of Jadabharata with king Rahugana 
My Tara 
ary forepeidicad Tet asd SAAS Acpctataa Pefecnrareqe ar-aeora a 
Sarroarfza: B estat SAMS WH Uta Far AeA St MaNaegt argued Gatatsyeica: Fe 
Tetd: WauAdee sale feifsent FT Agl{Hra: | 8 | 
Sti Suka began again : A (certain) king of the principalities of Sindhu and Sauvira, 
Rahtgana (by name), was (once) going (in a palanquin to meet the divine sage Kapila to 
receive instruction in spiritual knowledge). While looking on the bank of the Iksumati river for 
a manto serve asa bearer of his palanquin, the mate of the bearers came across this eminent 
Brahmana as pre-arranged by Providence. On the ground that he was stout, young and 
muscular and fit to carry a (heavy) load like an ox or a donkey, he was caught hold of by force 
along with those already employed to work without any wage, and that highly dignified soul 
bore the palanquin, even though he did not deserve such humiliation. (1) 
sored qeurafraed ane & alent: areata fenftta towered aaa | 21 
When the gait of the (other) men (bearing the palanquin) did not fall in line with that of 


~~ 


- 474 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA SS, “te 
PRAAARAEALERRERERARRAR AAA ARAL ALAR EL ALLAH HH ESSE SEE SA Ree ey 


the holy Brahmana, who stepped forward only after (carefully) surveying the ground (aheaq 
of him) up to a distance of three feet only (the standard length of an arrow), king Rahtigana 
on finding his palanquin irregularly borne, said to the bearers, "O bearers ! March Properly. 
Why is the palanquin borne irregularly in this way 2" (2) 


aq ad dyataa: Aue Hvai agaist faqrarasya: 13 1 
Now, on hearing the reproachful words of their master and afraid at heart of punishment 


(the last of the four methods of correcting a man, viz., conciliation, gift, sowing seeds of 
dissension, and coercion), they submitted to him (as follows) :— (3) 


Aaa Wea WAU Walaa aeN: Meda aera: | staaepta Peadtstt 4 ad asf aA 
We aley F aa UNaa sid ¥ 1 
"We are not remiss, O ruler of men; (strictly) obeying your commands, we bear the 
palanquin quite well. Though engaged just now, this (new) man does not walk quickly. We 
are, therefore, unable to bear the palanquin with him." (4) 
Test te sufaaqaiste featur aciepa sugheanataaeaadsta siddaafia 
TWialssqdaaeS | G1 Bel HE wideianye utara chinearnda wa afeary afar 
Afaatar A MeAaSl MCAT Vaal Var AS A Waray Us Ages sta ag faucet serfserar 
Tadseninnivamnancatsaaia  wdearfasttss  ademeanfrafiearncaar 
Aaya Pifat Gaacare | & | 
Hearing (their) piteous words,king Rahugana concluded that the fault appearing in one 
through contact (with others) is sure to become the fault of all wno are connected with that 
person. Even though he had sat at the feet of sages, his Ksatriya spirit prevailed over him. 
His judgment having been clouded by the element of Rajas, he felt a bit enraged and spoke 
(ironically as follows) to that Brahmana, whose spiritual glory was not distinctly perceived 
like (the brilliance of) fire (embers) covered with ashes :— (5) "What a pity, brother ! You are 
evidently very tired, (it seems) you have borne the palanquin single-handed all this long way 
(and) forlong hours (too) and none of these other associates (of yours), O friend, have shared 
your burden (at all). (Besides) you are neither very stout nor possessed of an adamantine 
frame and are oppressed with old age (too)." Even when taunted unsparingly in this way, the 
sage, who had become one with the Infinite and never entertained the false notion of 'I' or 
‘mine’ with regard to his ultimate body—which was nothing but a concatenation of various 
limbs put together in a particular disposition, consisting as it did of the five gross elements, 
the (ten) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action), the 
(impressions of) past actions (both meritorious and sinful) and the mind (the seat or 


Storehouse of such impressions), evolved by ignorance, and (therefore) unreal —aquietly bore 
the palanquin (even) as before. (6) 


3a Ut: waiftara faernaat waefta sara cenur: feafrant wa sitasqd? at 
Seip I Meamicata waded a a Huy fate eveuiurta waarean aa wep fed ea 
wisTeta stat 91 


King Rahtgana, however, flew into a rage on his palanquin being borne irregularly again, 
and said, Oh, what does this mean ? Though living, you are (as good as) dead in that you 
ignore me (my presence) and transgress the commands of your lord. | shall accordingly 
correct you, perverse as you are —even as Yama (the god of punishment) chastises the 
people—so that you may recover your senses." (7) 


wad UTA AL a VA WA AAA ateaal Ha favespargrawTa atte 
Usd 8 Wary AION Talat: Aa Yaar arivaraatart Aaa aA 
sa fandeta Sante ic! 





Dis. 10 ] BOOK FIVE sue 


PRESSES LG EE RR BRR RR RR ARR RRR RAED RARER ELAR 


| To Rahugana who had in his pride mixed with anger (a product of Rajoguna) and 
infatuation ( a product of Tamoguna or ignorance) slighted (through Bharata) all the 
devotees of the Lord (who constitute His favourite abode) and thought himself to be a wise 
man although he was not much acquainted with the ( queer and deluding) ways of masters 
of Yoga, and was at the same time talking much nonsense, accounting himself to be a ruler 
of men —that worshipful Brahmana, who had become one with Brahma (the Infinite) and was 


a friend, nay, the very self of all living beings, smilingly spoke as follows, even though he was 
altogether free from pride:—(8) 


AAT SAT 
waifed canieuret wf: a A wef die wel 
weate wrefitrame daft ust a feet yware:1e@ | 
wird wig cara smaya aged afefier wT a 
fat tUalsene: wer eta weer fe & 3 afaieol 
Vieqed Ft wry anedadignaet 86 eBTI 
aearauar ya sea aa adeadset = fafereprrart: 128 | 
fastageeidat «wie Gd Waa wt aaEndtsal 
m syatea fede anit mma arm fe 1221 
Sansisaraden wet Aa adit  feafeafeadt 
ag: fear waa fifact wemama a fasde:123 


The Brahmana said : What has been (ironically) hinted at by you (just now’), (viz., that 
lamin no way fatigued and that | have not borne the palanquin to a long distance) is evidently 
true and constitutes no reproach. It would be a slur if this burden borne on (the shoulders of) 
its bearer (the body), O valiant king, had rested on me (the incorporeal Spirit, who has no 
burden at all) and if the goal to be reached or the way (leading to it), existing in the eyes of 
the goer (the moving body), had reference to me (the all-pervading and, therefore, 
immovable Spirit). (Even so) the epithet ‘stout’ is used by the wise with reference to a body 
(a conglomerate of the five gross elements) alone and never in relation to the incorporeal 
Spirit. (9) Stoutness and leanness, (bodily) ailments and (mental) worries, hunger and thirst, 
fear and strife, desire and old age, sleep and attachment to the pleasures of sense, anger 
and vanity arising from egotism, and grief appear (only) in one who is born with a feeling of 
identification with the body and not in me (the pure Self). (10) Death synchronous with life, 
O king, is as a rule perceived in everything which undergoes transformation; for whatever 
undergoes transformation has a beginning and an end (too). And orders should be given 
by one and carried out by another without fail only where the relation of servant and master 
is fixed (unchangeable), O praiseworthy monarch! (11) (In our case itis not so; for you can 
become a servant and 1 your master if there isa revolution.) And we do not find the slightest 
occasion (justification) for the notion of difference (as between a master and servant) apart 
from usage or convention. Under such circumstances whois the ruler and who, the servant 
(fit to be ruled) ? Nevertheless, O king, (if you account yourself a master, tell me,) what can 
we do for you (what service can We render to you ?). (12) And what object will be gained 


Meee ncn nnn EEIEEEEEEENNEnnmmeememeeneeeeee 


* Vide passage 6 above. 








476 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 10 


LAAAAALAANLKHKAKALHKALALH AMAL AHLKARLAAL LQLAAAHAMKAAAAKAAKAHKAKHAAeKAAAKAAKAKHKKAKKAAHAH eh SSRRHERE Tee 


by you, O valiant monarch, by correcting me or teaching a lesson to me, who behave like 
a lunatic; a sot or a dunce, even though established in my own Self. And if | am (really) 
stupid or drunk, giving a lesson to me will be (as unprofitable and preposterous as) grinding 


flour. (13) sige Sara 


unraeqaruaraan welt qrar suyraviter surmised Sout cates 
ara Usa oaelateiexi a aie ues feeqetdtahrerattararai 
Tag Aap Maayeraaret fA Brea SQaITaaad Aaaeey 
fran wraqeqaga: ears faraqacara Sara! 84 I 
Sri Suka continued : Having made this brief reply in the form of a bare statement of facts, 
the great sage (Bharata)—who was tranquil by nature and in whom the cause (in the shape 
of ignorance) for identification with the body had (altogether) ceased—bore the palanquin 
even as before in order to exhaust the stock of Karma which had already begun to bear fruit, 
by reaping its consequences. (14) On hearing the reply of the Brahmana, which was capable 
of resolving the knot (of ignorance) existing in one's heart, and was (at the same time) borne 
out by many a work on Self-knowledge, the said ruler of the territories of Sindhu and Sauvira 
too, who had by virtue of (his) genuine faith acquired the (necessary) qualification for 
enquiring into the Truth, quickly alighted (from his conveyance) and, asking forgiveness (for 
his fault) and approaching (touching) the soles of his feet with his head, spoke (as follows), 
completely rid of his pride of sovereignty :— (15) 
aed fryeyafa feat fast qt  cqantsaea:! 
eee pad sata mar aaa agedafa Aa yact:1261 
Te fares Qa wae aA aver 
AN Aeh AA tara AS RT AEP CMAN | 219 | 
dq aelagt Wsal-tetagitatat Taateaany: | 
auta aman aet a A: aad wratt saqqiec! 
we GU atvamiedtad wit wi We a 
mus vad: feftert aq Mataeit § arencradtuiqi ee! 
a a Waleciaiiteuneneaantts:  faarafufadq 
amigo wares: nea  faaelht Were: 2ol 


“Who are you, that go about incognito and wear the sacred thread (a distinguishing mark) 
of the twice-born ? If you are an Avadhtta (one who has shaken off all worldly feeling and 
obligation), which (of the well-known Avadhitas, such as the divine sage Dattatreya and 
others) may you be ? (Again,) whose son are you and born at what place, and wherefore 
are you here ? If (you have come here) for our good, are you not the sage Kapila (who is 
Sativa personified) ? (16) | fear neither the thunderbolt of Indra (the lord of paradise) nor the 
trident of Lord Siva (the three-eyed) nor (even) the rod (of punishment) of Yama (the god of 
retribution) nor (again) the weapons of the fire-god, the sun-god, the moon-god, the wind- 
god and Kubera (the lord of riches); but | am terribly afraid of showing disrespect to the 
Brahmana race. (17) Tell me (all) this, (as to who you are) roaming about as you do like.a 
dunce, with your greatness in the shape of profound wisdom fully disguised, free from 
attachment and possessing infinite glory. Your words which are replete with Self-Knowledge, 





= 
& 
ia 


Tenn 


ai 


is. 10 
OE ec besasiekeanaieang ee BOOK FIVE 477 


BRR LR AERA EEE EEE EEE LER ALLER 


O pious Sage, cannotbe penetrated 
Moreover, | was (just) proceedin 
descended (on earth) with a view 
Yoga and the supreme preceptoro 
asylum in this world. (19) May it b 
in order to examine the condition 


(correctly understood) even with the help of intuition.(18) 
9 to ask Lord Kapila—who is no other than Sri Hari, 
to imparting (true) knowledge, nay, who is the Master of 
fsages knowing the truth about the Self—whatis the (true) 
€ that you are the same Lord Kapila going about incognito 


aehsae of the world ? Howcan he whois tied to his home and whose 
intellect is blinded (by infatuation) understand the ways of Masters of Yoga ? (20) 


VReMren yard: wat a: fest & a feat fasm 
TATA ATT ATE aetearay faster! 23 1 
wa TaN TATTHSA Teaqaares | 
pags titgeraraet at a waeaearade:i2x 
41 fafear farageeraer oaraa  dafiradecafi 
Tear, wands Wee ASRacauefs yee: 


Std SASTTad AST IASC Alera WeAeH-Y SMATSEATT: 1 20 | 


“| have known weariness being felt by me through activity (in the form of fighting in war) 
and infer that the same must (likewise) be experienced by you while bearing a load and 
walking (with the same). The phenomenal world too ought to have a reality at its bottom; for 
otherwise it will have no utility nor will it be possible to take any work from it, any more than 
one can fetch water and so oninan unreal jar. (21) (It is a matter of common experience that) 
in consequence of a kettle being heated by fire the water (contained in it) also gets fully 
heated and due to the heat of the water the grains of rice (that are being boiled in it) get 
softened (first) and (then) their interior too; and the heat thus conducted from the pot to the 
water and from the water to the exterior of the grains in the first instance and later on to their 
interior as well is not unreal. Even so, due to contact (identification) with the body, as well 
as with the Indriyas (the senses of perception and the organs of action) and the mind, their 
experiences (in the form of fatigue, the feeling of heat and cold and so on) are (gradually) 
transmitted to the soul (as well) because of its taking upon itself the attributes of its 
conditioning vestures. (22) (Granted that the relation of master and servant subsisting 
between a ruler and his subjects is not permanent or unchangeable) a king is (nevertheless 
for the time being) the ruler and protector of the people. He whoisa servant (of the Lord, that 
is, he who does his duty as a piece of service to the Lord) does not grind what is already 
ground (undertake an unprofitable business), for (although he may not be able to rida dunce 
of his stupidity by upbraiding him forhis remissness, he thereby carries out the Lord's behests 
and) by offering worship to the Lord in the shape of performing his duty he is able to get rid 
of his stock of sins. (23) Therefore, may you be pleased, O friend of the afflicted, to casta 
kindly look on me, who have slighted the most holy (like you) through: vanity arising from 
consciousness of my being a ruler of men, so that | may (be able to) get rid of the sin incurred 
by showing disrespect to pious souls. (24) Although there is no agitation in you, who area 








478 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 14 


AAA AAAAAAAAAAAHRHEARAARRAKHeRHAHHH HHH Sr Br Br Br Kr Hr Sr Br Hr Fr Br Sr Hr Br We Mr Hr Br Fr Vr Fr SRN HH teh oe 
* 


friend and a well-wisher of the (whole) universe and have entirely ceased to identify 
yourself with the body because of your undifferentiating outlook, a man like me is sure to 
perish at no distant date as a result of his own misdeed in the shape of despising exalteg 
souls, even if he were (as great and powerful as ) Lord Siva (the Wielder of a trident) 
Himself." (25) 


Thus ends the tenth discourse in Book Five of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SITS 


STN HES Sea: 


Discourse XI 
Bharata's teaching to king Rahugana 


Hat SAT 
aelfae: calfaaaleater, aaereat  aAdfacr afte: 
7 war ff iaaamt amraniq were. 
aaa Werpetrenertearatetenre tars resreay | 
a aaareg fe adaraare: wear weal | Unie arey:12! 
1 da deamema wae ata ara: waar 
wat freer qedhindrest 4 oe tai wat emis! 


wMictera ATER aaa taclet ata p|!: 1& | 
Wearta Aaet: alfa: aAaqeredt wate  wywergen:! 
wert «=o feel 60 achat Uae TTTTETII 
qe cert oat: dare tive ow em 
wer wettt ycahine fret: weet waft aereT aH 
Gq qa 8 Wediqas  gitiq: sadsaq araqicl 


The Brahmana (Bharata) replied : Though ignorant, you make speeches like the 
rejoinders of learned men. Hence you are in no way the best among those who are 
exceptionally wise. For the knowers of truth never discuss these mundane relations (e. 9: 
that of master and servant) along with an enquiry into the (absolute) Reality. (That is to say, 
they never recognize them as an absolute truth.) (1) Even so, O king, in the Vedic texts 








Dis. 11 ] 


~ 
snenieiewinnnnnnntiennnnnnenmnnee OOS FIVE 479 


PREAH AEAAAAARERAEAAAEAAAKAEAAREKALAL LES 


gon sie care enjoyments and the means of attaining them—extensively figuring in the 
i Acker 4g Ah PORE waeT by the name of Kalpa and) elaborating the numerous rituals 
co ; enold life—an exposition of truth containing no suggestion in favour of 
injury to life and free from partiality and prejudice does not, as a matter of fact, generally 
appear. (2) Even the utterances (of the Upanisads) which are (held to be) the.most sacred 
(representing as they do the very crown of the Vedas) have not proved adequate to reveal 
the truth directly to him by whom the (heavenly) bliss resulting from sacrificial acts pertaining 
to household life is not spontaneously concluded to be worth throwing away on the analogy 
of a dream. (3) So long as the mind of a man is dominated by Sattva, Rajas or Tamas, it 
continues unchecked to yield him ( a crop of) virtue or sin through his senses of perception 
and organs of action. (4) This mind (whichis a conditioning vesture of the soul and therefore 
stands identified with it) is a storehouse of impressions (of virtuous and sinful actions), is 
attached to the pleasures of sense, tossed about by the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and 
hence liable to disturbances in the form of lust, anger and so on. It is the foremost among 
the sixteen constituents of the subtle body and, (successively) clothing itself with diverse 
forms under different names, makes for a higher or lower form of life. (5) Embracing 
(enveloping) the embodied soul connected with it, the mind—which is an adjunct of the soul, 
brought forth by Maya (the deluding potency of the Lord), and which inveigles the soul into 
the whirlpool of birth and death—yields at the proper time pleasure and pain and the other 
inevitable fruit different from both (viz., insensateness). (6) It is only till then (So long as the 
mind exists) that these phenomena of the waking and dream states ever shine forth and 
continue to be perceived by the knowing subject. It is therefore that the knowers of truth 
declare the mind to be the cause of the degraded state of mundane life (the state of being 
identified with the three Gunas or modes of Prakrti) as well as of the highest state of liberation 
(which lies beyond the realm of the three Gunas). (7) A mind attached to the pleasures of 
sense (which are modifications of the three Gunas) leads to misery (in the shape of birth and 
death); while that which is free from their influence makes for final beatitude. Even as a light 
so long as it consumes a wick soaked in clarified butter emits a flame crowned with soot, while 
at other times (when the butter has been consumed) it returns to its original (unmanifest) 
state, so does a mind attached to the objects of sense as well as to actions flows in various 
(impure) currents, whereas it returns to its (pbure)essence (the quality of Sattva) when itis no 


longer attached to them. (8) 

uaa fe gia aga: WZ ferarstrars: | 
aft maffir ut a aet aaa ware aie spit < t 

cates, farrinetcafisteutyteat: | 
ust teri | AA wreamdé «= BIGSTAHS TL QOL 

FRA UTAT Tee en Tet aT oral a 
. SAT: arfesiga aagqd 7 faut A ad: TE1LVI 

daa ual wat finpisiae  aweanfadt fren! 
co; wate fertfearet wat frat ofr: 122 


the five senses of perception and the ego-sense—these are 
hich the mind-substance flows. And the wise declare the five 
e subtle elements and the body as the eleven receptacles into 


The five organs of action, 
the eleven currents through w 
forms of organic activity, the flv 





480 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 14 


SPHOKKAKKAALAAAKKHAAHLKBAAAKHLKKAAKHKHAKHHHLAAHHK HAA Br Br Hr Sr Br Hr Hr Kr Br Br Fr Hr Br Hr Sr Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr SRR AHH Re i Hay 


which these currents flow, O valiant king ! (9) Smell, colour, touch, taste and sound are the 
objects of the (five) senses of perception; defecation, coition, locomotion, speech and 
grasping or releasing an object—these are the (five) functions of the organs of action; ang 
acknowledging the body as 'mine'—which is the eleventh—is the function of the ego-sense. 
Others declare awareness of the body as one's own self (‘I’) as the twelfth current of the ming 
(their contention being that it is the sensible alone who acknowledge the body as 'mine' , i.e. 
something other than their self, the ignorant regarding it as their very self). And they speak 
of the body (the object of the aforesaid awareness) as the twelfth object (of the activities of 
the mind). (10) Due to the endless variety of objects, as well as to the very nature of things 
(which are ever in a state of flux), and to the diversity of predispositions and Karmas (past 
actions) and the action of time (which disturbs everything), these eleven modifications 
(currents) of the mind are multiplied (first) into hundreds, (then into) thousands and 
(eventually into) tens of millions. They (all, however,) proceed from God and have no 
existence of their own nor do they owe their existence to one another. (11) God, whois (ever) 
pure (unattached to the world) merely looks on (as a witness and never gets identified with) 
these (manifold) waves—appearing in an endless series, now manifest (in the waking and 
dream states) and (now) disappearing (in deep sleep)—of the mind, which is an adjunct of 
the Jiva and a creation of Maya, and which (ever) indulges in impure activities (leading to 
transmigration). (12) 


Sat Bie Gee: GMT: Matai: are: 
ANTAUTT Way  aladca: CAATAATS SH AAMAATA: 123 | 
aattet: Tass AMA ALARA OT fafas sud! 
We Wt Wem aMaca: aad  simanquiag:iex! 
Tt act ayes  faya at ager 
faqedag?  faanequct aaraara wade araqieat 
1 Weert sree 8 danameart 89 aq 
AERTS T TA TCA AT Tae Aaa faerd 126 | 
WG Aaa UAHA aE: | 
eeeaneranh site icitch TAAAIAATE | 219 | 


Sit APM TAG FETT URAC ST Alea TAA ASTONETTAAS UHICMS EAA: 1 22 I 


(The aforesaid) God is all-pervading, the most ancient (the first cause of the universe), 
all-perfect, (ever) patent, Self-effulgent, free from birth (and death), the Ruler (even) of the 
highest beings (Brahma, Siva and others), the almighty Lord Vasudeva (the abode of the 
universe), (Himself) dwelling as the (Inner) Controller of all the Jivas in every heart by His 
own Maya (wonderful divine power). (13) Even as the air, entering in the form of breath (all) 
mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate) beings, controls them, so the supreme Lord 
Vasudeva has interpenetrated this universe as the all-witnessing Inner Controller (of all). 
(14) Man (lit., an embodied soul) continues to revolve in (the whirligig of) mundane existence 
so long as he is not able, O ruler of men, to realize the true nature of the Self—by shaking 
off this Maya (illusion in the form of identification with the body) by means of the light Of . 
wisdom, having got rid of (all) attachment and conquered the six (internal) enemies (in the 
shape of lust, anger, greed, infatuation, arrogance and jealousy), and so long as he is not 





Se eee eet. BOOK FIVE senses 
 rirtrtr tre SRR AE tt fb ff et tte Brett rte ease tc tr errr te dete trietetn te octet rcte 
able to recognize the said mind—a conditi 


: oning vesture of the soul, which brings with it an 
uninterrupted succession of grief, infatuati 


: on, disease, attachment, greed and animosity and 
occasions a feeling of mineness—as a fertile Soil yielding the agonies of birth and death for 
man. (1 o-1 6) Therefor e, (ever) circumspect and armed with the worship of the (holy) feet of 
Lord Sri Parlin the form of your pr ceptor, get rid of this enemy (in the shape of the mind), 
that possesses enormous Strength and has grown very insolent through (your) connivance, 
and, which though illusory in itself, yet robs you of your very self (true nature). (17) 


Thus ends the eleventh discourse, forming part of the Dialogue between the Brahmana 
(Bharata) and king Rahdgana, in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SIM FISs Sear: 


Discourse XII 
Bharata answers the query of Rahigana 


TIT Sara 

war a: Uae muestra | 

TISAI fesreraferg rystreangyara PAR 
TRA TG «= erate =e FTES: 

Hecamietacsee: Tea aed SHAH TET AR 
wegen Meee | weatitt © UgeaeT «= aster 

sTeaTeaTaeret daladarente caldectadar Ast 
wae 480 apart geaaid ss fepatmect «= Aaa! 

7 we drafengita vary wad At Aix 


v id : Hail, hail to you, who have taken this godlike form (for the protection 
» wore shatalanse at body in (the supreme bliss of ) Self-Realization ae 0 
you, O master of Yoga, who have concealed your realization of Eternal Truth undert ¢ gar 
ofan unworthy Brahmana (a Brahmana only in name). (1) Like a palatable medicine oone 
Suffering from the disease of fever, or like cold water to one scorched by the heat & the sun), 
your word, O holy Brahmana, has proved a nectar-like remedy to me, whose eee 
‘ud t) has been bitten (warped) by the serpent of self-identification with this worthless 
" ae body. (2) | shall, therefore, refer my doubt to you later; (kindly) explain to me 
igabbebrerc tage uisitive as |am—your teaching, which is pregnant with deep spiritual 
Uust) at— present—induis make it easily intelligible. (3) My mind is bewildered by the - 
AS eae ade, O master of Yoga, that actions (such as carrying a load and so 
suatementvounaye ee (on the doer in the shape of fatigue etc.), though not illusory, are 
ainta sits ee pethtt = easily stand a sifting enquiry into the Truth (are not fit to be 


recognized as the absolute truth). (4) 


: + a: ulfla: Ulta mer eat 
at wit TH a Tar: 1& I 








482 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 12 


EERE AARREAEAALL AAA A AAA ALLL LALA AAA AAA HA Or Br Sr Or Br Fr Or Hr tr Latit tis ee pee 


sist adt fifmar aw ae aalustceey sitet 
afar warm wehrenirry wont feraftaia gtare:16 | 
MSA aa ease, fagar Frye Pacaersta 
sae «(Ore SCfameraray «TONNAGE 191 
aer fudaa arene faes Pet wd a fer 
Tarmiss aay freadt aq fraarqaic 


The Brahmana replied : That which is a modification of earth (itself), traversing its 
surface for some reason (or other), O king, comes to be known as this man (a palanquin- 
bearer). And above the feet of this (modification of earth) are located the two ankles, the two 
shanks, the two knees and the two thighs, the waist, the chest, the neck and the two 
shoulders. (5) On one of the shoulders lies the wooden palanquin, in which is seated another 
modification of earth bearing the title of Sauviraraja (the king of Sauvira). Having identified 
yourself with this, you account yourself as the ruler of the Sindhus (the people of the Sindhu 
territory), blinded by vain pride. (6) Nay, constraining these people—who were already 
afflicted with great misery (due to poverty) and (therefore) deserved to be pitied (rather than 
oppressed)—to do work for you without any remuneration, you are (but) proving your 
heartlessness. (Yet) shamelessly bragging that you are a guardian of the people, you 
(indeed) cut a sorry figure in the assemblies of the wise. (7) When we know that the (entire) 
mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate) creation invariably springs up from earth and is 
reabsorbed into it, tell me if there is any ground for (our manifold worldly) activities—other 
than (the) names (of the various earthly objects that we have to deal with in the course of our 
activities) that may be concluded to be real by virtue of the work that we take from it. (8) 
wa Preadt fafarytea grat aenrareavaroral al 
Sadar «wae 0Oonfeudied «= TC eS ctYSCsédfearga: 1 @ 
Wa st Wes eelaaret Walansiaraq | 


wt faye waiteart wcafedel ae 
Uae Wd 8 Waeedt Ugladd Haat aattiee 
Tein A ait A wer frdaore Jers 
Tecmo 89 eniaafear 6 aecararsirsfitar) 82 
TATA eNO fare: Ueda TTPa META: | 
reemnistet  qnenifi «adi aft  arqdaiest 


What is denoted by the word ‘earth’ is (also) similarly explained because of its being 
(ultimately) resolved into the finest atoms (its constituent factors). As for the atoms, by wnose 
concatenation the element known by the name of earth has been broughtinto existence, they 
have been postulated by force of reason through ignorance (because, as a matter of fact, 
all these phenomena are but a creation of the Lord's own Maya or creative energy). (9) 
Similarly whatever other objective (phenomenal) existence appears to us as lean or stout, 
small or big, of the nature of cause or effect, animate or inanimate, know it to be a creation 
of Maya (the beginningless creative energy of the Lord) known by various names such as 





is. 12 “3 
Peers BOOK FIVE 483 


Sr Br Re Re Re Be Ke Re Re Be Re Re Re Hr er Hy O 
Laat SRR Be BeBe eB eB rt Be et te De rte ete i ett Be Be fe fr fet te Bt ttt PB 


SuSE (the gross elements), nature (the mutability of all phenomena), predisposition, the 
Time-Spirit (that which disturbs the equilibrium of th 
e three Gunas or modes of Prakrti) and 
Karma (good or evil destiny). (10) Consciousness alone is true——Consciousness which is 
pure, absolute, one (differenceless) having no inside S true—Cons 
, or outside, all-perfect, directed 
towards the Self, immutable and (commonly) known by the appellation of Bhagavan (the 
almighty and all-glorious Lord), and that sa zie case g 
O Rahiigana, one does not attain th ges call Vasudeva (the abode of all beings). (11) 
erie) er. nor (Seine ain this (consciousness) through asceticism nor through 
( HUST, i) y dealing out food and other necessaries (among the needy), nor 
by (duly) performing one's religious duties (pertaining to household life —such as entertaining 
an unexpected visitor, service of the afflicted and poor and so on), nor through a (proper) 
study of the Vedas nor through the worship of (the gods presiding over) water, fire and the 
sun, (nor by any other means) €xcept by sprinkling one's body with the dust of feet of exalted 
souls. (12) In their assemblies are held discourses on the excellences of the Lord, which shut 
out (all) talks of worldly pleasures and which, when listened to everyday, concentrate the 
pure mind of a seeker of liberation on Lord Vasudeva. (13) 
Me GT owt aA owen §6©6 faqanessmragae: 
set Ta SEAT See GTS TeaetTes 1g 
a mt wafrinetst dk qendamyar a wera 
Stat Te wiagtedst 46s fap garitsfagayerfizi 24 1 
THI-NISAP AAS dares faqeurare: | 
alt adlelHearrigaanat STS raters: 1 LE I 
sf HARTA AETFTT URAC Alea THARP ASTOR TIAA STEMS PATA: | 82 I 
| was formerly (in a previous birth) a king (like you), Bharata by name, and, having 
completely got rid of (all) bondage resulting from attachmentto (all) thatis seen (in this world) 
or heard of (as existing in heaven) endeavoured to propitiate the Lord, but was reborn as a 
deer through attachment to a deer, and (thus) lost my purpose (in the shape of God- 
Realization). (14) The memory of pastlife, awakened in me by the worship of Lord Sri Krsna, 
(however) did not leave me even in that bestial form, O valiant king. It is therefore that | move 
about incognito and unattached, afraid as | am of mixing with the people. (15) Therefore, 
having completely severed (all) ties of infatuation with the sword of wisdom developed 
through the blessed company of exalted souls (who are free from attachment), and attained 
God-consciousness by (constantly) recounting and listening to the stories of Sri Hari, aman 
reaches the highest goal of his journey, the Lord (Himself). (16) 


Thus ends the twelfth discourse, forming part of the dialogue between the Brahmana and 
king Rahagana, in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 


otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SS eS 








484 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 13 


SB br Be BeBe eB Be Re RARER ALAA EARLE A EOLA AEA LAA EEA AAA ALE AS A SS aR Rr Br er ee Be Ptr re, 
& 


ZIT AAV SIS eA: 


Discourse XIill 
Bharata allegorically represents this state of worldly existence as 
a forest and the doubts of Rahugana get resolved 





May sara 
Ras eas fraterat WHAT Ara aNaTHASH | 
@ wy aeitssior: utuay vetedt ofa a wet ferait & 
Tafa wared aaa: aed faq qidh seid 
Wrraat Ut wthd = Aiich Wadafaga aeltt gen:! 2 | 
WyrdteyeriertEt i 
aaa | Terdgt | ugafa «= aafaraaforergaicdqenyed! 2 | 


aaiarat  aicitfercuiqeuar «fest 4 wsrifa 9 TWieaciar:! x | 
STevafatecieateH ui yet Seared aA | 
savagery «sad Neda Afadaratwenatat datas & | 
aatafedrar: 9 aidrsrarfa reat area PART | 
sta «cia aaifeaeitaett «=a «6a a CUdteTa:! & | 
Wena: aa a fafdoureda: yraq faqequafa myac 
qatar = retedgt fas: tat Peqarg © | 
aT Falah HVS oatlaaay Sared | 
Ud UdStixnaladiad: chica: gett A Waal 21 
aafafaivtissmniea st Arata  feefsfefaarsafacg: | 
a: FH Vd aq A aayenresema ulated < 
af wo fas fafederiiaentieifaar faa: 
maT eA ACTA Set gear a AAS 1 Qo | 
aqataet Viraracrarcatiatatsnat aadaater area 
eatataer fan wer faise fagaqescqa fangroudi ee | 
qatacearerenrorerneg IESsG § PIATRA Aaa: | 
eli G TRU iaetelons: UNITS MASAATAA | 82 


The Brahmana began again : Put on the path (of worldly activity) the end of which Is 
(So) difficult to attain—by Maya (the beginningless deluding potency of the Lord) and 
devoted to activities : divided into various categories according as they are dominated by the 
qualities of Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, this company of merchants, ranging everywhere with 
the object of acquiring wealth (in the shape of lasting bliss), enters the forest of mundane 
existence, where it finds no delight (whatsoever). (1) In that forest, O ruler of men, there are 
SIX high-waymen, who rob this company led by an unworthy chief; and, finding access to their 
camp, jackals drag away an unwary member of the company even as wolves carry away 


] 





100 Ol 


Dis. 13] BOOK FIVE aoe 


a strayed sheep. (2) Harassed by cruel gnats and mosquitoes, in a place dense with 
numerous creepers, grass and shrubs, they witness here an imaginary city in the sky, while 
at other places they behold a fleeting ogre appearing like a firebrand. (3) Looking upon a 
habitat, water and wealth as their own, they run about here and there in the forest, O 
Rahugana; while at some places they cannot distinguish the quarters smoky With the dust 
raised by a whirlwind, their eyes being blinded with dust. (4) The (shrill) notes of unseen 
crickets jarring upon their ears and their mind disquieted with the hooting of owls, they betake 
themselves to unholy trees when oppressed with hunger; while at some places they run after 
a mirage (in order to quench their thirst). (5) Here they march towards streams without water 
and, when starving, they seek food from one another; there they meet with a forest 
conflagration and get scorched with fire; while at a third they give way to despair when about 

to be killed by Yaksas (a species of demigods ruled over by Kubera; the god of riches). (6) 

When dispossessed of their wealth by (other) heroic men, they feel depressed in spirits; nay, 

grieving and getting confused, they faint away. And, entering an imaginary city somewhere, 

they rejoice (there) for an hour or so as though (quite) happy. (7) Desirous of climbing up a 

hill, they sometimes proceed in that direction to some distance; but, (the soles of) their feet 

being pierced with thorns and gravel, they sit down like one sad at heart. Burdened with (the 

maintenance of) a large family (but unable to support them) and tormented with hunger 

(lit.,the gastric fire), they indeed get angry every moment with their own people. (8) Cast (to 

their fate) in the forest now and devoured by a serpent belonging to the species known as 

the boa constrictor, they have no consciousness left in them; and now bitten by poisonous 

creatures (snakes etc.), and fallen in some covered (and therefore deceptive) well, deprived 

of their sight, remain lying down there in darkness. (9) Sometimes seeking after honey 

(stored by bees), they are tormented by bees and feel frustrated in their attempt. (Even) if 

they achieve (some) success in that direction with great hardship, others forcibly rob them 

of the booty and (while they are engaged in an encounter with these) yet others snatch away 

the prize. (10) And at some places they are unable to ward off (provide against) cold, the sun, 

storm and rain and sit down (helpless); while elsewhere they sell between themselves 

whatever commodity they have with them, and make enemies of one another, on the 

contrary, because of their greed. (11) On some occasions, when impovarished and deprived 

of abed, a mat etc., to squat on, a dwelling and conveyance (for a pleasure trip) in that forest, 

they ask these of another. But, on failing to secure the desired object, they cast a (wistful) 

look on others' property and incur ignominy. (12) 


sarees Tea ae faaeiaeya | 
Seep aaa aaa ST, faa=t: 123 1 
aren fara a fe at aa faa wid uy arei:t 
sjadasaiu «894 miyder dita: unNaquia 8 armiexi 
waka  faftafesnrsat 4 oanfa aud wfa sega: 
qq watt ¢ daasthad amedauet 9 adaitshrariai eu 


In spite of their feeling of animosity having been aggravated by their attraction for one 
another's wealth, they enter into marital relations with one another and, while sporting along 
this road, are reduced to a miserable condition through great many hardships, monetary 
losser and (other) calamities. (13) Leaving behind all their deceased companions at different 
Stages of their journey and taking with them every new-born babe, the company marches 
Onward and onward. None of this company has returned (from the journey) to this day, O 
brave monarch, nor does anyone take to (the practice of) Yoga (methods of God- 








486 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 13 


PRR RRR RR RRR RB BE RE REE Re Be Be BE RE HTB RB BBY BS EH AY BY BBB Be Be BY Be By Hr Br Br Br Br Br BY HY Be Be Br He He He Mr Rr Hr Hr Hr Hy vy 
See ee eee ee_e_5eess a eee lf 


Realization), leading to the (other) extremity of the road. (14) (Even great) heroes, who have 
completely subdued the great elephants guarding the quarters as well as the four intervenin 
corners, all bite the dust on the field of battle, having contracted confirmed hostility with one 
another for the sake of (dominion over) the earth, claiming it as their own. None of them, 
however, attains the goal which is reached by the recluse (who has completely shaken off 
all forms of violence and) who is free from enmity. (15) 


wasifa qatar MAYS AAKTa AM Aaa ATE: | 
AHA ARASH AA TT aot feat ame TA 1 2G 1 


aafaamranahaat Ud accit Jeter rai STRATA: 1 RS | 
ad: mefsea faqad sige: Gaya arel wagraitan 
seaaafeatstar «| rafereat «0 ertisenft A aq HVAT 
Temt 40 caf i MISE CUS: )=—_ HayMAA: | 
ahaa «86oshaaa | = aferera Ss aaa Ro | 


Clinging to the arms (tiny shoots) of creepers and full of longing for sweetly warbling birds 
perched on them, they get strongly attached to some (unknown) place. And sometimes 
afraid of tigers, they make friends here with cranes, herons and vultures. (16) Betrayed by 
them, they seek to join a flock of swans; but, not finding their behaviour to their liking, they 
approach monkeys ang, their senses being fully gratified with the amorous sports natural to 
the race, each pair get so absorbed in looking at each other's face that they forget (even) their 
(fast approaching) death. (17) Seeking delight in trees and fond of sons and wife, they are 
(ever) impatient with the animal desire for sexual indulgence and powerless to get rid of their 
bondage. When falling into some ravine through inadvertence, (a stray member of) this 
company catches hold of some creeper and remains suspended by it, afraid of the elephant 
(below). (18) Somehow extricated from this calamity, however, he joins the company once 
more, Ochastiser of foes ! No one puton this track by Maya (the deluding potency of the Lord, 
that has no beginning), and wandering (along it) is able to cognize the supreme object of life 
even to this day. (19) You too have been put on this track, O Rahtgana; (therefore) 
completely abjuring (all forms of) violence and making friends with all living beings, do you 
take up the sword of wisdom, sharpened with the worship of Sri Hari and with a mind 
unattached to the pleasures of sense get to the (other) end of this road. (20) 


WHAT 
we 8 ofan 86 6 aafieadienfer 
A Aaysiyeaytpdeat wee a: Wat: AWArTa: 122 1 
4 Ged  aceNoneupedea  wfedcelterstsacm 
WighireRa 8=89PANTATSD 89 | aeachycisuedisfaae:1 221 
aa Heqeaised Aa: Presa aA geet aA at aera: 
4 Men Wardieiseahd aea: fran «wATTIR31 


The king (RahGgana) said : Oh, (this) human birth is the best of all (other) incarnations. 
Of what avail are births of the highest order in heaven, where the fellowship of exalted souls 





Dis. 13 ] | BOOK FIVE 487 
HRERERER ESSA A AAA AL ARTA LARA AAA AHHH EERE 


(like you) —whose mind has been purified by (singing and hearing) the glories of Lord Visnu 
the Ruler of the senses)—is not had in abundance? (21) It is no wonder that unalloyed 
devotion to Lord Visnu (who is beyond sense-perception) should spring up in (the heart of) 
a man whose sins have been scoured off with the dust of your lotus-feet, when | find that my 
ignorance, which had its root in fallacious reasoning, has been rooted out by an hour's 
fellowship with you. (22) Hail to the Brahmanas who are advanced in age ! Hail to (those who 
are yet) infants ! Hail to the young! Hail to all down to the youngsters ! May (all) kings receive 
blessings from those Brahmanas who traverse the earth in the garb of ascetics that have 
shaken Off all worldly feeling and obligations ! (23) 


enfortaat fader avi denotes aerranandaraadra Sieafaeneanifaar a 
cereantd faaast | we fe yo sraarferenfetarqura: | 2&1 


Sri Suka resumed : O Pariksit (son of Uttara) having thus explained the true nature of 
the Self out of supreme compassion to the ruler of the Sindhu territory (the modern Sindha) 
even though he had slighted the Brahmana—that son of a Brahmana sage, who possessed 
the highest glory, and whose feet were (now) adored by Rahugana in a pathetic way, roamed 
about the earth like an ocean which is full on every side, with a mind whose waves in the form 
of the Indriyas had been stilled. (24) Having fully realized the true nature of the Supreme Spirit 
as taught by that saintly soul, Rahugana (the lord of the Sauvira territory) too (forthwith) shed 
the wrong notion, planted on his mind by ignorance, that he was (no other than) the body. 
such, O king (Pariksit), is the greatness of those who have taken shelter with the devotees 
of the Lord ! (25) 


x 


Waar 
ate al se agfaar nersamrad waattfed: aiatur ade sacivara a 
Urdatiear wfeadtara Aare aacich AAMT: | A Aeadgratld AAddioHcud 
Pafdéyeaarfata t 26 1 
sta StaErTad FETT IAC Alea THACH A AAG S CANA: | 23 | 


The king (Pariksit) said : The course of transmigration of embodied souls, that has been 
described by you in the form of an allegory, O great devotee possessed of varied knowledge, 
has been fancifully conceived by the inventive genius of wise man and (as such) it cannot 
be readily and clearly understood by untrained minds. Therefore, (kindly) point outthe hidden 
meaning by bringing out the corresponding ideas. (26) 


Thus ends the thirteenth discourse in Book Five of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PII SESS eS 





| J=)| HAGAVATA 
A88 SRIMAD Tsaueaneaneananesteseansensanenenneh oe: 14 


; BERR RE RE RL Re Re RR RE RE RE RRR RR RR Be RH AY Ber Be He MH FT 


BA Ade wMSeaa: 
Discourse XIV 
Jadabharata elucidated the meaning of the allegory 


a Ua Sereaaltrat ararfexpurfagtatacn feadey vie STA aET- 
fafiitafataaceratetuidarredartenni cd any wae anya utstxaafur 
daiisaacemseaafad years wradt fawitdgrafi-ar waar sitacitentse ger 
afureureitsetar: wacehrofeanaiqua: yayiadiiradarat Wantesat At Arenfe 
fancsguaniearaarat eheeaomfeqnyaqiadaanat UY F aT ua 
SfShaaaran: Huu cea Wa TR 1 dele Gees et aiehagalatas ag eoriinrd 
Maegan asa wet q aera saetd! aot ef 
SaaS ASAI S ASIA HTM Aa Ureieq 
fara 21 aa a aa alefaeart enmeneat Aa don Hagin watteoarsh 
modest Hela srHacceaanar Praatsha ether | 3 1 Aa MLA H MATA aaah sy 
ai Utalautana Weuqudiefeatetwa watada yes: wdea ular fe 
HAVA cid Acad HlaHws UF Baa: 1% 1 

He (Sri Suka) said : The six Indriyas (the five senses of perception and their ruler, the 
/ mind) are the only media (for the Jiva) of going through the beginningless (ordeal of) 
: metempsychosis in the shape of being united with and torn away from, as well as of 

undergoing the pleasurable and painful experiences of, a series of (corporeal) bodies 
brought into existence by virtuous, sinful or mixed actions—prompted by Sattva and other 
qualities —on the part of human souls looking upon the body as their very self. Lured by 
these into the aforesaid track, whichis as difficult to tread as a (mountain) defile, and swayed 
by Maya (the principle of cosmic illusion that makes the Jiva forget his essentially blissful 
character and seek delight without) functioning under the control of the all-powerful Lord 
Visnu, the multitude of embodied souls mentioned heretofore, like a company of (itinerant) 
traders intent on amassing wealth, enters the forest of worldly existence which is most 
inauspicious like a crematorium and where they reap the fruit of actions wrought with their 
own body. And, even though their endeavours (generally) prove abortive and are impeded 
by many an obstacle, they fail even to this day to get to the path of those who resort like the 
honey bee to the lotus-feet of Sri Hari in the form of their preceptor—the path (of Devotion) 
which (when duly followed) relieves the agonies experienced in that forest, where dwell the 
aforesaid six, which, though (passing as) Indriyas by name, are actually robbers by action.(1) 
For whatever fortune —acquired with great hardship—belongs to a man is of use only when 
itis directly conducive to (the practice of) Dharma (virtue); and that (alone) is Dharma, which 
consists in the worship of the Supreme Person Himself and it is such Dharma that the wise 
declare as contributory to happiness in the other world. In the case of those who are guided 
by a perverted Intellect and whose mind has not been subdued, as in the case of a company 
of (itinerant) traders led by an unworthy chief and having an unsubdued spirit, the Indriyas 
take away that wealth which is fit to be devoted to (the practice of) such virtue through the 
medium of Sensuous enjoyment at home in the form of seeing, touching, hearing, tasting, 
smelling, seeking after and determining (the nature of the various) objects. (2) Nay, in that 
forest members of their family, wife and children by name but really wolves and jackals by 
action, snatch away before their very eyes the wealth of those stingy householders, unwilling 
though they are (to part with the same)—wealth which is being jealously guarded (by them). 





Dis. 14 BOOK FIVE 489 


Br Br Br Be Ke Se Re Be Hr 
Hr Be BeBe He Be He Ge Br He * Hr Hr He Be Ge He Ree He Kee Ke RC Ke He Ke Ke Be Ke Ke Ke We he Ke Ge Be Ke Ke Ke Ke BeBe Ke Kr He Ke Hr Ke Ke Be Ge He Be Hr Wr Gr Ke Ht Be Me Be He Rr Be He Be He Be He He Her 


even as a lamb (by shepherds). (3) Just as a field, in spite of its being ploughed (and cleared 
of weeds and grass etc.), every year, grows dense as it were with shrubs, grass and creepers 
at the time of sowing seeds again; in cases where the (very) seeds have not been burnt (by 
fire), so is the case with the life of a householder—a field for sowing the seeds of actions— 
where actions never come to an end; for this stage of life is (after all) a storehouse of desires 
(which are the seeds of actions of various kinds). (4) 


PANTS AAT: TET AT | S| FAP STANTS VASAT S USAT Uc eco VST AT 

SATA AA al Ware a Sh farsa sth fate |e eae carafe: 

wat whan feifticaitedta utifadamaicntafienrataiyo! aafageya— 

frecitetaeiaearvared Waal wtet ar Rosato uiyereaa: 122 1 

In the aforesaid stage of life their wealth (which constitutes their external life-breath as 

it were) is squeezed by men, vile as gnats and mosquitoes, as well as by locusts, birds 
(peacocks etc.), thieves, rats and so on. Now, sauntering on the aforementioned road (of 
worldly life) with a mind corrupted by ignorance, desire and actions, they erroneously regard 
this mortal world—which is as unreal as an imaginary city (seen in the sky through optic 
illusion) as real (lit., something whose existence is proved). (5) Again, on that road they 
pursue sometimes the mirage-like pleasures of sense, fondly addicted as they are to the 
vicious habits of eating (delicious food), drinking (wine), copulation and so on. (6) Now, even 
as one tormented with a longing to get fire may pursue /gnis fatuus, they run after gold, the 
(mere) excreta of fire and the abode of all evils, their mind being swayed by the quality of 
Rajas which is of the same colour as gold and therefore bears a natural affinity to it. (7) Again, 
sometimes, with their thought centred on their dwelling, water, wealth and other things 
essential to life, they run about here and there in the forest of worldly existence. (8) And 
now placed on the lap (embraced) by a young woman throwing dust in their eyes like a 
whirlwind, and steeped as it were in ignorance due to the element of Rajas prevailing at 
the time, they abandon the path of the virtuous. And their reason being entirely clouded 
with passion, they —like one whose eyes are blinded with dust—no longer perceive (mind) 
the deities presiding over the quarters (who witness all their doings). (9) Sometimes, in 
Spite of their having spontaneously realized but for a moment the illusory nature of sense- 
objects, they are deprived of their reason by identifying themselves with the body (which 
is other than their self); and, guided by the same (perverted reason), they run after those 
very objects, which are as deceptive and tantalizing as a mirage. (10) Now their ears and 
heart are extremely tormented by the threats of enemies and the royal court; conveyed in 
the sternest spirit and with an overbearing demeanour before their very eyes, like the 
hooting of owls, (by the king's servants) and behind their back, like the (shrill) notes of the 
cricket (by the enemies). (11) 


BAST Sea AHHH (USM V ATM awe a Tag aT SAO, 
Silaaqar tad sia areraror Saerrate | 82 Wena gta adelach ald: Racial Haas 
SUE URavsattranta | 3 Gal Cf Waa Steast Aaa dar te Paquaate sa: quar. 
oT Gel vara | eel eataaretel Te aaahrariaeygalach Mena EA Yet 

| Rdeqneresfir 94 | aateenrctfaufinisteacreramedteanaerng: wader sa fertasitacterar 


[564] B. M. 18— ° 








490 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 14 


Wer Re We Re Re eRe Ree RR Re RRR ROR RR Re ROR RR RR Re RY Ree OR Re Ree eR Re Re He Re He Re We Me eee eee ee ee ee eee Re WE eee ey Br We Ve We Hr 
oct oR sR ee ee Ee SL ae nlf 


STAG | eiheaeaughareeactaa § weitsitcraoryuatd eo! aafag 
TRAIAN aA SATU Himadtndha: hlehwMwhuaat  waskaa 
ela eel adit SteT HlaMamtafat Jeltan: taper Healey a wa 
Gasser sal cate A: VINA sa Via Aral fost Ae yet FaraPEE: 1 Ro 
When they have exhausted their merit earned in previous existences, and are (thus) 
themselves reduced to a dying state, though (actually) living, they seek the protection of men 
whose wealth is of no use (to them) either here or hereafter (who neither use it for their own 
gratification nor for the gratification of others and thus indirectly for their own benefit in the 
other world), and who (thus) resemble accursed trees and creepers like the Karaskara and 
Kakatunda (two species of poisonous trees) and wells containing poisonous water and are 
as good as dead, though living. (12) On some occasion, their mind being perverted through 
close association with vile men, they embrace a heretic creed, which entails misery both here 
and hereafter like slipping into (the rocky bed of) a waterless stream. (13) When no food is 
forthcoming for themselves even through persecution of others, they indeed proceed to 
devour their own father or sons or those who are in possession of (even) a straw belonging 
to these. (14) Now, reaching their home, divested of (all) agreeable (enjoyable) objects and 
attended with miseries, like a forest conflagration, they are scorched with the fire of grief and 
give way to extreme despondency. (15) Sometimes, robbed of their very life in the form of 
wealth—which is most dear to them—by the demon in the form of a king's househlold, 
angered by (adverse) times, they appear quite dead, destitute as they are of all symptoms 
of liveliness. (16) Now, recognizing to be real their deceased father, grandfather and so on 
aS appearing in fancy, they experience joy like that in a dream. (17) Sometimes, eager to 
carry out the huge mountain-like volume of precepts relating to household duties, they are 
distracted by worldly calamities and feel miserable like one entering a stretch of land full of 
thorns and sharp-edged gravels. (18) Now, with their energy sapped by hunger (lit., the 
gastral fire burning within their body) which is hard to bear, they vent their anger on their own 
people. (19) Again, caught in the grip of a boa constrictor in the shape of (deep) sleep and 
steeped in ignorance, they remain lying down, cast off like a dead body in a lonely forest and 
unconscious of everything else. (20) 
es soy < Prararait a : > 
Taga S-eepU S-eacTarea | 22 asfanifcaresanle OE 
vat vafaivat fred: aac Pa1221 aa aw aeneuaenty fe aaifaren: 
VanNateletial 231 Wade ale aeeaed safeeafa aerate fawrfar 
Ssertateata: | 2¥ | aafered vitardraten fecha aifenreitart esa whahranut sacar 
SU Acre FAGUUT Set | VY aaa Aa Aaa es Alec ape AAA a Chea UTA ATA aL 
aicnisel faguata faagirearet 2€ | 
Sometimes, on their teeth in the form of pride being crushed by biting animals in the 
shape of wicked men, they are unable to get (even) a wink of sleep and, their consciousness 
getting fainter and fainter because of a distressed heart, they fall like a blind man into a 
covered well. (21) Now when, seeking after small drops of honey in the form of sensuous 
enjoyment and laying their hands on another's wife and property, they are killed by the king 
or by the husband or owner, they descend into the abysmal (depths of) hell. (22) Therefore, 
the wise speak of action in both forms (virtuous as well as sinful) on (the part of those 
treading) this path (of worldly activity) as a field bearing to the Jiva (the crop of) mundane 
existence in quick succession without fail. (23) (Even) if they escape from bondage (etc., 
inflicted by the king or the husband and owner by bribing them), a Devadatta snatches away 





Dis. 14 BOOK FIVE 


PHAARARAERAAAAAAAREAAEAAAAAARAAAAAA AAR AAA AAAAAAAEERAEARAREEARERAER EL LAA ARAL SS 


from them the woman and property seized by them and from the said Devadatta a Visnumitra 
wrests them. In this way the objects of enjoyment never.stay (with a single individual). (24) 
And sometimes unable to ward off (provide against) cold wind and many other (adverse) 
situations brought about by divine will or (by the will of) other created beings or related to 
one's own body or mind, they remain cast down with anxiety difficult to get rid of. (25) Now, 
carrying on business transactions on a very small scale with those of their own company 
or snatching from others even (a trifling sum of) twenty cowries or any amount (even less 
than that), they incur (their) hatred due to their (own) grabbing nature. (26) 


Mma sarees AAMAS AAS AAS Wrevitta | Vs | 
There are on this path (of worldly activity) these (obstacles, viz., great hardships, 
monetary losses and so on—vide verse 13 of Discourse XIll above) and other obstacles 
too—such as joy and sorrow, likes and dislikes, fear and pride, error and insanity, grief and 
infatuation, greed and spite, jealousy and ignominy, hunger and thirst, worries and ailments, 
birth, old age and death. (27) Sometimes folded by woman—who is (no other than) the 
Lord's (own) deluding potency (personified) —in her arms, (tender and slender) like a pair 
of creepers, they are deprived of their discriminating wisdom; and, anxious at heart to build 
a pleasure-house for her and lured by the (sweet) words, (affectionate) glances and 
(delighting) gestures of their sons, daughters and daughters-in-law, brought together under 
her protection, these men of uncontrolled mind hurl themselves in the bottomless and dark 
(regions of) hell. (28) 
HMalladyarey wad fawnygameara atfetguura wat racsa4wneatarddt Aaa 
Tal Std Weaqueatada yarahad raat fardecaatayat Aleta arsaget 
Waeiad AAGSMAeet wWavscad: Asydanaewa  sredanauhted: 
Wseriysrdt!22t aet unattsehnimafsides afsdt aged wader 
Wiese Wiad AAS dala, Wage Aid 
PoTAreantsyead at repre: Heras AM aMtwnd: 1301 aaa Pare: TACT 
feripunreieararagarttenten urate faeydnrenaey:! 321 aatad 
BAachearsy FoR TA AM AMAT: AdeNae Aaa: | 321 
Now their heart is filled with terror at the thought of the discus of the almighty Lord Visnu, 
manifested in the form of the ever-wakeful time (with its manifold divisions) from the minutest 
point (corresponding to an atom) to the period covering two Parardhas (the life-span of 
Brahma, equivalent to 31,10, 40, 00, 00, 00, O00 human years), which sweeps away all 
created beings —while they keep looking on—from Brahma (down) to the (merest) clump of 
grass, by means of its quick movement representing the passage of time (from childhood 
to youth and from youth to old age and so on). Nevertheless they ignore that very almighty 
Lord, who is no other than the Deity presiding over sacrifices and wields the wheel of time 
as His own (characteristic) weapon, and betake themselves to the deities worshipped by 
heretics and discarded by Vedic tradition—deities who are no better than buzzards, 
vultures, herons and quails (which are unable to protect one against the lion of death) —on 
the authority of the sacred works of heretics. (29) When they are grossly betrayed by those 
Self-deluded heretics, they take up their residence with the Brahmana race. But, notliking their 
(pious) way, such as investiture with the sacred thread and the worship of Lord Visnu (the Deity 
Presiding over the sacrifices carried on by them) through the performance of rituals enjoined 
(both) by the Vedas and the Smrti-texts, they join the Sddra community, who like the monkey 


491° 











492 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 14 


BERRA RE RRR RE RRR RR RR ER RR BERR RR Re HERE REE REBT ERE ABE BE Re HE BE BBE Me Re Ae Hr Be He HM Br Be Se He He He He Br Hr He He Me Hr Gr Ge He Rr Hr Hr Be He He Hy Hr Hr Hey 
eee“ “ “ OO 


race get paired and maintain their families by recourse to (what is regarded as) impurity when 
judged from the standard of right conduct as laid down in the Vedas. (30) Indulging in 
unrestrained licence there too, they feel sorely distressed in mind and remaining engrosseq 
in vulgar pursuits such as looking at the the face of their wife and vice versa, forget (even 
the time of their) death. (81) Sometimes, seeking delight in the household life, which like 
trees serves their worldly interests alone, they conceive (excessive) fondness for their sons 
and wife and find pleasure like the monkey race in coition (alone and are thus unable to 
secure release from the bondage of worldly existence). (32) 

Tarde yeaa  ftithaqmdi33! aafastrancdeata- 
Sfransiftenrcitart ¢:ari wfatranvisHed geaaearaauur sed | 8¥ eaharen aaa ey 
Gheatserqoata 4  fadgredti34! aafereiturert: yreareremreaamtiat 
Aaa aA aT aA SA adalat a SAAT AT att Waar | 3k I Ud 
fancaiastaqgeqerenstt Yaarata fra sgecauagtt! 301 Wafer, Wanteaht 
ATS SIU GA ARTY & area fares wrt STATA VTE, 
feaigae Hal Mea WIAA: Aeatsial Aaraddsaiht ad Sel WH Aci areit 
aaa: Ufa | 32 | Ales GNI A AT Udaae eid AAKIAUST YAS SUAVE 
SOA: AAs het 1 39 Laete fats aha S a weda: for gq Ut Wet SNe 
mata pda faqer taaqudedi: iol Hdacciimactsa dd 3a: 
Hisetalegdead: GNad aed ada wWelwardquata  waquit 
Teal sTa 1 ¥Q | 

Thus experiencing joy and sorrow on the way, they fall into adversity in the form of 
ailments and so on, fearful as a ravine, and remain in (constant) terror of the elephant 
(there) in the form of death. (833) Now, unable to counteract manifold unpleasant 
experiences—such as cold, wind and so on—brought about by divine agency or any other 
being or those relating to one’s own body or mind, they are worried with (the thought of) 
innumerable objects of sense. (84) Sometimes entering into business dealings with their 
own fellow-men, they secure some wealth through stinginess. (35) Now, reduced to poverty 
and deprived of (all) enjoyments (comforts) in the shape of a bed (to sleep on), a mat to squat 
on, food to eat and other such things, they make up their mind to attain (by foul means such 
as theft) the objects of their desire when denied to them and meet with ignominy and so on 
at the hands of (different) people. (36) In this way though their feeling of enmity (with others) 
is enhanced through (mutual) attraction for wealth, they enter into matrimonial alliances with 
one another and subsequently dissolve them according to the tendencies of their past 
lives.(37) (Nay,) if anyone, afflicted with manifold agonies and obstacles, meets with a 
calamity or dies on this road, others—as is well-known—leave him wherever he is and, 
taking (with them) every new-born child, give way to grief, infatuation and fear, quarrel (with 
those who oppose them), cry (in distress), are transported with joy (under favourable 
circumstances), sing (in a sprightly mood) and are bound (by others stronger than they). With 
the exception of pious souls this company of men, however, never returns even to this day to 
the point (God) whence this road (of mundane existence) commences and which the learned 
declare as the end of the road (as well). (88) The aforesaid men do not take to the discipline 
of Yoga (Devotion) nor do they attain the supreme state (which can be reached through 
Devotion alone and) which is easily attained (only) by sages who have shed (all forms Of) 
violence, who are naturally given to self-control and who have withdrawn their mind from all 
worldly objects. (39) Nor do the royal sages who have conquered the elephants guarding the 
quarters as well as the four intervening corners, and who perform (big) sacrifices listen to 
this teaching; they would rather bite the dust in battle (and remain lying) on the very earth 


Dis. 14] BOOK FIVE 493 


ge te Be Hr BY ERE HERE He Re BE RB Gee He Re Be He Hee Hee Be Me Gr Re Ke RR Ge Re HR RR RR Re RR ER REREAD BEEBE BEE LEBER ESES 





for whose sake they entered into enmity with others, accounting it as their own, and which 
they had ultimately to abandon, themselves withdrawing (from the scene). (40) Then clinging 
to the creeper of Karma (action in the shape of remedial measures) and somehow rid of the 
hellish tortures in the shape of ailment and other troubles, they revert to the path of 
transmigration as aforesaid and join (back) the company of men; and similar is the case with 
those who have risen above (to the higher regions such as heaven). (41) 

Thus do they sing of Bharata's career :— 


sree |= teteearfa | wees: | ATqaetéfs yar ufeha weed: 1x21 
at Geren qearad eewger: 1 wel ada ncagdayetenctea: 1X3 | 

ot Geer fafrgqarasrreianry wear fart grat: Waaracienry | 

Te-jieigtad vedi wafge Aarradatamvarst wey: 1s 

awara etude fafiriqora arma area wendivara 

ARTA eA AR Beet eretapranfe a: agente xyl 

No (other) king can follow even mentally the example of the high-souled royal sage 

Bharata (the son of Lord Rsabha) any more than a fly can think of emulating the speed of 
Garuda (the king of birds). (42) (With a heart) full of longing for the Lord of excellent renown, : 
he abandoned, while still young, (his) wife and sons, kinsmen and kingdom, (so) difficult to | 
renounce and (so) delightful to the heart, even as one would throw away excrement. (43) 
(Lo!) he did not long for (the sovereignty of) the earth, sons, kinsfolk, riches and wife—so 
hard to renounce—nor even for Sri (the goddess of fortune), who, though coveted (even) by | 
the foremost gods, cast Her gracious look on him. This was (only) as it should be; for, in the 
eyes of exalted souls whose mind is devoted to the service of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the 
demon Madhu), even liberation (immunity from rebirth) is of no value. (44) "Hail to Lord Sri 
Hari, who is Yajhia (personified), the Defender of righteousness, punctiliously carrying out 
the injunctions of scriptures (Himself in order to set a noble example before the world at 
large), an embodiment of Yoga (the diverse methods of God-Realization) and the principal 
theme (as Brahma) of Sankhya (the science of Self-Realization), the Lord of Prakrti (Maya, 
the divine energy that brings forth this cosmos), the Ruler of all Jivas!"thus did he loudly 
(piteously) and distinctly pray even before casting off the form of a deer. (45) 

a se WUTadaMt aad Ustad MIS wat aes 
ara gare ary YUN aaa Aah A Mat CATS STAT SST et A HII ONT Shed | YE | 
sft AtEMad Weg WAGE Alea TARPS MAT ITT IAAI AWA AqeeiS*Ara: | Ve 
Whosoever repeatedly listens to or recites and celebrates this story of the royal sage 

Bharata, whose spotless virtues and actions are extolled (even) by (eminent) devotees of 
the Lorda story which brings good fortune and confers longevity, wealth, celebrity, heavenly 
bliss and even final beatitude— attains all his desired objects by himself and seeks nothing 
from others. (46) 


| 
| 
: 
| 


Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled "The allegorical meaning (of the description 
of the forest of mundane existence) elucidated,” forming part of the story of 
Bharata, in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PIES SS 





494 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 15 


PREAH AAAAALEAEEEANELAL ALLER LA ALLELE ALAA LALA EE HA HH BH Ht BH Har g, 
eee a a tf 


ST UBS Sara: 


Discourse XV 
An account of Priyavrata's posterity continued 


Aye SAT 

MAMA: PAataised aye aa Hlacaivet mawuediagqadant ara 
sTaaAAlat saat AAT Ue Het Heated | el AAS Gaga saan 
UASHA | 1 SAM Aa AAMT Sa AETA ITAA Ya: WAS AT Yaa Weits SAS: 13 | 
Q sneaanarena wad Ul ASSAM! ¥1 Udterdadera ufasatqaore 
aWafasarenliaear: Gara: Wied: CUA YATAT ASE TAT ATA | 4 | or Safaep Caraga: 
Weta) CaM Vata ara Kaas staffs Tat SA YPMOTAAT ae SEK aT 
Sa wade gfagqar wat weilivar sansa sstad Watetad $= fesonsintarfarrar 
Weare 4 wmelssmarafenats Aeqead wee! A A aertoy 
GAIAM Uae A Wala Agee wUTat welfor 
aera  adfaaunrqdanssufeamMactadar ATM QUT: 
Uwafadidenideutdest 4 srt aquaranmaerearyarst ffir 
Ware taseTad | 9 | 


Sri Suka began again: We have (in VII. 3 above) already spoken about the (eldest) son 
of Emperor Bharata, Sumati by name, who followed in the footsteps of Lord Rsabha (lived 
the life of an ascetic who had shaken off all worldly feeling and obligation) and whom certain 
heretics, having no respect for Vedic traditions, will set up according to their own perverted 
intellect in the Kali age as a deity not mentioned in the Vedas (the Vedic pantheon). (1) A 
son, Devatajit (a conqueror of the gods by name, was born to him through (his wife) 
Vrddhasena. (2) Then through Asuri (Devatajit's wife) sprang up his son, Devadyumna; from 
Devadyumna, through Dhenumati, was born a son, Paramesthi (by name); (and) from the 
loins of Paramesthi, through Suvarcala, was born Pratiha, who, having taught self- 
knowledge (to.many) and himself thoroughly purified (thereby), realized the Supreme 
Person as his own self. (3-4) From (the loins of) Pratiha, through (his wife, also known as) 
Suvarcala, sprang up three sons, Pratiharta and so on (the other two being known by the 
names of Prastota and Udgata), who were (all) well-versed in (performing) sacrifices; and 
from Pratiharta, through Stuti, were born (two sons) Aja and Bhima (by name). (5) From (the 
loins of) Bhuma, through Rsikulya, sprang up Udgitha; from Udgitha, through Devakulya, 
was born Prastava; from Prastava, through Niyutsa, sprang up his son, Vibhu; from Vibhu, 
again, through Rati, followed Prthusena; from Prthusena, through Akuti, was born Nakta; 
and from (the loins of) Nakta sprang up the illustrious Gaya, son of Druti, the foremost among 
royal sages and a ray of Lord Visnu Himself—who has assumed the quality of Sattva (a form 
consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas) with intent to protect the universe— 
Gaya, who attained to the rank of an exalted soul by virtue of (his) self-possession and other 
attributes. (6) He had his mind repeatedly chastened and rendered extremely pure through 
(the disinterested performance of) his own duty—in the shape of looking after, providing with 
means of subsistence, humouring, treating with tenderness and admonishing the people 
and undertaking sacrifices and other pious acts in a spirit of complete dedication to Lord 
Visnu (the Supreme Person), who is higher than the highest (Brahma, Siva and others) and 
no other than Brahma (the Infinite) which had rendered it capable of yielding the highest 
results (viz., final beatitude, the supreme object of human pursuit), as well as through the 
habit of Devotion to the Lord, acquired by constantly adoring the feet of those who have 





pis. 15 | | BOOK FIVE 495 


realized (their oneness with) Brahma. In that mind, which had now been (completely) rid of 
all identification with the body (which is other than the self), he realized his oneness with 
Brahma (the Supreme Spirit), whose presence was felt therein as a matter of course (without 
any conscious effort on his part). Yet he had no pride in him and as such (in such an 
unegoistic spirit) he protected (ruled over) the (entire) globe. (7) 


aaa Tet wugsag aufag somal 2 


ears: ewe: wat alanis  wacncngal | 
aay urea Wer adt: aenfirdt carmen: aRRe:1 
wa ws gge | issigrat  Praferat  qoraraeqgitem: 1201 
SUA GM at AMT Gemert aft TTT! 
wears «aft entcr faut aerftrat «ppt «= UTI I 


Waa we: a = fasasita: wa: wa wditameaeies! 


The knowers of the past (those well-versed in the Pauranika lore), chant the following 
verses in praise of Gaya:— (8) 

What king, other than a part manifestation of the Lord could (dare) emulate by 
his deeds Gaya—be he a (great) sacrificer (one who has performed a number of great 
sacrifices),a high-souled man of extensive knowledge, a defender of righteousness, one 
who is wooed by the Goddess of Fortune, the leader of an assembly of holy men and a (true) 
servant of pious souls ? (9) It was him that the pious daughters of Daksa (Sraddha, Maitri, 
Daya and so on)—whose benedictions (always) come true—along with (the deities 
presiding over a number of holy) rivers (such as Ganga) sprinkled with water (at the time 
of his coronation) in supreme (ecstasy of) joy. And attracted by his virtues, like a cow whose 
udders begin to flow at the sight of her calf, mother Earth yielded to his subjects (all their) 
desired objects, even though he(himself) had no desire (whatsoever). (10) The Vedas (that 
had been duly propitiated by him through a reverential and devoted study) as well as the 
Vedic rites (scrupulously and diligently performed by him) yielded to him all (sensuous) | 
enjoyments even though he was free from (all) cravings. Again, honoured (by him with 
volleys of arrows) on the battle-field, (hostile) kings brought him (rich) tributes; while the 
Brahmanas, when propitiated with righteousness (the scrupulous performance of his sacred 
duties), yielded to him in the other world one-sixth of the blessings (earned by them through 
their religious austerities and sacrificial performances). (11) While Indra (the chief of the 
gods and the lord of paradise) got inebriate at his sacrificial performance, where copious 
libations of the (intoxicating drink called) Soma were offered (to the gods entitled to a share 
In the sacrificial offerings), the Lord (Himself), who is the Soul of (all) sacrifices, accepted (in 
Person) the reward of the sacrifice (in the form of religious merit), duly offered (by him) with 
reverence and in a spirit of pure (unalloyed) and unflinching Devotion. (12) By propitiating 
the Lord, the entire creation from Brahma (the creator) down to the (other gods), men and 
the Sub-human species of animate life as well as plants, including the smallest blade of grass 
IS at Once gratified. The selfsame Lord (the Soul of the universe), who is (ever) pleased (all- 
blissful by natu re), Himself felt palpably gratified at the sacrificial performance of Gaya ! (13) 








in| 


a 


496 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 16 


QB BeBe Re BeBe Re Be Re Re Re RRR ERR ERR RRR RE RE Re BER BE BE Be REBT Be Re Be BY Be Be Br Be Be Hr Br Br Br Ger Be i He Be Kr Br Hr He Hr Be He Br Be Ber Wr Hr Br Br Bt Be Br Br Hr 8 yg, 
—_—_—————— ooo eee oY 


TANGA PIAA: PATA Sha Aa: TAT AY Yaa ATU a MATS SHAMB | 8X ta 
Senta mihi feared aera Aefadaet: quate 
Sade MST WITTY West Aen: aeat alate qaurai wasp 
wap ftrasrat faxst faxstest prafstarat Yaga at a fageat forct STA Bu 1 

aad Voth: — 

daad asia fawvadiega: | aatectet aiet fam: Get ewig | 

sf SPErad FETT WAS Sea aH Harada Hids WA TAGS PATA: 1 kG | 


From (the loins of) Gaya, through (his wife) Gayanti, sprang up three sons, Citraratha, 
Sugati and Avarodhana by name; and from Citraratha, through Urna, came Samrat. (14) 
From Samrat, through Utkala, sprang up Marici and from (the loins of) Marici, through 
Bindumati, Binduman was born. From Binduman, through Saragha appeared (a son) Madhu 
by name; from Madhu through Sumana, sprang up Viravrata and from Viravrata, through 
Bhoja, Manthu and Pramanthu were born; from Manthu, through Satya, appeared Bhauvana; 
from Bhauvana, through Disana, Twasta was born; from Twasta, through Virocana, came 
Viraja; (and) from the loins of Viraja, through VisUci, were born a hundred sons, the eldest 
of whom was Satajit, and a daughter (too). (15) About Viraja runs the following verse:"Viraja, 
the last-born (in the line), adorned this race of Priyavrata by his glory even as Lord Visnu 
brought glory to the gods (by appearing in their midst as Vamana, the divine Dwarf). (16) 


Thus ends the fifteenth discourse entitled "The posterity of Priyavrata," in Book 
Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


BID VWSonrseara: 


Discourse XVI 
A description of the terrestrial world 


Weta 

Seca YAVStaaana Aaateadaad at Meal Rifas wWisasar ar We 

grad! i wae fraameracraivandt: wate: wa fra suaqer aq Uae: 

aagitiarsanieda Way We Yad Waealhaané uradi causa wa 

fatsrarertt 1 21 wad Tora weerad anaherd way eetsie Gana anereafates ww 

aertur ore aaa MAMTA Me Sra WISE apatite t 3 t 

The king (Pariksit) said : You have described the extent of the terrestrial globe as 
covering the whole range where the sun shines and where, on the other hand, the yonder 
moon with the host of (other) heavenly bodies is visible. (1) Within that very extent are 
comprised the seven oceans formed by the seven furrows dug by the (revolving) wheels of 
the chariot of Emperor Priyavrata; and it is to these (oceans) indeed that you. have ascribed, 


O glorious sage, the division of the earth into seven distinct Dwipas (subdivisions). | have 
a desire to know all this in detail with the extent and characteristic features (of the various 





pis. 16 ] BOOK FIVE 497 
BSS SB BA BeBe BAB RR AB RRR BB Be BBB ALAA RARE EBA IIER, 


divisions, the oceans and so on). (2) For, (when) focussed.on the Lord's gross material form 
(in the shape of this universe) the mind becomes (gradually) fit to be concentrated on the 
immaterial, most subtle (hard to perceive), Self-effulgent and transcendent Brahma (the 
infinite), known by the name of Lord Vasudeva. Therefore, be pleased to describe the same, 


O (my) preceptor ! (3) 
Beara 


414 FEN Wad weTfaye: ast wat aden arieraue’ fagereerte 
Gees THAT ATAU SANSA: | ¥1 Taree gra: 


ATTA aS AeA ATTA: Aaa: Maul: Beha ASE VATA AE: Sh furans: 
gactrnncns Wait ghia weaaeriaddt Wt Weyraes aaarafrat was: 1 01 
smite ate: yaa: perarhta set vara hona eur autor waters: wear 
sad: arate feasagee Whar: year Sa eeisnrmists set wa 
Sadi co 
The sage (Sri Suka) replied : No man, O great king, can ever succeed in ascertaining 
with his mind, much less (describing) in words, the full extent of the vast display (in the form 
of the universe) set up by the Gunas of the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) even if he strives 
for a whole lifetime of the gods. Therefore, we propose to discuss at length only the salient 
features of the terrestrial globe with the names, position, extent and characteristics of the 
various subdivisions. (4) As for this (particular) Dwipa (the one inhabited by us), it represents 
the innermost of the (Seven) sheaths of the lotus-like terrestrial globe, with a diameter of one 
lakh Yojanas (8,00,000 miles) and round (in shape) like the corolla of a lotus. (5) In this Dwipa 
are comprised nine Varsas (subdivisions of a Dwipa)— each nine thousand Yojanas (72,000 
miles) in extent—clearly divided by eight mountain ranges which form their (natural) 
boundaries. (6) In the middle of these continents stands the inner Varsa, called llavrta, at the 
centre of which is situated the king of (all principal) mountain ranges, Meru (Sumeru), entirely 
consisting of gold and possessing a height equal to the extent of the Dwipa (viz., one lakh 
Yojanas). It forms the pericarp of the lotus-like terrestrial globe and has a diameter of thirty- 
two thousand Yojanas (2,56,000 miles) at the top and (only) sixteen thousand Yojanas 
(1,28,000 miles) at the foot, with its root lying under the earth's surface to a depth of sixteen 
thousand Yojanas. (That is to say, the mountain is only eighty-four thousand Yojanas high 
above the earth's surface). (7) To the north of llavrta are situated one after another the three ; 
mountain ranges called Nila, Sweta and Srngavan, severally forming the boundaries of the B 
Varsas bearing the names of Ramyaka, Hiranmaya and Kuru and extending east and west | 
as far as the salt ocean, each two thousand Yojanas (16,000 miles) wide and every exterior 
range being shorter in length alone by a little over one-tenth of the next interior range (but 


Equal in height and breadth). (8) 

Ud afeotterad fret taqger fears sit wea ae atereatsadarsriceseM 
Chater ead aaa | ANAC A ACAALAT Ya UT Sl MIcAag IAT aA aera 
feaees une: dqarevaeaat: dari faqert) gol Watt Hera: Yuivd: BaE 
Wagdsmeiaet «= AgaiderAaeeia SUAS 1RR1 | gee 
FASS Sr TANF AAT: SAMA: Vela eel Fae AST eM ae fete ah etree: 
VTA STTARUTTST: 1 82 1 SAITACAT: VAN AAA EAE ACTA SATO Sea AUT 
Tare acader ema e3 caer a waht went ted Vara aursich 








“498 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 16 


eRe Re Re Re Ree Re Re eRe Re RRR RE RR RE RE RE REE Re RRB Re BR AER He Be By Be Be Be He Be He Be Be Hr Br Hr Hr By Br Br Sy Hr Mr Br Hr Hr Br Sr BeBe RR Sr Se Br Bt Be A Ar Br tr tr ag, 


SS 


adarsrataha | ex | AeMUkagal: We Bteremtenaqaada sadanle ata: 
fact faartt! 24 1 

Likewise to the south of Ilavrta, and extending from east to west, stand the (three 
mountain ranges called) Nisadha, Hemaktta and Himalaya—each possessing a height of 
ten thousand Yojanas (80,000 miles) and severally marking the boundaries of Harivarsa, 
Kimpurusavarsa and Bharatavarsa.(9) Even so to the west and east of llavrta stand the 
(mountain ranges of) Malyavan and Gandhamadana respectively, severally extending as far 
as the Nila mountain (on the north) and the Nisadha mountain (on the south) and covering 
a breadth of two thousand Yojanas (16,000 miles) each. They mark the boundaries of (the 
Varsas called) Ketumala and Bhadraswa (respectively). (10) On the four sides of Mount 
Meru stand the Mandara, Merumandara, Suparswa and Kumuda mountains, forming its 
buttresses (as it were), and having a length and height of ten thousand Yojanas (80,000 
miles). (11) On these four (mountains) stand four big trees of mango, Jambu (rose-apple), 
Kadamba and banyan (respectively) looking like their flags, each possessing a height of one 
thousand and one hundred Yojanas (8,800 miles) and a diameter of a hundred Yojanas (800 
miles) (at its trunk), and its branches extending within a diameter equal to its height. (12) 
(Besides these trees) there are four lakes (as well) of milk , honey, Sugar-cane juice and fresh 
water (respectively). The demigods (the Yaksas, Kinnaras and so on) who drink of these, 
O Pariksit (the foremost of the Bharatas), enjoy mystic powers as a natural 
consequence.(13) There are also four celestial gardens, called Nandana, Caitraratha, 
Vaibhrajaka and Sarvatobhadra. (14) In these gardens the foremost of gods, leading a bevy 


of most charming celestial beauties with them, carry on (their) sports, their glories being sung 
by hosts of demigods. (15) 


Herat eaqda eral tect 
hud cacmiendt aefanrqqquercataies| aaavantr termdrat afar 
WAM Aaeaa Aeaieh Aa MaAM HA AeA WAS ATA Fault wafat 2o1aAg 
e ae fagqenea: de qalatinqemenfeqarenuuradur eq emcafed | 22 1 

From the top of the celestial mango tree, eleven hundred Yojanas high, standing on the 
bosom of Mount Mandara, drop down fruits as colossal as a mountain-peak and luscious 
as nectar. (16) A river, Arunoda (lit., having red water) by name—so-called because of its 
carrying as water the most delicious, (naturally) fragrant and highly perfumed (with other 
scents), abundant and scarlet juice of these fruits bursting open (with the fall) flows from the 
Summit of Mount Mandara and irrigates the eastern part of Ilavrta. (17) The breeze perfumed 
by contact with the person of Yaksa ladies forming the retinue of Goddess Parvati (the divine 
Consort of Lord Siva) surcharges with fragrance the whole area about them as for as ten 
Yojanas (80 miles), (whichis possible only) because of their drinking this water. (18) Similarly 
a river, Jambu by name, emanating from the juice of rose-apples of the size of elephants and 
having very small seeds, burst open as a result of their fall from an exceedingly high level, 
falls from the summit of Mount Merumandara, ten thousand Yojanas high, on the earth 
(below) and waters the whole of (the southern part of) Ilavrta, standing to the south of that 
river. (19) The clay on both the banks (of this river), getting saturated all over with that juice, 
and undergoing a chemical change under the joint action of the wind and the sun, (S 
transmuted into (high-class) gold, known by the name of Jambunada, which ever serves to 





pis. 16 ] BOOK FIVE 499 


gr Br A HASSE SERIES SE SESS SS RES Ge RM AR RRB BBR RR HH RAR TE HHH He RR AER Re HRA ERA ARE RIE AIRE 


adorn the person of immortals. (20) Indeed, as the tradition unmistakably points out, the gods 
and other heavenly beings (such as the Gandharvas) with their spouses wear this (on their 
person) In the shape of diadems, bangles, girdles and other ornaments. (21) 
aed Wels: Hovde areas Srexeay fart:gqea: wararaakturrer: Gat Aa: 
Gary aaa SA OTT AAPA 21 AT agen qatratfadt ad: 
HAS Aa ST TATAT aaa | 23 | 
Five torrents of honey, each measuring five fathoms in diameter—that stream forth from 
the hollows of that great Kadamba tree which stands firmly rooted on Mount Suparswa— 
when falling from the summit of Supargwa, delight with their aroma (the region of) Ilavrta, 
lying to the west of those torrents. (22) The breeze surcharged with the odour issuing from 
the mouth (breath) of (celestial) damsels drinking of those torrents perfumes an area of one 
hundred Yojanas (800 miles) all round. (23) 


wt eyetecl a: weal wm acme weet tite: 

career Ly STATA OTT: Tes US HATA AST: SH STATA TEMA TAU Te 

qaqaarstatad | 2S 1 UIST A mefeeft wart acitofaracmmaedhteasnt- 

; Vata araraita Gea Prfasrava | 24 | 
In the same way from the boughs of that banyan tree, Satavalga by name (so-called 
because it has hundreds of boughs), which stands firmly rooted on Mount Kumuda, issue 
(anumber of) streams—all flowing downward and capable of yielding the objects of one’s 
desire, such as milk, curds, honey, clarified butter, jaggery, cereals and other edibles as 
wellas raiment, beds, seats and ornaments—ang, falling from the summit of Mount Kumuda, 
benefit the region of llavrta lying to the north of the said mountain. (24) Afflictions of various 
kinds—such as wrinkles, grey hairs, fatigue, perspiration, foul smell, old age, disease, 
(untimely) death, (sensations of) cold and heat, pallor and (other) troubles are never 
experienced by those created beings that make use of these rivers; nay, they enjoy the 
greatest happiness throughout their life. (25) 





« & * 
*€ e bed Ge ele o 8 
e 


AnNaraar fargrhahrcat Aw: HluteHral sa HACIA Feat Wa Sracpad: 1 2G I Sarea|l As 
Gaunrsresrarsrtaeanenreardt feaea Gadst wad: wana waqurtarat afar 
SMA UMAMAa MATS: Testa Rage ASAT: 1 29 
Wife enact stra A ea SAT PMA Aa SATA St AAA TA Mitenlesih aah 1 Ve | 
Tay Ufa TH UIAABTA aarfest Gad TAA WISE T TCA: | 2k | 

sft sierrad Ferg Uae Mea TAA YATHITATT AT WSS PATA: | 8 | 


Like filaments surrounding the pericarp (of a lotus), there are twenty mountains— 
Kuranga, Kurara, Kusumbha, Vaikanka, Trikuta, Sisira, Patanga, Rucaka, Nisadha, Sinivasa, 
Kapita, Sankha, Vaidarya, Jarudhi, Hamsa, Rsabha, Naga, Kalahjara, Narada and soon— 
Situated round about Meru near its foot. (26) (Again,) to the east of Meru stand the Jathara 
and Devakita mountains, extending north to south to a length of eighteen thousand Yojanas 
(1,44,000 miles) and possessing a hight and width of two thousand Yojanas (16,000 miles). 
Similarly to the west (of the same mountain) are situated the Pavana and Pariyatra; to the 
south (of Meru) stand the Kailasa and Karavira extending east to west—and to the north 
are situated the Tri$srmga and Makara. Enclosed on all sides by these eight mountains, Mount 
Sumeru (the mountain of gold) shines as a sacred fire surrounded by blades of KuSa grass 
(marking its boundaries as it were). (27) On the summit of Mount Meru, at the very centre, 
they Say, is situated the city of Brahma (the self-born), built (entirely) of gold, with an area 








500 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17 


LARA LALA REALL ATA AAT ALLA LESSORS STS SSSA SASS SES SANT H He He Bee 
of fourteen* thousand Yojanas (1,12,000 square miles) and rectangular in shape. (28) After 
this model and round above the same have been built the eight cities of the eight Lokapalas 
(guardians of the spheres—indra and others) in a style befitting their master and in the 
direction allotted to him, each city being one-fourth (in extent) of Brahméa’s city. (29) 


Thus ends the sixteenth discourse entitled "A description of the terrestrial 
world" in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


“ex ts a x 
PISS TSS acy 


ZIM Ua Sea: 


Discourse XVII 
An account of the descent of the holy Ganga and a song of praise to Lord 
Sankarsana by the divine Sankara 


TA Wad: Mategiegel frwntaad anmnegetarht=atvsHerefaacond:— 
Ma aeaptadaaswanaatidsed Aleit Baeaucass feat ye aadanr 
FaigaentE: | 21 aa s Aa aNad siaaaila: WANA seicheidaddratuInta-alach ated 
WAT Perma @é fatsaritecd silcnvswlaayfdetarer— 
Steir crea a HAM ATARI cre separa eATacoT Fyre ferstiet | | 


Sri Suka continued : (Standing) on this terrestrial globe (referred to in the foregoing 
discourse) when Lord Visnu Himself, appearing in the form of Trivikramat at the sacrificial 
performance of Bali, raised His (left) foot (in order to measure the heavenly regions after 
having measured the earth including the subterranean worlds with His right foot), a stream 
from the (immaterial) waters existing outside the egg-like cosmos, which rushed inside 
through a breach made in the upper shell of the cosmic egg as a result of its being pierced 
by the nail of His left big toe, flowed down to the realm of Dhruva (forming the crest of the 
Starry heavens)—which they call Visnupada (the abode of Lord Visnu)—after a very long 
(measure of) time covering a thousand revolutions of the four Yugas (Satya, Treta, Dwapara 
and Kali). While washing the lotus-foot of the Lord (on which it fell in the very first instance), 


* The compound epithet 31qdatsttaleey could be taken on the face of it to mean ‘covering an area of a thousand times 
ten thousand i.e., one crore square Yojanas or eight crore square miles', as almost every renowned commentator of Srimad 
Bhagavata has done. Considering the extent of Mount Meru, which is mentioned in passage 7 above as only 32,000 Yojanas 
wide, however, this figure strikes us as enormous. Haace, following a learned commentator, we have split the compound as 
AACA Aral ee Aand taken Mee to mean ‘covering an area of four thousand square miles'— Agena (Ag -AeaeT) afc 
4A: ai. Thus interpreted, the compound will mean ‘having an area of ten plus four, i.e., fourteen thousand square Yojanas, 


which exactly tallies with the figure given in the Visnupurana. In that we come across the following description of the city of 
Brahma on the summit of Mount Meru :— ‘ 


AGM AEM ASA NTT | ATE Aaa err: Abra FAS 11 (Il. if. 31) 
T For an account of the Lord's descent as Vamana (the divine Dwarf) and His assuming a cosmic form (as Trivikrama) 
at the sacrificial performance of Bali, the celebrated demon king and a great devotee of the Lord, see Discourses XVIII-XX of 
Book VIII. 





Dis. 17 ] BOOK FIVE ~ ee! 


"We We Ss Be 
te HAA AA BAAR AA RARER RARER BRR RE RAE BEDALE AE RAL BE RARER LARA BEA BAER ALE SEAR ASE. SESE, ES We We 


it got coloured by its red pollen-like dust and thus acquired the virtue of wiping out by its very 
touch the dirt of sin of the whole world, itself remaining untouched by the sin, and was 
(thenceforth) expressly and directly called by the (sacred) appellation of "Bhagavatpadi 

(that which proceeds from the foot of the Lord Himself)—to the exclusion of other names 
(Jahnavi, Bhagirathi etc., suggesting other later and less momentous associations). (1) In 
the aforesaid realm indeed that foremost devotee of the Lord, Dhruva (the celebrated son 
of Uttanapada), steadfast in his vow (of devotion), bears (sprinkles) on his head even to this 
day (the water of) the (holy) Bhagavatpadi (later known as the Ganga) with supreme 
reverence, remembering that it has washed the lotus- foot of his family Deity, his heart deeply 
saturated with an incessant flow of constantly growing devotion, with tears of pure love 
escaping from his eyes—resembling a pair of lotus buds—half-closed in a fit of self- 
forgetfulness induced by ardent longing (for his beloved Lord), and the hair on his body 
standing on their end. (2) 


dd: Ua wae Naya at AY ava sicaftent faketaradt wrafa Gafart 


aegea SRA vietarren vrata Materia Yfedttarra Waera sa Wagar 
WETS SRA | 3 | aa tence ah fe aah ag cre a ae ee STATA 
aaraesd fraata x1 


Further on (in the next stages of the descent of this stream) the seven seers 
(responsible for the maintenance of the world order and having their abode immediately 
below the realm of Dhruva, where the seven stars of the Ursa major are located), who know 
the greatness of this (holy) stream, receive (sprinkle) it with great reverence even to the 
present day on the tuft of their matted locks—in the same way as the seekers of liberation 
would hail final beatitude coming to them (ina concrete form of its own accord), accounting 
it the supreme reward of their austerities—having spurned (all) other objects of human 
pursuit including Self-Realization, simply due to their having achieved the boon of 
unceasing devotion to Lord Vasudeva, the Soul of the universe. (3) Descending thence 
through the heavens (the passage of the gods), crowded with many billions of aerial cars, 
the stream washes the lunar sphere and comes down to the city of Brahma (on the summit 
of Mount Meru). (4) 

da aget fear aqiaiatayadayahwtearecd tetelatadan aittagita didletha-at 
AUS Gl Gat T Ade ataenlehtRyravaAsassx: Waa Weareayqsag 
Ufdrarattor waatgaad ureat fefer ancaquafiafastaig wa areaateauteraadit 
aa spate Hears aay: Urea fever akeatt wfasfai 1 war ara Wafer 
fet wefimfiofagitic avert cfavta aeeagam fimerafan 
CAR SAPS ANAS Moda UNaay av afarorent fefer srerfemafarafaerta 
wet Bre anresad: TH: We Ue syanentagarea thet 4 act uta | 8 1 Stat a Ael aaa 
ad ad ata agit dalfefiatedt: Sragt: | 20] 

Branching forth into four streams there, the Bhagavatpadi flows in four directions under 
four (different) appellations —Sita, Alakananda, Caksu and Bhadra —and (finally) enters the 
Ocean (the lord of streams and rivers). (5) Passing through the city of Brahma and gradually 
descending from the principal summits of one of the many mountains represented (in XVI. 
26 above) as so many filaments surrounding the pericarp-like Mount Meru, the Sita falls on 
the peaks of Mount Gandhamadana and, coursing through Bhadraswavarsa, enters the salt 
Ocean on the east. (6) Likewise, reaching Mount Malyavan and descending from it, the 
Caksu flows with unabated speed in the direction of (the land of) Ketumala and enters the 








502 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 17 


PRAAAAKAALLLAAEAEKLALERAALL LEAL ALLAAH ALLA HH HL HIE SES SET EGE SESE SES ST BE Be Be He Be Be He Be Hr Be Sr He Hr oy gy 


ocean on the west. (7) Descending from the summit of Mount Meru in a northerly direction 
and leaving one mountain-peak after another, the Bhadra flows from the peak of Srngavan 
in the direction of the northern Kurus and enters the ocean in the north. (8) Even so flowing 
to the south of Brahma's city (on Mount Meru) and passing through many a mountain-peak, 
the Alakananda reaches the mountain-range of Hemakuta and, rolling down from 
Hemakita to the peaks of the Himalaya mountain with a tremendous speed and coursing 
through Bharatavarsa, enters the ocean in the south. And for a man who goes forth to 
bathe in this river, the reward of ASwamedha, Rajastya and other (great) sacrifices 
becomes easy of access at every step. (9) There are in every Varsa (Subdivision of 
Jambudwipa) hundreds of other rivers, both big and small, having their source in Mount 
Meru and other mountains. (10) 


aaa undaa ad adaararas asiftt <ahion quasar drat tartoet 
sofeaieg) 89 WE GENT Gag eargqaator aera APTA ATTA 


adai221 at © tauda: ea: waturraanfseangeon: Padaqratan wei aca sar- 
SSTAAM ae ueidacuhre ayaa SAAR AAT ATACTSICTIVTAR 


WeilStetiaraatatie: etemaegyauun cHrach ete aelaenenacienlpertigea: Tat 
Teaexit 1 23 1 


Of (all) these Varsas, the learned declare Bharatavarsa alone as the land where a man 
can shape his destinies through actions. They speak of the other eight Varsas as the places 
for enjoying the fruit of such merit as still remains to be enjoyed by those who return from 
heaven (after exhausting the stock of merit which entitled them to a residence in that realm), 
and designate these as the celestial spots on earth. (11) The god-like men inhabiting these 
Varsas, live to an age of the thousand human years and are endowed with the strength of 
ten thousand elephants. The couples there are extremely happy with their adamantine 
frame, (never-failing) strength, (lasting) youth and (abundant) sense-delights, and are 
possessed of extraordinary venereal capacity; while the wives conceive only once and that 
too during the closing year of their life, which (also) marks the end of their (period of) sexual 
enjoyment. The conditions prevailing there are (throughout) the same as obtain in the Treta 
age (here). (12) Here indeed in the precincts of hermitages and the valleys of the principal 
mountains,forming the boundaries of these Varsas, with their picturesque woodlands 
looking (very) graceful on account of trees with their branches and the creepers supported 
by them bending low under the charming load of bunches of flowers, fruits and tender foliage 
of all seasons, as well asin the lakes of limpid water, resonant with the noise of swans, water- 
fowls, Karandavas, cranes and ruddy geese—ravished by the fragrance of diverse species 
of blooming young lotuses—and with the humming of various species of black bees, the 
lords of gods divert themselves at will with aquatic sports and various other amusements, 
the chiefs of their respective retinues adoring them with rich presents and their mind and 


eyes captivated with the dalliance, (winsome) smiles and playful glances, charged with love, 
of charming celestial ladies. (13) 


Taare SEY MTaHINTAU ATYSA: USM TaqUeTarHaaeyS aaa 
aireitae | 8 ¥ lyegd | War tas Us Wa Ga eta Ptfeter fa ara: Praha hare 
AMaAMd: CAMA CAVag aaa | Ve | 


| In all these nine Vargas Lord Narayana, the Supreme Person, remains personally 
= present in His (diverse) manifestations even today in order to shower His grace on His 





Dis. 17] BOOK FIVE a8 
pete te Re RARER REA Be Bt BCR RE Re BEBE BE BEE Re BeBe ee Hr ee Ree He He He Re Re Re ee He Re Re eR Re Be Be Be eR ee RR Re eR RE RE Be BE Be BBEB ReBEBERE BE Re He BEC BEM EES 
devotees (in the manner to be shown hereafter). (14) In Ilavrta, of course, the only male 
(available) is Lord Sankara (the Source of this universe); none else who is aware of the 
circumstances which led to the curse pronounced by (Lord Siva for the satisfaction of) 
Goddess Parvati (the divine Spouse of Siva, whose divine sports had been interrupted by 
the unannounced and hence unwelcome presence of sages in Her pleasance) dare enter 
this land. How a male attempting to enter it is transformed into a woman | shall narrate later 
on (in Book IX). (15) 
cal oy: 7 i : ; fa ; ; - rf ate 
plait: Asta aera Grarcakaahayury wa SaeTaa | VE | 

Waited upon by hosts of women, numbering billions and forming the retinue of Goddess 
Parvati, Lord Siva (the Source of the universe) adores (there) His own Cause, the fourth 
manifestation, presiding over destruction (the function of Tamoguna) and known by the 
name of Sankarsana, of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person)—appearing in four forms 
(Vasudeva, Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Sankarsana)—realizing His presence in the mind 
in the form of a conceptual image and muttering the following (prayer). (16) 


AMAA TATA 
So TAT WTA HSTGSMS VARVARA AANA AA Sher | V9 | 
Us WIVES WIT Het w WAIT 
Vata Whaat wae wr  wanranivamyieci 
7 Ga wanquianghrtiad arvatt  gerr 
et oa Asitargica met A aaa feritgeer ee 
aacet a8: wiht wraar aida Aearaadacitet: | 
a wmaetsen sfx fear area: wayicteftidtxar: 1201 
FATE Rafi fafuragtt SAAT TT: | 
4 ae faereifia aafafeard yausci yearn 22| 
Gea siete qofarer ver faamirear wart: fact 
arnsaisée 4 figat wadsrear ae aAaaraat gst e1 
Ud ad ae ast ner: fer: yet sa qaafad:! 
Tere andthe: gar ad  aaqweleaq 3! 
aRaftat meift aduduif arat watsd woredatted: 
a ae freon aa wet facatea ex 
sfy sStaerrad WeTGT TRAE Teas aA AAGMS ATA: | 391 


Lord Siva prays : "Hail, hail to the infinite Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), denoted 
by (the mystical syllable) OM, and manifesting all virtues though (Himself) unmanifest. (17) 
O adorable One! 1 adore You, the supreme Lord, whose lotus- feet afford shelter (to all), the 
highest Abode of all divine attributes (viz., universal lordship and omnipotence, piety of all 
kinds, entire glory, all wealth and splendour, omniscience and unattachment to everything) ! 
You have fully revealed before (Your) devotees Your divine form (that protects all created 
beings) and put an end to their rebirth; while You perpetuate (the bondage of) worldly 
existence in the case of those who are not devoted to You. (18) Who that seeks to subdue 
his senses would not esteem You, whose vision is not at all coloured by the objects of senses 











504 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA | [ Dis. 19 
Se Re Re Re Re Re eRe Re Ree Re Re Re RE RR RE RR ERE RE BR Re Be RR He Re Be Be BR eB Be Be Se Be Me Be He Re Re He Bee Se Ke we Se Bee Re Re Re Re Be He Be Be Re Me Pe He He or wy 


(which are products of the Gunas of Maya) nor by the activities of the mind—even though 
You witness all with a view to controlling everything—unlike our vision, who have not been 
able to curb the vehemence of wrath. (19) To him who looks upon the body (which has no 
reality whatsoever) as his own self, You appear through (Your own) Maya (deluding potency 
as though drunk, with Your eyes reddened by the use of spirituous liquor and distillates 
(toddy etc.). Nay, the wives of the Nagas (the denizens of Patala, the nethermost of the 
- subterranean regions) are unable to worship You through bashfulness, their mind bein 

excited (with love) at the very touch of Your feet. (20) The sacred texts (of the Vedas) declare 
You as responsible for the evolution, existence and dissolution of this universe, though 
beyond these states Yourself, eternal as You are. You never feel (the presence of) the 
terrestrial globe, lying like a mustard seed somewhere on the (sublime) base of Your 
thousand hoods. (21) Your very first manifestation, springing up from the three Gunas 
(modes of Prakrti) was (known as) Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), which 
(in the form of Citta or the faculty of ratiocination) is rooted in Sattva and which (when 
considered from the point of view of the Spirit presiding over it and visualized as one with 
the Supreme Deity) came to be known as Lord Brahma. (And) descended from him, | (Rudra) 
bring forth—through My own glory (in the form of Ahankara or the Ego), consisting of the 
three Gunas (because evolved from the Mahat-tattva, a product of the three Gunas)—the 
deities (presiding over the ten Indriyas and the mind) and the mind itself (that are Sattvika 
in character), the five gross elements (which are rooted in Tamas, being inert by nature) and 
the ten Indriyas (which are predominantly Rajasika). (22) Remaining under the control of the 
Supreme Person (in You) (and) unified (by the active principle in the shape of the vital airs) 
like birds held by a string, we all, viz., the Mahat-tattva, the ego, the deities mentioned above, 
the five gross elements and the Indriyas, evolve this creation by Your grace (alone). (23) 
Deluded by the objects of senses (which are the creation of the three Gunas), this Jiva (that 
is subject to birth and death) can never know (except by Your grace) the Maya (the principle 
of cosmic illusion) which has been conjured up by You and which subjects it to the bondage 
of Karma (action prompted by interested motives); much less can it know with any amount 
of ease the means of getting over that Maya. Moreover, the creation and dissolution (of the 


universe) are nothing apart from You (inasmuch and both these events take place in You). 
Therefore, obeisance to You !" (24) 


Thus ends the seventeenth discourse, in Book Five of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


rat Peek Peet BA 
SSE EEE ICS 


SIABTSST Sear: 


Discourse XVIII 
A description of (the various Varsas) of the terrestrial globe continued 
MYh SAI 
qa A MAA A Hep eIda: YPM warvaat aenarad argeaen frat a2 
enue eayrettrenat ator Mare aearerenhayor Sue |e | 


Sri Suka went on : Even so in Bhadragwavarsa a son of Dharma (the deity presiding 
over righteousness), Bhadrasrava by name (the ruler of this Varsa ) as wellas the chief men 





Dis. 18] BOOK FIVE -  wakndee esa 
of his retinue adore the favourite manifestation of Lord Vasudeva Himself, known by the 
name of Hayagriva—who is piety personified—realizing His presence through supreme 
concentration of mind while muttering the following prayer. (1) 
WRATH HY: 

3% AAT wad a arcaagneraray aa Stati 2 

stat fafat wnafeatd wd satsa fe fas sata 

eases fant fad fe ut faat fasitfaaiais 

achat fayd mad: wa agat usata areamefacr faufyad: | 

aaa qa dant ara dfafad pest adit aqix! 

fayal garantie a Wade patqeaqarga: | 

qed 4 fat cia amend waa afaked a aea:i4l 

aay ait Seo fete Tete Ss Fes fae: | 

Weed GQ maasttarad am anedsfaaafeara sfaig 

Bhadrasrava and his men pray : “Hail to the almighty Dharma—denoted by the 

mystical syllable OM—who purifies the mind !" (2) Oh, (how) marvellous are the doings of 
the Lord (Your Maya), deluded by which this Jiva fails to perceive Death (whokills all), though 
endowed with vision, when he desires to survive (even) after cremating his father and son 
(old and young), contemplating evil deeds in order to enjoy the carnal pleasures (which have 
no reality whatsoever) ! (3) The learned have spoken of the world as perishable; while those 
wise men who have realized the Self even perceive it as such (through deep concentration 
of mind). Yet are people deluded by Your Maya, O birthless one ! Highly wonderful are Your 
ways and | (simply) bow to You, the birthless Lord. (4) The functions of creation, preservation 
and dissolutions of the universe have been attributed (by the Vedas) to You, who are (really) 
anon-doer and unveiled (by Maya). This is (however) not (at all) surprising in Your case; for 
activity is (but) proper to You, who are everything (through Maya) and (therefore) the cause 
(the progenitor) of (all) effects; while, as a matter of fact, You are unconditioned (unveiled 
by Maya and therefore actionless). (5) Appearing in the form of a man-horse (a man with the 
head of a horse), it is You who rescued from the bottom of the ocean and restored to the 
supplicating Brahma (the first seer) the Vedas, that had been stolen away by the demon 
Madhu (who was ignorance personified) at the time of universal dissolution. (Therefore,) hail 
to You of unfailing resolve !" (6) 


ekad waft wareretedured agqureumaquiiuan ddad ad 
Hele AUIS ASTANA aclal tach cit Mt ch WI vite aha: Us lal SAAC AA alee aA 
Ue dgiqeaedied se Alelatha | 9 | 3 AAT Wad Adela AAeIsTedeTa siiferiasia aaa 
WS HAVA CHA Cea AH! WH Wa So talear staat yap Se eit c1 


Tara fayaet wet: Wetec ear wart fea fre fear 
Wy YR Usidleelast sarayadt AW wfaeeqenti et 
AMINeaniasaaneseyy_  #Wst ae Wievakway 4:1 
“a: wWorgra ukqs simay fasmaaa adttaafrea:igol 
aageet fddayd diet yg: dese fe aAraqi 
Resisa: mfaividisgst wr A a Aad ysecfamaqiees 





506 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18 


Me Be Re Re Re Re RRR RRR RR RR HR REM HT RTE RE RE ME EE HE BE ENE SSE We We Be We We We We Be We We Ve Ke Ke Ke He Vee He Wr We We Re Hr 





Sat 
geht wferivaaiart werttret aarad = At: 
Uae opal Rear aerate madt ate 1 221 
eh wernstay wifes weaunfka dradtitan 
feat Heiet ale aed YS dal Bera aaa say e3 | 
AAIFSNT MaMa AMS vas AeA, | 
fear ye )060OMeftamaret dere et p@cafafai ex 
Again, in Harivarsa the Lord abides in the form of Narahari (aman-lion). The circumstances 
that led Him to assume that (queer) form | shall relate later on (while narrating the story of 
Prahrada in Book VII). The great devotee, Prahrada, who is an abode of all good qualities 
inhering in exalted souls and whose virtue and (ideal) conduct brought sanctity to the (entire) 
race of the Daityas and Danavas, adores this form, beloved of him, through a course of 
uninterrupted and undivided devotion, alongwith the (other) people inhabiting that Varsa, 
and repeats the following (prayer):—(7) "Hail to Lord Narasimha, who is denoted by the 
mystical syllable OM ! Hail to the Light of all lights !! Fully reveal Yourself, O Lord with 
adamantine claws and adamantine teeth !!! Burn down, O burn down (our) latent desires (the 
seeds of future actions); swallow up, O swallow up (all) darkness (in the form of ignorance). 
We offer our worship to You, O Lord, O appear (in the horizon of) our mind in such a way 
as to make us fearless, to rid us of (all) fear Ksraum* !" (8) "May all be well with the world; 
may the wicked become gentle. May (all) living beings contemplate good to one another with 
their intellect and may their mind resort only to that which is good; and may our thought as 
well as the thought of others be fixed on You (Lord Visnu) without any motive (whatso- 
ever).(9) If there be (any) attachmentin our heart, let it be for the loving devotees of the Lord 
and on no account for (our) dwelling, wife, children, wealth and kinsmen. (For) he who is 
contented with the (bare) necessaries of life and self-possessed attains blessedness at no 
distant date, but not he who loves the objects of the senses. (10) Entering through the ears 
the mind of those who repeatedly listen to the purifying accounts of the exploits of Lord Visnu 
(the Bestower of Liberation) which possess a unique glory of their own and which one gets 
to hear in the company of such devotees—the birthless Lord takes away the impurities of 
their mind ! Who (then) would not resort to such devotees ? (11) In (the heart of) aman who 
is blessed with exclusive devotion to the Lord permanently dwell the gods with all (their) 
virtues. (But) how can the qualities of exalted souls exist in him who, far from being a devotee 
of the Lord, runs after the illusory objects of senses under the impulse of desire ? (12) As 
water is dear to the fish as their (very) life, Lord Sri Hari indeed is the (veritable) soul of all 
embodied beings.|gnoring Him, if a man, however great he may be, remains attached to his 
home, his greatness, then, is reduced to that type which couples claim in advanced age. (13) 
Therefore, renouncing the home—which is the root avidity (the thirst for pleasures), 
attachment, grief, anger, pride, longing (for another's wife and wealth etc.), fear, wretchedness 


and mental anguish and, as such perpetuate the cycle of births and deaths —take refuge in 
the feet of Lord Nrsimha, the only safe retreat." (14) 


eqs war ami cen: frafasttar wade fequr arom 
Testi TOMEI Aa wut wemEuneraasaersaare faeaet 
oma: daenird fata ey ata aafeanfatacratactads fareraegracirh- 
cietaie agai at ynu sey ate feat sre Tar THA A aTOT TAA | VE TATA 


* A mystical syllable sacred to Lord Nrsirmha. 





Dis. 18 ] BOOK FIVE ~ 507 


she tr Be Be BERTH HE MERE Me Me BeBe BEES Ke He Me We Be Re Re Me Be Me Me we eM Re ee RAR Re ee Rea Re Re Re ea REE AR ER REE ER REE REE REE ME Ree HEME He BEBE SENE 





* 


HaHa WS UTTAR TAT Set era TTY wares fg PTAA: AS ad Pe UTA 
gd Araletia | 891 So Bt StS soul sad aera Bayurfaprafa cardia SEH ata 
aan Get ATS ATA HATS HATA AHA SHAT FAL VC 
So in Ketumalavarsa the Lord stays in the form of Kamadeva (Pradyumna) with intent ~ 
to please Goddess Laksmi (His own divine consort) as well as the daughters (the female 
deities presiding over nights) and sons (the deities presiding over days)—the rulers of that 
Varsa—of Samvatsara (the deity presiding overa year, a Lord of created beings), (severally) 
numbering 36,000 (as many as there are days and nights comprising the full span of human 
life, viz., a hundred years). The embryos born in the womb of the former (the daughters of 
Sarhvatsara), whose mind gets frightened by the (dazzling) brilliance of the mighty weapon 
(the discus Sudarsana) of Lord Visnu (the supreme Person), perish at the end of a year and 
get discharged in a lifeless state. (15) By the elegance of His lotus face, lovely with the 
shapely arches of His brows, which are slightly raised on account of His playful glances 
accompanied with a winsome smile—which in its turn is embellished with the charm of His 
highly graceful gait—He brings excessive joy to Goddess Rama (who is His other Self) and 
(thereby) delights His own senses. (16) Accompanied by the daughters of Prajapati 
Sarmvatsara during nights and by their spouses (the deities presiding over days) during the 
daytime, Goddess Rama waits upon the aforesaid manifestation of the Lord, an embodiment 
of His own will (or creative energy), by recourse to supreme concentration of mind and 
repeats the following (prayer):—(17) "Hram ! Hrim !! Hram !!!* Hail to Lord HrsikeSa (the 
Controller of the senses), denoted by the mystic syllable OM, distinguished by (all) 
extraordinary qualities, the Ruler of (all) the organs of action and the senses of perception, 
as well as of the (four) aspects of the internal senses (viz., the intellect, the ego, the 
understanding and the mina) including their functions and objects, who is manifested in the 
form of the sixteen limbs of a subtle body (viz., the mind and the ten Indriyas and the five 
subtle elements), who is Veda personified, who in the form of food sustains the physical 
body, who is immortality (final beatitude) itself, nay, whois everything and whois the fountain 
of (all) strength’of mind, the potency of the Indriyas and physical strength. Hail to You, (our) 
beloved Lord, Love personified, both here and hereafter." (18) 
frat aaear Biwenvat adl wed cite ulaaenadsayi 
aa wz a & wukoeet fet emis adiseqaar:12ei 
a & ula: wlepda: wa aada: ait wart S74 


@ wa wade feet sa warned Aad W120! 
a am a UWeealeceu  famacnkacamemeds! 
ata Ueiftaadiftadishadt «SaaS Ta WTA RR I 


TATA ASAT AT AeA 3a aa Ufsatera: | 
=i waren wt faeme wmaayea adisist1 221 
ao mmereqa vifet ated mie areata Acaay 
fault ui men awa net wm gyaredfeddied fayftfri 23 


* The Tantras mention a number of mystical syllables (Bija-Mantras) whose utterance is believed to possess a unique 
Power to propitiate and reveal certain deities. Hram, Hrim and Hrum are three such syllables well-known for their efficacy to 
Please a number of gods and goddesses. They are obviously intended here to propitiate Lord Pradyumna (who is Love 


PErsonified). 








508 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18 


PERERA RE RR ERR ERE RE ER MERE REP He MERE He SE SM SRE AE HE EAE ES EE EB SE SE SRR He He A He HE He Me He He gy 


"Women (maids) in this world desire (to obtain) another man as a husband by Propitiating 
Yourself, the very Director of the senses, through sacred vows (of various kinds). They (the 
earthly husbands obtained by them) are surely unable to protect the beloved offspring, 
wealth and life of these women, since they (the husbands) are anything but independent 
(themselves). (19) He alone is a master in the real sense, who has no fear from any quarter 
himself and is able to protect on all sides a person stricken with fear. You are the only lord 
(answering these qualifications),since You account no other joy higher than the realization 
of Your own blissful nature. Otherwise (if Your joy depended on others, You would be far from 
independent and in the event of there being a number of independent rulers) there would 
be fear from one another. (20) (Again,) she who exclusively desires to adore the lotus-feet 
of such a lord in You succeeds in attaining all the objects of her desire (and yet enjoys the 
fame of being a disinterested devotee). If, on the other hand, You are worshipped (by a 
woman) and approached with a longing to secure from You her sought for boon, You 
bestow (on her) that boon alone, with the result that on the said object of her longing being 
destroyed (in course of time) she feels much afflicted, O Lord ! (21) (Even) Brahma (the 
birthless creator), Lord Siva (the all-powerful), gods (like Indra), demons and the like, 
whose mind is attached to the objects of senses, practise severe austerities for winning 
me (my grace), but fail to secure me—barring him who is devoted to You—inasmuch as 
my heart is fixed on You (alone), O invincible Lord ! (22) Be pleased, O immortal Lord, to 
place on my head Your adorable lotus-like hand, which You have (so often) placed on the 
head of devotees. (I certainly enjoy Your esteem in that) You bear me by way of an emblem 
(in the form of a golden streak) on Your (blessed) bosom, O adorable one ! (Yet | am 
deprived of Your grace, which is the exclusive privilege of devotees —an anomaly which 
lam unable to understand. This is, however, no cause for wonder; for) who can (hope to) 
divine the raison d'etre of whatever is wrought by Your Maya (deluding potency), 
omnipotent as You are?" (23) 

Wai ot aad: add Aaa Tee Sas AAT: Wravefetd a garttafa wear 
Matas Melete | WY 1 So AAT wWrad Weaaara AA: Aras YWrunrdisia Wea 
acta Asa Aa sft i 2& | 

And in Ramyakavarsa, the (present) Manu (Sraddhadeva, a son of the sun-god, known 
by the name of Satyavrata in the sixth or Caksusa Manvantara) the ruler of that Varsa adores 
even now with an unceasing flow of great (exclusive and disinterested) devotion, the most 
beloved form of the Lord—the form of the Divine Fish—revealed to him before (at the end 
of the Caksusa Manvantara,* when the three worlds were inundated by the ocean), and 
repeats the following (prayer):— (24) "Hail to the Lord as revealed in His very first descent 
(on the material plane) and denoted by the mystical syllable OM ! Hail to Him who is an 
embodiment of Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), and who is the very life-giving 
principle as well as (the source of) the potency of the Indriyas, the strength of mind and 
physical strength (too) !! Hail to the great (divine) Fish !!!" (25) 

i ; faateqoas: | 
Wa grata A gd Avista ger arena ae: feraqi2e| 
a cieeuret: fort aeawent fear aaaisf gee wat ut 
Tq «4 wiefgueyaque: uigd wry wax eyatizel 
vary aiteta sitfatt avitfianiefirdteeat ffir 
Wal Pele HAAS Sista AST sorTMAY AR shri 2c! 


* For the story connected with the Lord's descent as the divine Fish vide Discourse XXIV of Book VIII. 








Dis. 18 ] BOOK FIVE 509 


ey te HME RTE MERE REMC IESE SESE SESE SEER MMe Me Me He Hee He He Me Me Ae Me ae Hr Bre Me We Re We Mee Me Me Mee Re Re Re Re RE RE RE RE RE REE RE RE OBR ME Me OREM REDE ME RE eMC HE 


"Though Your form IS unseen by (remains hidden from the view of) all the guardians of 
the spheres (Brahma and others). You move about (in the form of the vital airs) within and 
(as the atmospheric air) without (all living beings), making a loud noise (in the form of the 
Vedas and thereby proclaiming Your existence). You are that (supreme) Ruler who has 
brought this universe under control by means of (various) denominations (such as the 
Brahmana, which serve as a basis for the varied injunctions and interdictions of the 
scriptures), even as a showman controls a wooden puppet (by a wire). (26) Suffering from 
the fever of jealousy, the guardians of the (different) spheres (Indra and others) were unable 
without You (the life-giving Principle) to protect the bipeds or quadrupeds, the mobile or the 
immobile creatures—{in short,) whatever is seen in this world—in Spite of their striving 
severally as well as unitedly. (27) Holding (by a cord) this earth—a storehouse of annual 
plants and creepers (etc.) —including myself (then known as Satyavrata) You, the birthless 
Lord, sported far and wide with (great) vigour in the ocean, that was, at the time of universal 
dissolution tumultuous with waves. Hail to such a Lord, the (inner) Controller of the 
multitudes of animate beings !" (28) 


feconaste wamattaata qd fauna aftwaast aqadar ae adged: 
fagronfectrecenata watt urpmfaiee: 2 wa wad amon 
Ad ara oar aoa acta AAT ASOt AAT Wl AA AAISACATATA AAA | 30 | 
In Hiranmayavarsa, again, the Lord resides in (lit., having assumed) the form of the 
(Divine) Tortoise. Alongwith the denizens of this subdivision of the earth, Aryama, the lord 
of the hosts of manes, adores that most beloved manifestation of the Lord, and repeats this 
prayer:—(29) “Hail, hail to You, the divine Tortoise, denoted by the mystical syllable OM and 
possessed of a form consisting entirely of Sattvaguna, whose position is not open to 
perception (because of Your staying under water)! Hail to the most ancient one !! Hail to the 
omnipresent Lord !!! Hail, hail to the Support of all !!!!" (30) 
Agoda taal ageueluds | 
der 2a Gerard dat AMedseuegreafasr 32 | 
. x ttf. ° Gray calatagydaraay I 
at: wa fafa: vieraicaqsdiuneedefrta  we:132! 


ohare rafagraarraatch ct calatst: cHleudary | 
den awa aremadiad am wa: aeitagta a giti33! 


"The objective world, manifested as it is by Your own Maya (creative energy) and 
observed in multitudinous forms, but whose extent cannot be correctly estimated because 
Of its being falsely perceived, is (as a matter of fact) Your own manifestation (nothing apart 
from You). Your (essential) form, however, cannot be described (in words). Hail to You as 
Such ! (31) It is You alone that are called by the name of amammal a sweat-born creature, 
an Oviparous being, a plant, a mobile or immobile creature, a god, a Rsi (a superior class 
Of human beings endowed with preternatural vision or clairvoyance), a Pitr (mane), an evil 
Spirit, the world of the senses, the heaven-world (the celestial regions), the aerial world (the 
Space intervening between heaven and earth and inhabited by beings endowed with an 
aerial body), the earth, a mountain, a river, an ocean, a Dwipa (one of the principal divisions 
Of the terrestrial world), a heavenly body or planet, a star (and so on). (32) Even though You 


POSsess a numberless (endless) variety of names, forms and shapes, yet a (specified) 
Number of eateconae Bes twenty-four) has been assumed in You by seers (like the divine 
Kapila). The knowledge of Truth by means of which this number (plurality) is set aside is no 








510 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 18 


AHAAAAAAAAAAAALAAAAAAAAAAL ARAL LAA ALAA AA ASSLT AA TT Reg 


other than You, the embodiment of true wisdom. Hail to You !" (33) 

SRE WU HEY Wary ayeu: Hdatead set ad q cat Ca y: ag 
Horncaeamtatariianaa gat A UTATquMaaatadaida! avi So AAT amad 
TAS la Ueda AeeEATAAaTS ASTYo aT AA: HALAS AQUA AAT! By 1 

In the land of the northern Kurus (the subdivision of the terrestrial world known by this 
name) the Lord presiding over sacrifices dwells (is worshipped) in the form of the divine Boar. 
Alongwith the Kurus (the denizens of this subdivision) this Goddess Earth (that serves as 
our abode) adores Him through an incessant flow of unfaltering devotion and repeats the 
following supremely esoteric prayer:—(34) "Hail to the divine Boar, denoted by the mystical 
syllable OM, truly known (only) through the Mantras (sacred texts of the Vedas), the Deity 
presiding over sacrifices both without and with a sacrificial post, (nay,) whose (divine) Body 
is constituted of the (varieties of) great sacrifices ! (vide Ill. xiii. 38) ! Hail to the Supreme 
Person !! Hail to You who (in the form of a sacrificer) are pure* of actions, and who manifest 
Yourself (in the form of sacrifices) only in the (last) three Yugas."t (35) 


aa wed maa faufvadr qe aefaa wddx 
Haid wat wre fegaar qe fasta gitar 36 
FAH aoa Aa TOl aed retary 
STAN AAS Tia yranaegl a wedararg aa ar AA: 1 391 
aud  fagateattdaned areitad aftacdifarqect: | 
Tea aeMeal wad aes We AME WorHnarfavri 3c 
Waa aa wWidanot yer a At tarear wtafaqet| 
Hamas imgead: wmisttay: wore a fafa 3e 
Sd AAEPTAd ATT TRAC Alea TAA YATHIMANT AATETSRS PATA: 1 8o I 


"Even as those well-versed in rituals churn out the fire hidden in pieces of (sacrificial) 
wood with the help of the fire-producing wooden stick, so the wise, keen to perceive Your 
reality, obscured by (attachment to) actions and their fruits, try to discover it (as the all- 
pervading self) in the discipline of their body and senses etc., (which are products of matter) 
with the help of (their) discriminating mind (reason). Hail to You who reveal Yourself through 
this process (of chastening the body and senses). (36) By them whose intellect has become 
capable of keen discernment through reflection as well as through (the practice of) the (eight) 
limbs of Yoga (Yama, Niyama and so on). You, the Supreme Self, are truly and directly 
perceived alongwith (as distinguished from) the attributes of Maya (Prakrti), viz., the gross 
elements, the organs of action, the senses of perception, the all-powerful Kala (the Time- 
Spirit) and the doer (the ego). Hail to You as such and hail to You, whose form is not the 
creation of Maya (Prakrti) ! (37) Even as a piece of iron moves due to (the very presence Of) 
a loadstone, turning its face towards the latter, Your Maya carries on through the three Gunas 
(Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) the creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe— 
sought after (by You for the evolution of the Jivas) though not desired (by You for Your own 
" * The Lord Himself declares in the Bhagavadgita that the performance of sacrifices and the practice of charity and 
austerities are conducive to purity— 

. am er aaa cents asifron | (XVIII. 5) 


T That is because no sacrifices are performed in the first Yuga, the Satyayuga or because according to another 
interpretation, the Lord remains unmanifest in Kali age. 





Dis. 19] BOOK FIVE ott 


We Ve Ve Fe GOW Me We We We Ve Me He 
ge te CA MEME ITN SERRE RR RRM BRE MEH Hee HE ME MEH ae a eee: eee He We Re Me Ree Re Re MEER MERC HM MRE CACM Me SEACH HEME MEME 





ake)—Y ourself remaining a mere looker-on. Hail to You, the Witness of (all that is evolved 
from) the (three) Gunas as well as of the Karmas (of the various Jivas) ! (38) | bow to that 
omnipotent Lord who, having assumed the form of the divine Boar, the Cause of the 
universe, and placing me on the end of Your tusk, emerged, through the entire depth of the 
Deluge water, from its very bottom, sporting like an elephant after crushing to death in an 
encounter the demon (Hiranyaksa) who stood (before Him) as a rival elephant." (39) 


Thus ends the eighteenth discourse entitled "A description of the terrestrial world” 
in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


Sic Pact ts 
ODODE EE ESOS 


ST NenAafayirs sara: 


Discourse XIX 
The description of Jambidwipa concluded 
Aya sara 

foamed ad wraatafaqee Menuet Grass UH eT ih aad: WANT 

etal, He faretfaraufadeured 121 svar we wWerdwtaaamt wana 

eq WTaAcH aM AA ANU CaaS AS Mala | 2 1 SOA Wiad SAYS hla AA Saag UMA 

wy sufstfararcaa surladettenra AA: MealahiH AU A Ae VAC ara As qe aa Assia 

Wa sia 3 

Sri Suka continued : In Kimpurusavarsa that foremost devotee of the Lord, Hanuman, 
who takes great pleasure in remaining by the side of his Lord's feet, adores with unremitting 
devotion, alongwith the Kimpurusas (the denizens of that Varsa), the most ancient Person 
in the form of Lord Sri Rama, elder Brother of Laksmana and the Delighter (Beloved) of 
Sité.(1) (There) accompanied by Arstisena ( a chief denizen of the Varsa), he listens with 
great interest the most auspicious story of his divine Lord, sung by the Gandharvas and 
himself repeats the following (prayer):—(2) “Hail to the glorious Lord (Sri Rama), denoted 
by the mystical syllable OM ! Hail to Him who Is possessed of noble characteristics and an 
ideal character and conduct ! Hail to Him who fully disciplined His self (and) followed the 
wishes of the people ! Hail to Him who is the (very) touch stone of reputation for goodness 
Hail to the Lord who is resplendent with His devotion to the Brahmana race ! Hail to the 


Supreme Person in the form of a great Ruler !" (3) 
AMgwalyararanch tacsta CATT ATARTT 
uae Wt «= afearoaersa aaaed fm wei 
qafammieae aeifat «=tataeraa 4 act = fait: 
Harssaet eaTeA: TA SIA: eter AANA 1 & | 
= a a mmessaat YEN: Tadhtactaat Wary Arges: | 
4 wind omeneygaia A wen arta «= fererqrefa i & 








512 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


BOWER Ree RR RRR Re RR RR Re ROR HOM RR ee SE Re We We We We Me Mee We ee Ree ee ee eee eee ee ee ee BORER MERE He He He Re He Hew g 
een ee aaa a ee tt 8 


4 A ved 4 Met a ae 4 ahaaipianived: 
Sdiggsmfa oat oadimaydant Pet ad Aen: 11 
Suisg amar arnt WW: Wale a: Updcqqday! 
aid WH wnat eft 8 saUdtacnlacnbaathiaic 


"! resort to Him who is of the nature of pure Consciousness, the only entity, who has by 
His own divine energy (that constitutes His very being) distanced His potency known by the 
name of Maya (consisting of the three Gunas), (nay,) who is other than this objective world 
and perfectly serene, who can be realized (only) by those possessed of a pure mind, and 
who transcends all (material) names and forms and is (absolutely) egoless. (4) The descent 
of that omnipotent Lord in a human semblance on this earth is really intended to teach 
mankind (the ways of the great) and not merely to exterminate the demon race (which could 
be done by His mere will) ! Otherwise how could there be any woes caused by (separation 
from) Sita (His divine Spouse) to the supreme Lord, the Soul of the universe, revelling in His 
own (blissful) nature ? (5) He is the same as Lord Vasudeva (the abode of the whole 
universe)—the greatest friend, (nay,) the very Self of (all) wise men*— not (in the least) 
attached to (anything in) the three worlds. He could not (therefore) give way to infatuation 
occasioned by (separation from) His Consort nor could He abandon (send into exile) 
Laksmanat (except in order to teach the world the ways of the great). (6) Indeed neither 
pedigree nor physical charm nor eloquence nor intellectual calibre nor (again) race (the 
species of life in which one is born) is conducive to the pleasure of that Supreme being; for 
lo ! Sri Rama (elder brother of Laksmana) admitted to His friendship even us, wild beasts 
(monkeys), bereft of all these (qualifications) ! (7) Therefore, whether a god or a demon, a 
monkey or a human being—whatever one may be—one should resort (for protection) with 
allone's being to the noblest Sri Rama—Lord Sri Hari Himself in human semblance —who 
is supremely conscious of services done to Him and who (while returning to His divine Abode 
at the end of His pastime on earth) led to Heaven (all) the people of north Kosala." (8) 


ads at wee 8 8 86sarHcomaqufaaedtarmarragaatu- 
Waa eae ah ae |86ddisaadtayetaie! ad water 
SUT AHS aT: UST Tara ATA TA WATS Ta aU Aa SUS aa: 
Uaiadwaduetid sé uUiliwonfaigo!| 3% ART wad susTAsteramaMieaa 
THistesama me AUT uwHdaaa sien zat 
Wa siti 221 Mata aeq— 





~ The Lordis, in fact, the friend as well as the Self of all embodied souls without distinction; yet He is spoken of here as 
the friend and the Self of wise men in the sense that it is the wise alone who recognize Him as such. 

T We are told in the Ramayana that Lord Sri Rama was once closeted witha messenger of the gods Laksmana guarded 
the entrance under orders of the Lord, who had strictly warned him not to enter the room himself nor allow anyone else to do 
So under any circumstance, adding that anyone who did so would be beheaded by Him. Meanwhile the irascible sage Durvasa 
appeared on the scene and peremptorily demanded that the Lord should at once be apprised of his presence, threatening to 
curse Him if Laksmana declined to do so. Laksmana preferred to be killed by his divine Brother rather than invite the sage’s 
curse on Him and informed the Lord of his arrival. The sage was then ushered into the Lord's presence and respectfully 
dismissed after being duly entertained. The Lord now felt very miserable when He thought of the terrible fate which awaited 
Laksmana, and remained mute. He then summoned His counsellors and invited their opinion, whereupon the sage Vasistha 
exhorted Him to exile Laksmana, which was as good as beheading him. The Lord accepted the advice of His preceptor and 
did accordingly. 





pis. 19] | BOOK FIVE 513 
SERS SESE REE SERRE RRC AEB REA EE EECA AER REREAD ME EMER AE BERET 


coatet unifey at a meat 4 gad endef Stars 
wet amiga «net saitsaaafefererarfiact 1 e2 | 
safe ativar aqui fewenif marae aC | 
aedeatet caf Prot mt sae aefidierquencrar: 123 | 
aaicerafitercnmenme: ae any Paar | 
Mgt fae Gavan wee ac: a 
wt Wt oto pectanfiat «= saameeargeaareltersi 
Rr Sey ad yefiat fae at wit a: eerafthri eu 


Again, In order to shower His grace (by setting a noble example) on those who have 
controlled their mind, the Lord compassionately practises in Bharatavarsa (in the holy retreat 
of Badarikasrama)—under the name of Nara-Narayana, till the end of the Kalpa, His 
movements remaining unperceived—austerities, which, while enhancing one's religious merit, 
enlightenment, aversion to the pleasures of sense, Yogic power, self-control and freedom from 
egotism, (eventually) lead to Self-Realization. (9) Intending to instruct savarni (one of the 
prospective Manus, who is going to preside over the next or eighth Manvantara) in the 
Paficaratra Agama (describing the greatness of the Lord) as well as in (the principles of) 
Sankhya (the process of realizing God as identical with oneself) and Yoga (the process of union 
with the Lord as distinct from oneself) as taught by the Lord (Himself) in Srimad Bhagavadgita, 
the glorious Narada, along with the people of Bharatavarsa, who follow the rules of Varnasrama 
(the division of society into four Varnas or grades and four ASramas or stages in life), adores the 
Lord (Nara-Narayana) with a feeling of supreme devotion and repeats the following 
(prayer):—(10) "Hail to the Lord, denoted by the mystical syllable OM, who is given to self- 
control and is (absolutely) free from the attributes of body and senses etc., (which are other than 
the Self) ! Hail to Nara-Narayana, the foremost of sages, the wealth of those who have nothing 
(to call their own) !! Hail, hail to the supreme Teacher of ascetics of the highest order and the 
Lord of those who revel in the Self !!!" (11) Again, he sings the following (praises):—‘Hail to 
Him who, though the Maker of this (universe), does not get bound to the functions of creation 
etc., (by recognizing Himself as the doer), who though invested with a body, is not affected by 
the attributes of a body (hunger, thirst and so on) and whose vision, though He is all-seeing, 
is not tainted by the qualities (of that which He sees)—(to sum up,) who is (absolutely) 
unattached, pure and a (mere) witness. (12) Indeed here in, O Master of Yoga, lies the 
proficiency in Yoga (mind-control), of which the glorious Brahma (who was born of a golden 
lotus sprung from the navel of Lord Visnu) has spoken, viz., that, having given up (all) 
identification with the body, one should concentrate one's mind on You, who are beyond the 
modes of Prakrti (all material phenomena), at the last moment (of one's life) through (the 
Practice of) Devotion (continued from one's very birth). (13) (All) effort (in the direction of 
attaining wisdom through learning and other means) is mere (fruitless) labour on the part of 
him who, though learned (well-versedin the scriptures) is afraid of the loss of (his) contemptible 
(frail) body (even) like him (an ignorant person) who Is addicted to the pleasures of this world 
aS well as of that (the other world), and anxious about his sons, wife and possessions. (14) 
Therefore, administer You to us that (supreme) remedy in the form of loving devotion to You, 
whereby we may (be able to) shake off soon, O Lord who are beyond Sense-perception, the 
feeling of 'l' and 'mine' with respect to this contemptible (material) body, which (feeling) is so 
difficult to renounce, occasioned as it is by Your Maya (deluding potency)." (15) 


urasuafery at after: wht sweat Herat HAcINeM AaeehaRe IM: sem: 








514 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 19 


ee er We We Wr We Te Me We Ye ey Wy We We Wy AY We We We WY cee eEEETEOEOEEOevv EH HA a Be rg 


levi: Ta eae eah: sigtel ag|t Ae al alan fares: VERA AT: UTaray 
Auifaaper asta: HEA Weare sanie: HARA ara a yrs: 
SOTAGT AATNAT Al AIT PASTA: 18 G | CATT AN: SST ATA Gaara 
SUIS | Vio | AKAM ATH StaSreal Paate aelaat Hrat aunt watt yeh wera 
Teva PUT svar inet Marat Pfa-ear wareait aat Tar Tea AAT aH Tat Paeyreer: 
UY Vek Aaa THAT vgvaurm Asagen faded sifaent favatt wera: 1 ec 
sfaaa at qetcianmty: yacncleda wavs canelt HAUT T 1 
aged Sie sqyeu val Wa Va facia aarauifasauerivarhs wats 1% 1 arse 
Wald AdyaeraeaisMeadseat UATaH ATA Sa SAA RTA TT aTUTT 
AMMifasataa-at-eAgur dar fe Aelqeayeawag: | Ro | 
In this Bharatavarsa too there are a number of rivers and mountains, viz., Malaya, 
Mangalaprastha, Mainaka, Trikuta, Rsabha, KUutaka, Kollaka, Sahya, Devagiri, Rsyamtka, 
Srigaila, Venkata, Mahendra, Varidhara, Vindhya, Suktiman, Rksagiri, Pariyatra, Drona, 
Citrakita, Govardhana, Raivataka, Kakubha, Nila, Gokamukha, Indrakila and Kamagiri, and 
other hundreds and thousands of mountains and there are countless big and small rivers 
flowing from their sides. (16) The people of Bharatavarsa touch with their body too the water 
of these rivers, which purify them by their very names. (17) Candravasa Tamraparni, 
Avatoda, Krtamala, Vaihayasi, Kaveri, Veni, Payaswini, Sarkaravarta, Tungabhadra, Krsna, 
Venya, Bhimarathi, Godavani, Nirvindhya; Payosni, Tapi, Reva, Surasa, Narmada Carmanvati 
(and) Sindhu, two big rivers—Andha (Brahmaputra) and Sona (Sone)—-Mahanadi, Vedasmnrti, 
Rsikulya, Trisama, Kausiki, Mandakini, Yamuna, Saraswati, Drsadvati, Gomati, Sarayu, 
Rodhaswati Saptavati, Susoma, Satadriu, Candrabhaga, Marudvrdha, Vitasta, Asikni (and) 
Viswa are (the names of) the principal rivers. (18) It is by men born in this Varsa alone that 
manifold states of existence—celestial, human and infernal—are earned for the soul 
through actions of a Sattvika, Rajasika and Tamasika character respectively, performed by 
themselves; for all forms of existence can be attained by all according to (the quality of) their 
actions and final beatitude can also be achieved (by them) by discharging (in a disinterested 
spirit) the duties prescribed for each Varna or grade of society—final beatitude, which 
consists in an incessant flow of motiveless devotion to Lord Vasudeva, the Supreme Spirit, 
the Inner Controller of all living beings, who is free from partiality (and prejudice etc.), is 
beyond the range of speech and has nothing to rest on. It appears only when (the rare 
privilege of) close (loving) association with the servants of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person) 


is had, which (again) is possible only when the knot of ignorance, the occasion for the various 
States of (mundane) existence, is cut asunder. (1 9-20) 





Uded fe car Maha — 
sel atdtet foment yer wast wat fised wae aft: 
aia ret TY Us ecadratech wer fe 1221 
fe gett: 9 omditetadatfefrat aaa 9 we 
7 Wt AeUTerssyfa: § waprfrerafxaterar 221 
CISC CURR CIC GC CIC GEM ICL ECC tc cee 
Aut Ast had Aafea: Woe Maeavs we 2t:1231 





. ZY ate 
Dis. 19 ] BOOK FIV 515 
sqgsteteUneturny GI Cer Ttt Terre TTT TT eTenU Tere tnrNeE Teer nerereTeTnE ne teen eeeree te 


eg Fl “SQ vSR AAEM Tt aeat = wnradreterstar: | 
1 TA SAAS Teaa: Areca + A aA Aaa ew! 
wet fetid fag a a wat wafrarmererceyarl | 
Ta aera & et ater ga aha aerqieul 
The gods too extol human life (as follows):"Oh, what meritorious deed was performed 
(in a previous birth) by them—or it may be that Sri Hari was pleased with them of His own 
accord (through His own compassionate nature, sucha meritorious deed being most difficult 
to perform,)—who have secured (the rare boon of) birth among human beings in the land 
of Bharatavarsa—(the only birth) suitable for the service of Lord Sn Visnu (the Bestower of 
Liberation), (and therefore) coveted (but not attained) even by us ! (21) What has been 
gained by us through sacrificial performances, austerities and (other) sacred vows, (practice 
of) charity and other (meritorious) acts, so difficult to perform, or even through the fruitless 
attainment ot heaven (earned through those meritorious acts), where one gets no opportunity 
for the remembrance of Bhagavan Narayana, which is eliminated due to excessive 
gratification of the senses ? (22) (Nay,) securing (birth in) the land of Bharatavarsa on the 
part of men with a short span of life is preferable to the attainment of the abode (the spheres 
higher than Indra's heaven, viz., Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and Satyaloka or Brahmaloka) 
of those who live for a (whole) Kalpa (the lifetime of the three worlds, covering a thousand 
revolutions of the four Yugas, or 4,32,00,00,000 human years)—an abode which leads to 
rebirth (after one has enjoyed one's allotted span of life there). For, offering (to the Lord) the 
actions done in the course of an instant (even) with their mortal body, wise men (in this land) 
attain to the fearless Abode of Sri Hari. (23) That region—be it the abode of Brahma (the 
highest ruler of the gods) himself—should in no case be resorted to, where streams of nectar 
in the shape of the stories of Lord Visnu do not flow, where there are no pious devotees of 
the Lord, living on those nectarean streams and where there are no sacrificial performances 
intended to propitiate Lord Visnu (the Lord of sacrifices) and accompanied with grand 
festivities (in the shape of sacred music and dancing etc.). (24) Those Jivas (embodied 
souls), however, who do not strive to secure immunity from rebirth (even) after attaining birth 
in the human race—fully equipped with knowledge (discrimination), capacity for actions 
leading to knowledge and substances helpful to such activities—all into bondage again like 
wild birds (disentangled from the fowler's net, yet carelessly sporting on the same tree where 


they were once entrapped). (25) 
3: srga aféfe unen atten fattraade: 
Un: yaerahngd Yel Yella Wr: TaaATTAT «WY 1 2G 1 
ae fegrafeiaafidr yor Aareter  aeqafeiar aa 
cag 0 fer aeoaftreoriterd = Pretareteeta 29 1 
aaa 7: wigeravifd fare qart prSt WTA 
aay qa: wag as ehdesat wt atic 
; ; es , Agni and so on) by the people of 
Invok fices under diverse names (Indra, A¢ 7 
Bhgretavaiset the aan | ord—who is (not only) perfect (in every respect) but who is the 
estower of (all) blessings (sought for by men)—Himself gladly accepts (nay, eats) the 
Oblations set apart (for different gods) in (due) proportions and poured into the sacrificial fire 
for being SeRCR to those gods) with reverence according to the correct procedure, while 


iti ity invoked) and with (particular) regard to 
ecitin nsecrated to the deity invo | 
sis aioe tabiee saa in the case Of different gods). (26) True, the Lord grants men's 








516 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 29 


We Be Bee Re Ve Pe eM Ke eR Re RE EH Wee We Re Re Re Re RY eRe Rea eR Re ROR Me Re Me Re He Re Ke Re We Hee He He He We He He SS SES MRE eR HR HHH Hayy, 


ah ener Tr a ey 


prayer, (when) implored by them; but certainly He does not confer the real boon (on SUCh 
men) as (is evident from the fact that) their supplication Is renewed (not long) after their 
prayer is granted. To them (however) who adore Him, seeking nothing (of Him), He 
vouchsafes (reveals) of His own accord His own lotus-feet, which satiate (one's) longings 
(for all time). (27) If there is (any) religious merit—following from a good sacrifice dy 
performed, a religious discourse properly delivered or (any other noble) act done by us (in 
a previous existence)—still left (to our credit) after (enjoying) the pleasures of heaven, oO, 
let us be blessed with an incarnation in the Ajanabhavarsa“ (Bharatavarsa), endowed with 
(the) consciousness (that Sri Hari alone is worthy of adoration), inasmuch as (we know that) 
Sri Hari extends (His) blessing (grace) to those who worship Him. (28) 
Myh Java 
agin UT Usieqagisl ta safest amiesigaraao gat vel afta 
Praaksedanierar | 231 daa ving Bada WAU WaCERUT: Usa: 
fagct Sta! 301 Ue da UIA SHgiaadfaurn aarudsrTatuted sft Be t 
Sf SETTaAd ASTI WAGE Alea TAA Tega WAH APAMS EAs: | 2S | 

Sri Suka went on : Some (wise men), O king, speak of eight minor Dwipas (islands), 
comprised in JambUudwipa and brought into existence by the sons of king Sagara while 
digging up this globe on all sides in the course of their search for the horse (released by their 
father preparatory to the performance of a horse-sacrifice'). (29) They are known as 
Swarnaprastha, Candrasukla, Avartana, Ramanaka, Mandaraharina, Pancajanya, Simhala 
and Lanka. (30) In this way the division of Jambudwipa into (so many) Varsas has been 


described to you, O jewel among the descendants of Bharata, even as | was told (by my 
preceptor). (31) 


Thus ends the nineteenth discourse entitled "A description of Jambidwipa," in Book 
Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 
ets 


“ah 2." 4 
ag See IS 


sig Tagirseara: 


Discourse XX 
A description of the other six Dwipas and the 
mountain-range called Lokaloka 


AYR SAA 
Sa: UL Wadia Waa alfa soaudadiel wragiisd 
AGATA EM AM Aare Ua oA AM Ae strea Ss cra Ue terete aat feAUTAgTTeT A 


Tiare Unfarai Gar ur aeltast! wat saa dronena fecona sfeerdt 
emufd: Stain: a gia aerator fasrsa aaa aaa 
* We have already seen how this subdivision of the terrestrial globe, was previously called Ajanabhavarsa and came 
to be known as Bharatavarsa after the name of its illustrious ruler, Emperor Bharata (vide. V. vii. 3). 


T Vide IX. viii. 8-9. 


ee a a  ) as os 


eee 


) 17 
Dis. 20 ] BOOK FIVE ed ae eee 


wee Mee MEM Ee Mee Me Se Fee He ee ENE AE Ge He Me He Re Me ee Ne Me Mew we He we ee ee ee ee We Me Me He HEHE He Mee He EE He HE 





STA AHA PASTAS | 2 | ores Gas Gus vd Sy asarata aarear 
aq Prat tage aatarhigne: 131 afore arHeE sxe wha, qa ferwagtar 
qearet sft Aaeten: | seu Torssferat area quar was Au sit Aer: | 


aa wiretap gauageataraagiayaant aut: Aeeargar 
faqerone-ay astra: tte wean faa wrest adie gear asrat 1 I 
Gere fant wo aed ASIN: | BIT ST Ags Weare 1G | 
wmiatey Us Geaunaaktsanm:aer act afsfdtan sf a adaraiatraat 
fafexfastaut addi t 
Sri Suka resumed : Hereafter the division of Plaksa and the other Dwipas into Varsas 

is going to be described with (particular) reference to their extent, distinctive character and 
configuration. (1) Even as Mount Meru is surrounded by Jambudwipa, this Jambudwipa (in 
its turn) is encircled by a salt ocean, as wide as the Dwipa itself; and the salt ocean too is 
hemmed in (on the other side) by what bears the name of Plaksadwipa—which is twice as 
wide as the salt ocean (or two lakh Yojanas wide)—even as a moat may be enclosed by an 
outer garden. (In that Dwipa) stands an effulgent Plaksa tree—of the same dimensions as 
the Jambu (rose-apple) tree (in Jambudwipa)—which is responsible for the name of the 
Dwipa and at the foot of which dwells the god of fire with seven tongues. Its (very first) ruler, 
Idhmajihva, (the second) son of Emperor Priyavrata, divided his Dwipa (into seven parts) 
and, having entrusted (these) seven Varsas (Subdivisions) to (the care of) his (Seven) sons, 
bearing the name of the seven Varsas himself attained liberation by being united with the 
(supreme) Spirit. (2) The Varsas are called Siva, Yavasa, Subhadra, Santa, Ksema, Amrta 
and Abhaya. The well-known mountains and rivers in those Varsas are severally seven only 
(one in each). (3) Manikuta, Vajrakuta, Indrasena, Jyotisman, Suparna, Hiranyasthiva and 
Meghamala are the (principal) mountains forming the boundaries (of the Varsas). (And ) the 
principal rivers are called Aruna, Nrmna, Angirasi, Savitri, Suprabhata, Rtambhara and 
Satyambhara. The four classes (of people here) bearing the title of Hamsa, Patanga, 
Urdhvayana and Satyanga respectively (which correspondto the fourcastes in Bharatavarsa), 
are (gradually) able to shake off Rajas and Tamas by bathing in the water of these rivers; 
they live to an age of a thousand years, possess a form (free from fatigue, perspiration etc.), 
similar to that of the gods, bear children like the gods and worship the (almighty) Lord, the 
Soul of the universe, in the form of the sun-god, the gateway to heaven and the veritable 
embodiment of the three Vedas (being their preserver and teacher, nay, their very theme) 
through the rituals taught in the three Vedas. (4) (They repeat the following prayer:)— "We 
resort to the sun-god, who is a manifestation of the most ancient Lord Visnu and the very Soul 
of (the Deity presiding over) Satya (regarding all with the same eye, Rta (speaking politely and 
truthfully), the Veda (that reveals the true nature of both these types of virtue) as well as of good 
(resulting from righteousness) and evil (resulting from unrighteousness)." (5) Inthe five Dwipas 
commencing from the Plaksadwipa, long life, soundness and potency of the Indriyas (the 
senses of perception as well as the organs of action), strength of mind and bodily vigour, 
intellectual acumen and bravery are the natural endowment of all men without distinction. (6) 


Wiel: TASHA aera AAT AM grarsfa yiretent fezporfayinct: AAT Aulearga: 
UR eth 19 1ST SS He MAA AEM areal fenct Pcaalg HMA oa: Ela: Adie se 
WW gaeda Ssaeead | ¢ 1 dagraferata: aad aAeae: ada: Aaa 
WAaaUT Sst AAA TAU Caaed UitASATaTaAAagdiata | & Lag Aaa 
Tay Utafyaa: TATA: VAAST AAA: Hral Hwa: Yaad: Measlahea | stata: 
fartaret ateadt Ge Wart Tal Meh fet | 80 Lag GSU: labial babes ETS 








518: SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 20 


PRR RAR RATER RR RRR RRR RE SERRE REP TERROR EER SRO STROBES RRR RC TORE ROR IORI TTR LIER Ae rte ey 


AqNa GAA Aca Ast<t 1 LR 
Tah: faqearar srl HOYaca: | WIA Takar Weise: AAT 7 seeker 1 gz 


Even as Plaksadwipa is surrounded by an ocean of sugar-cane juice, equal (in Width) 
to the Dwipa itself, so does Salmaladwipa, which is double in width (as compared to the 
Plaksadwipa) shine as enclosed (on the other side) by an equally wide ocean of wine.(7 
It is a well-known fact that in that Dwipa indeed there is a Salmali (silk- cotton) tree, of 
the same dimensions as the Plaksa tree, on which the learned proclaim the existence 
of the abode of the glorious Garuda (the king of birds), who glorifies the Lord by means 
of Vedic hymns (which constitute his very limbs*) and this tree is considered as 
responsible for the name of the Dwipa. (8) The (first) ruler of that Dwipa, king Yajhabahu, 
(the third) son of Priyavrata, divided among his seven sons the seven Varsas (divisions 
of this Dwipa) bearing the name of the princes—Surocana, Saumanasya, Ramanaka, 
Devavarsa, Paribhadra, Apyayana and Avijnata. (9) In those Varsas the well-known 
mountains demarcating the different Varsas and rivers are (severally) seven only—viz.., 
the Swarasa, SataSrnga, Vamadeva, Kunda, Mukunda, Puspavarsa and Sahasrasruti 
(mountains) and the Anumati, Sinivali, Saraswati ,Kuhu, Rajani, Nanda and Raka 
(rivers). (10) The (four classes of the) people of those Varsas known by the names of 
Srutadhara, Viryadhara, Vasundhara and Isandhara, worship with (the recitation of ) 
Vedic hymns the Lord whois the Soul of the universe in the form of the moon-god—) who 
is Veda personified. (11) ) (They repeat the following prayer:—) "May the moon-godt— 
who during the dark and bright fortnights distributes by his rays nourishment (in the 
shape of nectar) to the manes and the gods as well as to all (other) created beings — 
be our ruler (protect us) on all sides !" (12) 

Wa Qicisheatatequ: aaagd ydier aergd: @pergrat afer pyre 
candela ane Act Saran: TAGE feo farrstafa | 23 iaagrauta: Waal Wsry, 
favatar TAs TST: wage qemu = faa wa au anfasa 
adddea ce lant aadiataadtanie armas: 1 2% ART aay Sara AIPA ATT: 
Wal Uda Unyad: ye: Hlucivaapel cari aedion sfaur sft capes Aepepeat 
fafa sadfa-er cagut qaqa aerarefieg! aret ualf: ayrgidtae: 
PUciHilaaiiaaipcahaal Wat Maca UUT HUH Astat | VE | 

TEA AU: Maisiddeista CAae| CaM Gears aa Ged aaifaiey 

Similarly, beyond the ocean of wine and twice as large, the KuSadwipa, which like the 
Salmaladwipa, (mentionedin passage 7 above), is encircled (on the other side) by an equally 
wide ocean of clarified butter. In that Dwipa there is a clump of KuSa grass, brought into 
existence by the Lord (Himself), which is responsible for the name of the Dwipa, and which, 
like another (heatless) flaming fire, illuminates the quarters by he effulgence of its (tender) 
shoots. (13) Its (first) ruler, O Pariksit, king Hiranyareta by name, (the fourth) son of 





* The Sruti texts declare that Garuda represents in his person the various parts of the Vedas :— 


aisha rear fga fae Maa Vay: AA SA GIA @ A] aeed Senet wall aged Yas Sirah fate uiieieren asta ATA 


T itis believed that the orb of the moon is constituted of nectar, the nourishment of the gods and the manes, which it scatters 
by its rays all the thirty days of a month. The vegetable kingdom, the natural food of earthly creatures, including men, is also 
believed to derive its nutritive properties, succulence and savour from the moonbeams. It is in this sense that the moon- 3902 
_ is declared in the above verse as distributing food to all created beings including the gods arid the manes. 


Dis. 20 ] BOOK FIVE 519 
LAAEA SALAS SALA EAA SER RAGES AL EEA ELLA AAAI ALISA IED 


Priyavrata, divided his Dwipa, in due proportion among his seven sons—Vasu, Vasudana, 
Drdharuci, Nabhigupta, Stutyavrata, Vivikta and Vamadeva—and himself took to religious 
austerities. (14) In their Varsas the well-known mountains, forming their boundaries, and 
rivers are severally seven only—viz., the Cakra, Catuhs$rnga, Kapila, Citrakuta, Devanika, 
Urdhvaroma and Dravina (mountains) and the Rasakulya, Madhukulya, Mitravinda, 
Srutavinda, Devagarbha, Ghrtacyutaé and Mantramala (rivers). (15) Purified by their 
waters, (the four classes of) the inhabitants of KuSadwipa—enjoying the title of KuSala, 
Kovida, Abhiyukta and Kulaka—worship the Lord manifested as the God of fire, by 
means Of their proficiency in rituals. (16) (They repeat the following prayer :—) "You are 
the Carrier of oblations to Bhagavan Narayana (the transcendent Brahma) Himself, O 
God of fire ! (Therefore,) by means of the worship (offered through you) to the gods, who 
are (SO many) limbs* of that Supreme Person (Cosmic Being), propitiate (convey our 
oblations to and thereby contribute directly to the pleasure of) Sri Hari (the Supreme 
Person)." (17) 
aM Pdietate: Hrsatat fequr: ars aired Uta SaaTal Gal cal Hester Yatat 
oferty, Hat ATA Utes Groans Street | Ve | SSM We weconaterat tase ar str 
ARIA AAA MATA AS UA STEN Fara AS | 2S laharae Veararat gage Ararat: 
wa gia aaiftr aca fase ay Gaara aa faener adataaya tad sear, waa: 
TARVIN BAYT BVA aqua! 2ol Bal Aeeel AUGE: earar 
asst cited areatakta qageaarera adhia: At Akita Avafwend: Yair 
ada Vist SaaS ult Aral Tat: Maas Slat StwAT srydrear steenr dikadt qr tad 
Ufaradt ypactht! 221 ara: ufaannequ a: TeuwIustavicdanda AVeaT 
BAA SAAT YUASA Aste | VI 
smd: Feuatat: ta qaatysta: Ga: | aA: Uttartawt: Lara Yat sir 23 | 
Likewise, beyond the ocean of clarified butter lies the Krauncadwipa, twice as wide (as 
that ocean) and surrounded (on the other side) by an ocean of milk of the same width as itself, 
even as the KuSadwipa is enclosed by the ocean of clarified butter (as mentioned in the last 
Paragraph). There stands the king of mountains, Kraunca by name, which is responsible for 
the name of this Dwipa. (18) Though it had its ledges and arbours riven and destroyed by 
the weapon (spear) of Guha (the younger son of Lord Siva), the mountain became fearless 
(immune from danger), sprayed (constantly) by (the billows of) the ocean of milk and 
protected on all sides by the glorious Varuna (the god of water). (19) Its ruler, (the fifth) son 
of Priyavrata, Ghrtaprstha by name, (who lived) in that Dwipa of his own (share), carved out 
seven Varsas and, having installed his seven heirs in those Varsas—which were named 
after his sons—as their rulers, himself resorted to the lotus-feet of Lord Sri Hari of most 
auspicious renown, his own inner Self, enlightened as he was. (20) The sons of Ghrtaprstha 
were named Ama, Madhuruha, Meghaprstha, Sudhama, Bhrajistha, Lohitarna and Vanaspati. 
The well-known mountains of their Varsas are seven (only)—viz., Sukla, Vardhamana, 
Bhojana, Upabarhina, Nanda, Nandana and Sarvatobhadra; and the rivers also are seven— 
viz., Abhaya, Amrtaugha, Aryaka, Tirthavati, Vrttiropavati, Pavitravati and Sukla. (21) Using 
the sacred and purifying water of these rivers, (the four classes of) the people of these 


ee ee eee eee nnn ——EeEeEeEEEEEEE——EE———— 
* This is borne out by the Sruti text: © cl Aqraa ca: | 








520 | SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 29 


Re We Re Rr Re Re Re Re Re Re RR RR Re RR RR RR Re RR eRe RR RT eRe A Be HB eee Be Ree BB Wee We We Be A Be Se We We He Be He He He SE SESE He We Wr 9 Hr He wy 
a a RT SS 


Varsas—bearing the title of Purusa, Rsabha, Dravina and Devaka—wait upon the Deity in 
the form of water* with the hollow of their joined palms full of water. (22) (They repeat the 
following prayer:—) "O (god presiding over) water! You are endowed with the energy of God 
(the Supreme Person). (Therefore) consecrating the three worlds (heaven and earth and the 
space intervening them), (and) capable of wiping out sins by your very nature, (pray,) purify 
our bodies as we touch you." (23) ? 
Ue Wretah reread SAA: Vara Ua Tea SAAT AA: Caria a afemusier 
Uda Aa Vial ATA Helo: TAAAAIS ch UA & Meee GIA aaa | 2% | 
canta taad wartrafastar aenfafa: asta fase aa auifor gaara ay raters 
POC RIC ECE IED IRIC TLE RSC EOMIC NE CIS FUP ILC LLB Gis DMR BE OGG 
sTakrrmietad isa 1 Utet atnatara Aaya WA Ata SMI SHS 
SAUE: Yah: Waal caren Aerta sfa srratssqat svuaegherauista wart 
Weaaiahisesfantta | 21 AUGSs wdaddada tad faACMAA WTA ATCA 
WOoTaTafae se: ULARATEAT Astat | VO 1 
siwiasa Yds at fasrcaterhafy: | srdtattivar: Marca, Al Aggy BHSA | Ve | 
Likewise, situated beyond the ocean of milk and round about it is the Sakadwipa with 
a width of thirty-two lakh Yojanas (or 2,56,00,000 miles) and enclosed by an equally wide 
ocean of liquid curds. In that Dwipa stands a tree bearing the appellation of Saka, which is 
responsible for the name of the Dwipa and whose most fragrant odour they say perfumes 
the (entire) Dwipa. (24) The (first) ruler of that Dwipa too was a (the sixth) son of Priyavrata, 
Medhatithi by name. He too carved out seven Varsas, that were named after his sons, and, 
having installed there as (their) rulers his own sons—bearing the names of Purojava, 
Manojava, Pavamana, Dhumranika, Citrarepha, Bahurupa and ViSswadhara—himself 
entered (retired to) a forest suitable for religious austerities, his mind given to Lord 
Ananta.(25) The mountains forming the boundaries of these Varsas, as well as the rivers of 
these Varsas are severally seven only—viz., the Isana, Urusrnga, Balabhadra, Satakesara 
Sahasrasrota, Devapala and Mahanasa (mountains) and the Anagha, Ayurda, Ubhayasprsti, 
Aparajita, Pancapadi, Sahasrasruti and Nijadhrti (rivers). (26) (The four classes of) the 
people of those Varsas—severally bearing the title of Rtavrata, Satyavrata, Danavrata and 
Anuvrata—worship the Lord in the form of the wind-god through supreme concentration of 
mind, having shaken off (the elements of) Rajas and Tamas by means of Pranayama 
(breath-control). (27) (They repeat the following prayer:—)"May that Lord, the very inner 
Controller (of all)—under whose sway this visible universe exists and who, having entered (the 


body of all) animate beings (as air), sustains them by His (fivefold) functions of inhalation, 
exhalation and so on (that serve as a token of His own existence)—protect us!" (28) 


URemeady 1 2k tee TEA ATA Hoh Waa ORT eh Tawa aa eT AeA SATA ST A eepTATATA 
SA Tay feed create Carer cites Te ara aque AS Uw: AAT 
Uh cadena utwatdi 301 dagtmencafiafa: taadr difaaray artaearcisit 
WUIHMiteaaah atadt Mars G ta Yast eacHsite Ward | 32 lagaae ar wTat 
aerate CaAehul HAVs serait AleTEthd | 32 | | 

adnendad fog sellers watsdaq | Carded wid ae waa aa sft! 331. 

* The worship of God in the form of water (as in any other form, since all forms, are His) has been recommended in 
the Vedic text— “ei ead and is thus quite in keeping with the spirit of scriptures. 





Dis. 20 ] BOOK FIVE 521 


Even so, extending beyond the ocean of fluid curds and encircling it (on one side) lies 
the Puskaradwipa, double in width as compared to it and surrounded on the other side by 
an equally wide ocean of fresh water. In that Dwipa stands a gigantic lotus with hundreds 
of millions of gold petals bright as the flames ofa blazing fire, which is intended to be the seat 
of the glorious Brahma (who is universally known as having a lotus for his seat). (29) In the 
middle of that Dwipa rises only one mountain-range, named Manasottara, which forms the 
boundary of the inner and outer Varsas and possesses a height as well as a width of ten 
thousand Yojanas (eighty thousand miles). On this mountain stand (built) in the four quarters 
the four cities of Indra and (three) other guardians of the world (Yama, Varuna and Soma) 
(and) over it revolves the (other) wheel—in the form of a year—of the sun-god's chariot, 
going round Mount Meru (to which the first wheel stands fastened) in the space of a day and 
a night of the gods (which correspond to the northern and southern courses of the sun). (30) 
The (first) ruler of the aforementioned Dwipa as well was a (the seventh) son of Priyavrata, 
Vitinotra by name. Having appointed his two sons, Ramanaka and Dhataki by name, as the 
rulers of the two Varsas (comprised in his Dwipa), he himself took solely to the service 
(worship) of the Lord, like his elder brothers. (31) The people of these two Varsas worship 
the Lord in the form of Brahma (the Creator) through rituals leading to (the attainment of) 
Brahma's heaven and other such rewards (which are achieved through actions alone) and 
repeat the following (prayer):—(32)"Hail to that glorious, yet tranquil form (of the Lord), which 
is attained through (meritorious) acts and by resorting to which (the truth about) Brahma can 
be known, which men worship (as Brahma), (and) which has the one supreme Reality for its 
goal and is (therefore essentially) one without a second." (33) 


Te aTa 
Ad: Wea eeti ch leh AAA CHenletch altaet Utd Saad: 1 BY LATA AA Goede 


Wad yf: HSssepraciaa ae Wied: Gare A Hela: weenrad aaica- 
AraAURATS SMI | 34 | ener Sit PASM ASA Aenea a MAC aTA | BE I 
a creaaat aka sya fafedt aengaidet yarmantt  ~nifatori 
TUM SA aaa oot MANadam A Hella Aaqycaed Mage ararea: | 39 | 


The sage (Sri Suka) went on :— Beyond that (the ocean of fresh water) stands in the 
form of a ring the mountain-range called Lokaloka, which constitutes the dividing line 
between the region lighted (by the sun) and that which is not so lighted. (34) (A stretch of) 
land as wide as that lying between the Manasottara and Meru mountains extends (on the 
other side of the ocean of fresh water). Beyond that there is another (tract of) land with a 
Surface of gold and (bright) like a sheet of mirror. Anything dropped there is on no account 
to be found again (apparently because it is changed into gold and assimilated with the 
Surface): hence it is shunned by all (earthly) life. (85) The mountain-range referred to above 
is rightly called 'Lokaloka' inasmuch as ‘Loka’ (the region lighted by the sun) and ‘Aloka’ (that 
screened from the sun's rays) are clearly defined by it, standing as it does between them.(36) 
That mountain has been placed by the Almighty beyond the three worlds (heaven, earth and 
the intermediate region) as a boundary extending on all sides. And it is so high and 
extensive that the rays of the multitudes of heavenly bodies from the sun (right) up to the 
pole-star, enveloping (illuminating) as they do (all) the three worlds on this side, are never 


able to reach the other side. (37) 
Waa ee Sh AAA AAA TOTEM eter: Cheats: A ASA ch eT Mere 
Waunitsa crenrerenract: | Be | AUN Geary ST a aT RacrsP Te HUM at TAT 


{564] B. M. 19— 





522 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


a ferqada eu: Yencaer ara saised sha Tacit htatdeda: | 38 i tet tata | 
MHA a fafaeraat as eons wan AAS Tea Hella arat faye | 
qHaMaavadesnelaegucant  faracearfaf: aaa away: uftarktar 
Ferrgaagnarsrysers: 9 weranredier, |= fiat | waieencicientaara 
SIealXol atacuad as wd we wWaraaraaa  fatadataeciaq- 

Gato idteacaet:ixe) 6 aSetiddeete Cth Te 
Ugiectictnlaend | dd: Wetaigactd faypeg aretha | SR 1 


Thus far has been reckoned to be the disposition of the terrestrial world by the learned 
with (particular) reference to the extent, distinctive character and configuration (of its 
various parts). As for the region extending from Mount Sumeru to the aforesaid Lokaloka 
mountain, it covers a quarter of the entire diameter of the terrestrial globe, which is 
calculated to be fifty crore Yojanas (or four thousand million miles).(38) Beyond that 
mountain live the (four) great elephants—Rsabha, Puskaracuda, Vamana and Aparajita 
by name—that have been posted in the four quarters by Brahma (the self-born), the 
adored of the whole universe, and are (held) responsible for maintaining (the balance of) 
the entire globe. (39) By way of augmenting the various powers of those elephants as well 
as of the guardians of the world (Indra and others)—who are (partial) manifestations of the 
Lord's own glory—and for the welfare of all the worlds, the almighty Lord, the supremely 
exalted Person, the Possessor of the highest glory, the Inner Controller, dwells on all sides 
on this great mountain, surrounded by His foremost attendants, Viswaksena and others, 
and manifesting His divine form (consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), 
characterized by (Supreme) virtue, omniscience, (the highest form of) dispassion, 
omnipotence and other divine attributes as well as by the eight superhuman powers (such 
as that of assuming a form as minute as an atom) and distinguished by His (four) stout 
arms—adorned with His own (characteristic) weapons (conch, discus and others). (40) 
What | mean is that the Lord has assumed the aforesaid form for the maintenance of the 
career of the various worlds evolved by His own Yogamaya (wonderful creative energy).(41) 
The extent of Aloka (the region not illuminated by the sun's rays) too, which stretches on 
the other side of the Lokaloka mountain, has been explained by (as equal to) the extent 
of the area falling on this side (of the said mountain). Beyond Aloka the learned declare 


(the existence of) the sacred region which can be traversed only by Masters of Yoga (divine 
personages). (42) 


usted: Fal Marparead| qaveteamed aiew: w: usfagra: | s3 | 
asus Us Uday Aaya avs sit caves: | fervanst sia auhewawsayea: | ¥¥ | 

gan fe faurad fest: @ artet Per | cantaanit axe tateife a Gas: vu | 

qadasqearoni Tiguaaieeany | dasitattnart Ea sca sitar: 14s | 








sli APEPIad Aelg WAC eas WaAH-Y yarreractt 
Aqsa aa aaa: «FALTS FATA: 1 20 | 


(The orb of) the sun is located in the middle of the egg (of this universe), which 
corresponds to the centre of space lying between the upper and lower shells of the cosmic 
egg. The (extent of) space between (the orb of) the sun and (the outer shell of) the cosmic 
egg (on all sides) is twenty-five crore Yojanas (or two thousand million miles). (438) Because 





Dis. 21 ] - BOOK FIVE - es: 


sar BeBe SESE SESE SESE SESE SESE EE REMEBER SRE Be Re RR Ree MERE AHR RRC RA A AE Me Re RE AE RE RE ARE RRR REE EERE ERROR AEE AERE 


the sun-god appeared in this lifeless (inanimate) egg (as the Cosmic Being), the appellation 
of Martanda (4d 3S 4a:) has been applied to him (ever) since. He is (also) called 
Hiranyagarbha inasmuch as he (as the sun) represents the embryo (located) in (the centre 
of) the golden egg (of this universe). (44) By the sun indeed are divided (clearly defined) the 

quarters, the heavens, the celestial region, the earth and (other such) distinctions (divisions), 
the worlds* of enjoyment and supreme bliss (final beatitude), the infernal regions (where one 
undergoes tortures of various kinds), the subterranean worlds (Atala and so on) and all 
(other divisions). (45) Of gods and human beings as well as of the subhuman creatures (that 
are oblong in shape), of reptiles and plants (the vegetable kingdom), nay of all species of 
living beings, the sun-god is the very Self (the animating spirit) as well as the deity presiding 
over their eyesight. (46) 


Thus ends the twentieth discourse—delineating the relative position, extent and distinctive 
character of the oceans and Varsas as a part on the description of the 
terrestrial world—in Book Five of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


at 0. ~ +4 
PISS mS 


BIMeHlragirseara: 


Discourse XXI 
A description of the stellar sphere as well as of the 
chariot of the sun-god and his entourage 
Ayn Ja 

Udlarna Yaad SAAM: WATT SATA: 1k 1 Uda fe feat AUS afga 

safestha ue fgenaiieradmt ad sritunradhtet desvaarercqi2! aaearar 

wMarcaqanrafaedad sida fireitet Waaavaaanauran @ WA setatataunat— 

| Sgardar raf asteareaiBatfarnre unre re vreareanrg Aa aa TA IATA Ae May, 

UPTSaSrafer desea fart 1 3 1 Mat AVG AareNrator ares Walt 

Fal GUufey Gas A Uy atta darelaa seit Sale Sl AS Aa henl alehr UA | ¥ 

ael afvaaifer use ade carers faudartor vata 4 | areefaronreasest aet=t 

i Waa: 1 & 1 

Sri Suka began again : To this extent alone has the disposition of the terrestrial globe 
been described (by the learned) with (particular) reference to the extent and distinctive 
character of its parts. (1) By (referring to) this (the extent of the terrestrial globe) the knowers 
of the subject (indirectly) describe the extent of the heavenly sphere as well, even as by 
referring to (the size of anyone of) the two halves of peas and other pulses (that of the other 


half is also made known). Between the two (heaven and earth) intervenes the sky (the aerial 
region), which is joined both to heaven (above) and earth (below). (2) Placed at the centre 


* Of the six spheres above the terrestrial globe, the first two viz., the aerial world (Bhuvarloka) and the heavenly sphere 
(Swarloka) are the worlds of enjoyment; whereas the four higher spheres (the Maharloka, the Janaloka, the Tapoloka and the 
Satyaloka or Brahmaloka are the regions inhabited by those (Rsis and others) who either enjoy supreme bliss (Jivanmukti) 
Or Strive for the same, turning their back on the pleasures of sense, with which they are abundantly provided. 








524 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA -[ Dis. 24 


SRR BRT RR RE TE RR RR RE RRR RRR RR RR RE RE RERERE ERE REREM BEBERERERERE SESE ERE BEBE GE BBE BE BEBE EAE BB Be He Be He He Br Br He He Hy, 


of the sky, the glorious sun, the lord of the luminaries, warms by its heat and illuminates by 
its light (all) the three worlds (heaven, earth and the space lying between them). (Coursing) 
by slow, swift and regulated marches, known by the names of Uttarayana (the northerly 
march from the equator to the summer solstice and back to the equator), Daksinayana (the 
southerly march from the equator to the winter solstice and back to the equator) and the 
Vaisuvata (the march across the equator at the equinoxes) and rising higher (in the 
heavens), going down and taking a mean position whenever and wherever SUCH positions 
are inevitable (under the divine law), the sun, while passing through the signs of the Zodiac, 
from Makara (Capricornus) onwards, lengthens the days while shortening the nights and 
vice versa and brings their duration on a par. (3) When the sun traverses the signs* of Mesa 
(Aries) and Tula (Libra), the days and nights are (more or less) of equal length and when it 
traverses the five signs from Vrsabha (Taurus) onwards (viz., Vrsabha, Mithuna, Karkata, 
Simha and Kanya or Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo and Virgo), days become longer and 
longer only while nights become shorter (on an average) by nearly half an hour (24 minutes) 
every month. (4) When (however) the sun traverses the five signs from Vrscika onwards (viz., 
Vrscika, Dhanus, Makara, Kumbha and Mina or Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricornus, Aquarius 
and Pisces), days become shorter and nights (proportionately) longer. (5) Days grow in 
length till the sun takes to the southward course and nights become longer and longer till it 
takes a northward turn. (6) 
Ti Waasaieae AA afaroral Aeat Waal AMA Uvaigreun fries AM Sata: 
Area Taran As ayeanearereataynaritta yarn Waldararsaais AAatagraar 
Miyadiayr | 9 | daca feaaaeted Ua Herssferreaald Aeaaraet aero Hiifa i ¢ t 
aad ca & wargatand Posada at aaa erefuaata aa ea Baraarrare 
Weare aa We A agatha St tf GAIA! <1 


The learned declare the distance + covered by the revolution of the sun on the top of the 
(circular) Manasottara mountain as described heretofore (vide V. xx. 80) tobe nine crore and 
fifty one lakh Yojanas (or seventy-six crore and eight lakh miles) and (further) mention the 





* As the sun never remains at a fixed position according to the ancients and is constantly changing its course, turning more 
and more either towards the north or towards the south, days and nights are of equal duration, strictly speaking, only on two 
days in a year, viz., on the vernal and autumnal equinoxes. But the disparity in their length is very negligible during these two 
parts of the year, covering a total period of nearly two months, as it never exceeds 24 minutes. It is therefore that days and 
nights are spoken of as equal in length during this period. Similarly the length of days gradually increases and the length of 
nights is proportionately reduced only when the sun traverses the signs of Vrsabha and Mithuna; while during the other three 
months, viz., when the sun traverses the signs of Karkata, Sirnha and Kanya, the order is reversed, thatis to say, the length 
of nights gradually increases and that of days diminishes. Days, however, nonetheless continue to be longer than nights till 
the sun takes to the southward course— vide passage (6) above. It is in this light that the statement in the latter part of 
passage(4) above should be interpreted. And the statement made in passage (5) above should also be construed likewise. 
Even so the monthly rate of fall in the duration of nights during the five months of the sun's northward course and in the length 
of days during the corresponding months ofits southward course is not uniform every month; sometimes it exceeds 24 minutes, 
while at other times it is less than 24 minutes. 24 minutes should, therefore, be taken to be the average rate. 


T By adding together half the diameter (fifty thousand Yojanas) of Jambudwipas—which lies at the centre of the lotus-like 
terrestrial globe—and the width of the five other circular Dwipas Surrounding it, each of which is twice as large as the one 
preceding it, as well as of the six belts of oceans encircling the six Dwipas, each of whichis equal in extent to the Dwipa enclosed 





is. 21 
DIS. Us BOOK FIVE: F 525 
$0 9 ISSR RSA TRE AAR AMR RAEN AAAS IS SEAT 


existence on that mountain of the city of Indra (the deity presiding over the eastern quarter), 
named Devaghani, the city of Yama (the deity presiding over the southern quarter), called 
Samyamani, the city of Varuna (the deity presiding over the western quarter), Nimlocani by 
name, and the city of Soma (the moon-god, the deity presiding over the northern quarter), 
known as Vibhavan, to the east, south, west and north respectively of Mount Meru. When the 
sun makes Its way into these cities (one after another) at particular periods (of the day), there 
are on the four sides of Mount Meru sunrise, midday, sunset and midnight respectively— 
which serve as occasions for activity and suspension of activity on the part of living beings.(7) 
For those dwelling on the Meru the sun ever shines as at midday. And though (actually 
moving in an easterly direction with its face turned towards the lunar mansions and) keeping 
the Meru on its left, it appears to (move in a westerly direction and) keep the Meru on its right 
(because of the movement in an opposite direction of the entire stellar sphere including the 
sun, which is going from east to west, being pushed by the wind known as Pravaha, which 
is always blowing with the Meru on its right). (8) It is a well-known fact that it sets (goes out 
of sight) just on the opposite side of the point where it rises (comes to view) and it sends the 
world to deep sleep (causes midnight) just opposite to the place where it torments people 
(by its heat), so as to make them drip with perspiration. (Similarly) they who clearly see it 
continually (from sunrise to sunset) no longer perceive it when it has gone to the other side 
(That is to say, when the sun shines overhead on the opposite side, there is midnight on this 
side). (9) 
el Ua: Yat: Wad Usevrefearfrahat aarcatlegas asm Atelgagretanrer 
arfirarht arate | Qo 1 Ue Adt Grout Wasa UV YAKIMA ST Wet: ATATeaT Aaa: Te 
waftgaeh aagara we at Prieta Q21 Ud Yada Udieagieciaats aes een 
nt tac aa sat Use Utada WTA 221 
When the sun proceeds from the city of Indra to that of Yama, it traverses, in the course 
of fifteen Ghatikas (six hours), (a distance of) two and a quarter crore, twelve and a half lakh 
and more (twenty-five thousand) Yojanas (i.e., two crore, thirty-seven lakh and seventy-five 
thousand Yojanas all told or one-quarter of its total orbit). (10) In the same way (in the same 
period) it travels from it (from the last-mentioned city, the city of Yama) to the city of Varuna, 
and (thence) to the city of Soma and (then) back to the city of Indra (all of which are situated 
at an equal distance from one another). So also other planets such as the moon alongwith 
the lunar mansions rise as well as set together in the stellar sphere. (11) Thus covering (a 


by it, and joining to the total width of these six Dwipas and the same number of oceans surrounding them half the width of 


the seventh and largest Dwipa (Puskaradwipa) at the centre of which the mountain-belt called Manasottara is placed, the 


figure of one crore, fifty-seven lakh and fifty thousand Yojanas is arrived. This represents the radius of the circle described 


by the revolution of the sun's chariot on the top of the Manasottara mountain with Mount Meru, standing at the core of 
‘Jambudwipa, as its centre. The double of this number or 3 crore and fifteen lakh Yojanas represents the extent of its diameter. 
According to the established rules of geometry the extent of the circumference ofa circle is 3 ‘/, times as much as its diameter. 
Multiplying the length of the diameter as calculated above by 3 '/, the figure comes to nine crore and ninety lakh Yojanas. This, 
however, does not tally with the figure cited in the text, which is 39,00,000 less. A learned commentator, however, points out 


that, really speaking, the distance from the centre of Mount Meru to the orb of the sun itself should be reckoned as the radius 


Of the circle and this has been ascertained from other authoritative sources to be in the neighbourhood of one crore and fifty- 
one lakh Yojanas only. Thus calculated, the diameter of the circle works out at the figure of three crore and two lakh Yojanas 


approximately. And by multiplying this figure by 3 ‘/, the result arrived at exactly corresponds to the figure quoted in the text. 








526 | SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24 


RRR RRA RR REE RE REAR RERERERE  M R RRERE R RE RERERERERE CRE EE Re RE RE RE BERET EON HRB RE HE BE AER SE RE BER SESE Be RBH He He eH He Be He a gy 


distance of) thirty-four lakh and eight hundred Yojanas (or two crore, seventy-two lakh, six 
thousand and four hundred miles) in the course of two Ghatikas (forty-eight minutes), the 
chariot of the sun-god, which represents the three Vedas (Rgveda, Samaveda ang 
Yajurveda), continues to travel through the four cities (one after another in the order 
mentioned above). (12) 
aeics dae grey woah fronfs Warnes wart cea ae pat 
AAA HAAN aA We tara deaaaHag waa aera 931 
ARAAR Hagen fadtarsaeqars asidedtcaaratag La HAATATT: | kv | 
The wise speak of this chariot as having one of its wheels in the shape of a year with 
twelve spokes (in the form of the twelve months), a rim with six segments (in the form of the 
six seasons) and a hub with three pieces joined together (in the shape of the three parts of 
four months each). Its axle-tree is fixed (at one end) to the top of Mount Meru and has its other 
end placed (somewhere in the air) over (the belt of) the Manasottara (on the same level as 
the Meru). Fixed through and rotating on this like the wheel of an oil-press, the wheel of the 
chariot of the sun-god revolves over (the entire length of) the Manasottara Mountain. (13) 
(Besides this) there is a second axle-tree, measuring one fourth of the length of the first, (i-e., 
thirty-nine lakh, thirty-seven thousand and five hundred Yojanas, the length of the first being 
one crore, fifty-seven lakh and fifty thousand Yojanas as already pointed out), with its lower 
end joined to the aforesaid (first) axle, like the axle of an oil-press, and its upper end fastened 
to the pole-star (with an aerial cord). (14) 


THATS ed We ager ara sa eT ATTRA MARAT AA SAYS AAA: 
Maeva Agha cama Wal Uenctlaqreu: uyarear fraad: dea Hae 
feaeired | 86 te areas BIA SH EIA: Vieaearter Wa: as Gaara Paya: 
eqs | V9 1 AMA SA AAT Wea Ca! ALT UTAVAT Aaa Cal Selah HI WOT: AeA 
Ades Ale Ale Wad Cao AMMA GaSe: Yaa get Saad 1 Ve | 
cai Mltanteasauhiavsed Yatra wi att fgaeaanmiit a 
We! 8s 
aa Srarrad Hey UREA asa Waa wilavamekevscaurd aafaes eae: | 22 / 


The interior of the chariot is thirty-six lakh Yojanas (or two crore and eighty-eight lakh 
miles) long and a quarter of it (or nine lakh Yojanas) in breadth. The yoke of the chariot of 
the sun-god is (also) of the same extent (nine lakh Yojanas long) : joined to this by Aruna 
(the charioteer), seven horses, severally bearing the names of the (seven Vedic) metres 
(Gayatri, Brhati, Usnik, Jagati, Tristubh, Anustubh and Pankti), carry the sun-god (seated in 
the chariot). (15) Charged with the role of a charioteer, they say, sits Aruna in front of the sun- 
god but with his face turned towards the west (towards the sun-god in order to avoid showing 
disrespect to him by turning his back towards him). (16) Even so, entrusted with (the duty 
of) uttering his praises (and ever seated) in front of him, sixty thousand sages, (known as) 
the Valakhilyas, (all) equal in size to the forepart of a thumb, extol the sun-god in a chorus. (17) 
Similarly other Rsis (Sages), Gandharvas (celestial musicians), Apsaras (celestial nymphs), 
Nagas (serpent-demons), Yaksas (a species of demigods), Yatudhanas (Raksasas) and 
gods—fourteen (in all) taken singly and forming seven groups when taken in pairs (each pair 
consisting of two individuals of the same species), and bearing diverse names—wait upon the 
Lord, the (universal) Spirit, in the form of the sun-god, called by different names, through 
different services” andin distinct batches (of fourteen) every month. (18) (Ithas already been 





DIS. LE \\ SECO BOOK FIVE | S27 
$I NEAL ARLE RE ARE HR MR RATA AA AAAI AER 


ointed out in passage 7 that) the circumference of the terrestrial globe (at the belt of the 
Manasottara mountain situated in the heart of the outermost Dwipa, the Puskaradwipa) is 
nine crore and fifty-one lakh Yojanas. (Out of this) the sun covers ( a distance of) two 
thousand and twoYojanas in a moment. (19) 


Thus ends the twenty-first discourse entitled "A description of the stellar sphere as well as of 
the chariot of the sun-god and his entourage" in Book Five of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


wat CT OT OS 
PDPTSOO ES ys 


HAA Silagrseara: 


Discourse XXIl 
The relative position of the planets and their movements 


a 


Walarsd 
Mad aaa ag Harsha |g 
The king (Pariksit) asked : How are we to understand (accept the truth of) what your 
glorious self has (just) stated (in passages 8 and 14 of the last discourse) with respect to 
that glorious sun, viz., that while appearing to revolve about Mount Meru (on the one hand) 


and the pole-star (on the other) with both these on its right, it (actually) moves (through the 
various signs of the zodiac) facing the lunar mansions, with the Meru (and the pole-star) 


On its left ? (1) ; 
a Bara 

am peletahu wad we waar carseat fadifererchi 9 afatta 

We Aa aaa alee AAAS Ua Hier Ya Ae A Vefarort aera 
Ve ULM AAAMAT ASIA FalSrat Waren Whataa AMAAL UY AAA AAT I 2 I 
a Uy TMTaMHATST Wa MAAN cham wet seat ads Hfagesgtd 
fafa a aan fafrarermr greg fara wag auniiagdy aang 
faaenfa 13 aaathe weuresen fader aut sara ae Sala: HATA al Madge 
STEM Gass Ha: Paherreohal V1 SMT A UT Sea ear Marygtyeanaaxr 
TAA GhreraaH Ta SSM AAMT, Ysa UA Aaa aa Ae: Wags Tea eet 
aft aureatguqafasha aac SEAT Usitd w a eG hteiayad MacTaaa: | 1 SAA 


* The diverse functions discharged by the seven groups of attendants of the sun-god enumerated above are described in 





other books as below :— r 
Haha wea: aTaMad We: | FIST Aid AeA AT FATA: It 
acha vam aa: feaasiigaye: warefecmedtad = aftard  aeTa 


(Visnupurana) 


"The sages extol him through hymns of praise. the Gandharvas sing before him, the Apsaras go dancing in front of him, 


and then follow the Raksasas. The Nagas draw the chariot (alongwith the horses), the Yaksas hold the reins and even so the 


Valakhilyas sit in the same chariot surrounding him (on all sides).” 
For the names of the attendants as well as for those of the sun-god changing every month vide,. XII. xi. 33-34. 








598 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 20 


“: ERAR ERA AAA AAR AAA LALA ITAA LAA HAHA AMAA AL ATLA AAAS SS SE a aa a a ra wy 


Saatia andieat sent ad wloqaarad ig! Aa aA Wanaque a zg. 

TauMeartiera aie We Yel ad wis Aaa wats 

Aca ANA IAT: TATA HT I 9 | 

The sage clearly said : (Even) as the course of anis etc., crawling on a potter's whee|— 

which is rotating (on its axle) —and (thus) revolving with it, is indeed different (from the course 
of the wheel) as is evidenced by the fact that the ants etc., are observed in different parts 
(of the wheel even while it is in motion), so the course of the sun and other planets—which 
are subject to the wheel of Time, symbolized by the (various) constellations and the signs 
of the zodiac, and revolve with it even as the wheel in the form of constellations revolves 
round the pole-star and Mount Meru—is certainly different (from the course of the said whee| 
of Time, with which they move), as is clear from the fact that the sun and other planets are 
observed as conjoined with different constellations and at different signs of the zodiac (from 
the one where they were seen before). (2) It is no other than the glorious (omnipotent) Lord 
Narayana, the most ancient Person (the ultimate Cause of the whole universe) Himself, who 
is critically inquired into by the Vedas as well as by the wise (those well-versed in the Vedas), 
that for the welfare of (all) living beings splits up His body (in the form of Time, symbolized 
by the year)—the theme of the three Vedas (Rgveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda), (nay) 
which is responsible for the right (timely) performance of rituals—into twelve parts (the 
twelve months) and manifests (by turns), in the six seasons, spring etc., the (distinctive) 
characteristics (in the form of heat and cold, showers and winds etc.), of each season, so 
as to provide the Jivas with the means of reaping the fruits of their past actions. (3) Devoutly 
worshipping in this world the aforesaid Lord (in the form of Indra and the other deities) 
through (the different orders or grades of) rituals, (both) high and low, prescribed in the three 
Vedas, and (in the form of the Supreme Person) through the elaborate system of Yoga 
(courses of spiritual discipline or methods of God-Realization, e.g., Bhakti, Jnana, Yoga), 
men following the path chalked out for the various Varnas (grades of society) and ASramas 
(stages in life) easily and duly attain the (desired) blessings (in the form of heavenly bliss— 
inthe case of those who worship Him through rituals—or final beatitude in the case of those 
who worship Him through Bhaktiyoga, Karmayoga, JAanayoga and so on). (4) Now, 
entering (in the form of the sun) the wheel of Time (as symbolized by the stellar sphere) 
existing in the firmament between heaven and earth, the same Lord who is the soul of all 
living beings passes through twelve months, the (twelve) parts of a year, known by the 
names of the (twelve) signs of the zodiac (Mesa, Vrsa and so on). The learned declare that 
a month is equivalent to a couple of fortnights (one bright and the other dark, according 
to the lunar calendar), a day and night (in the eye of the manes) and the period taken in 
traversing two constellations and a quarter (from the point of the sun). And the fraction of 
a year in which He (the sun-god) covers the sixth part (of His orbit) is called a Rtu (season). (5) 
And, again, they refer to the (duration of) time in which He traverses one-half ef His 
passage through the heavens as an Ayana (a half-year). (6) And, further, the learned 
speak of the (length of) time in which the same sun traverses the whole extent of the sky— 
bounded by the heavenly sphere on one side and the terrestrial sphere on the other— 


along with these two spheres in slow, rapid and moderate marches as a Samvatsara,” 
Parivatsara, Idavatsara, Anuvatsara or Vatsara. (7) 


Ud ae aa SUeIecaasr SUA sche Paced wWarrsett 
Avent Meee feta water qa Weed | ¢ | ater argdaronfaga 


"For the significance of the names Sarnvatsara, Parivatsara and so on, vide footnote below III. xi. 14. 








Dis. 22 ] BOOK FIVE : 529 


SORE SE ME MERE R MME REMC M Ree Me ew Me Me Me Mee Me a RE He ERE RE EMRE MERE REMC RENE BE ME MERE MEE 


ge ae Be HC BERCSERE BEBE REFESE SESE SESE SE SESE Ht Se Be He HE Be Me He He Me He He Mr wr 


Similarly, the moon, which is observed at a height of a lakh Yoianas (eiaht lakh miles) 
peyond the orb of the sun, and which moves faster than the sun and heer leads all the 
other constellations, completes in the course of a month (two fortnights) the circuit made by 
the sun Ina whole year, traverses in two and a quarter days the distance covered (by the 
sun) inamonth, and the distance coveredina fortnight in the course ofa day. (8) Determining 
by its gradually growing and declining splendour, associated with the first (bright) and 
second (dark) half-months, the day* and hight of the gods and the manes respectively, the 
moon—which IS the very life (sustenance) of all the species of living beings as well as (their) 
life-giver (Sustainer)—passes through each constellation in the course of thirty Muhutrtas 
(twenty-four Nours). (9) It is this glorious being appearing in the form of the moon (with its 
orb consisting of sixteen parts or digits), the deity presiding over the mind, the foodt of all 
living beings and the very embodiment of nectar, who, being by his very nature the nourisher 
of the life of (all living beings including) the gods and the manes, human beings and spirits, 
beasts and birds, reptiles and plants, is one with all: so declare the wise. (10) 


dd suhetacadeara aeaftt ae afarntta mre gyaratheahs 
Pertuhsteare fasta: | 8 ida SUS Teyr fgaaraierta Sues Wa: Uae a AAA 
VAT aaa satiated Sear MaetHe wa war avdvanuirasiad a 
fe fas tre agra: | 821 

At a height of three lakh Yojanas (or twenty-four lakh miles) beyond the moon (or five lakh 


Yojanas beyond the earth's surface) are placed the twenty-eight lunar mansions +inclusive of 
Abhijit. They revolve with the Meru on their right alone (having no separate course of their own) 


* Although the scriptures declare that the dark and bright fortnight of a lunar month constitute a day and night respectively 
of the manes—a species of living beings inhabiting a part of the aerial region which evidently remains lighted by the sun’s rays 
throughout a dark fortnight and screened from its rays for the whole length of a bright fortnight, the same Is not the case with 
the gods, whose realm—so declare the scriptures—remains lighted by the sun so long as the latter continues to traverse the 
northern skies, and remains screened from the sun's rays throughout the rest of the year. Thus the period of six months 
commencing from the day on which the sun enters the sign of the zodiac called Capricornus constitutes the day, and other six 
months commencing with the sun's entry into the sign of the zodiac called Cancer constitutes the night of the gods. By the 
statement, therefore, that the moon divides the day and night of the gods and the manes by means of the bright and dark halves 
of a month, the sage Suka evidently means that the moon determines by means of the bright an. dark fortnights the periods 
of worship suitable for the gods and the manes respectively; for the Sruti text TATETAAMIa Aa restricts the worship of the 
gods, to the bright fortnight. Similarly the Sruti text STIT4 Fagor assigns the dark fortnight to the worship of the manes. It is 
in this sense that the bright fortnight should be understood to be the day of the gods, and the eight of the manes and the dark 





fortnight to be the day of the manes and the night of the gods. 
Tt The moon-god has been referred to in the scriptures as ‘OsadhiSa’ (the ruler and protector of herbs and annual plants). 


Elsewhere he has been spoken of as supplying food to all living beings (vide V. xx. 12). It is in this sense that he should be 


understood as constituting the food of all. 


+ The Naksatras or lunar mansions are ordinarily reckoned as twent 
Krttika, Rohini or Brahmi, Mrgasira or Agrahayan, Ardra, Punarvasu or Yamaka, Pusya or Sidhya, Aslesa, Magha, Parva- 


Citra, Swati Visakha or Radha, Anuradha (so-called because it is placed next to Radha), 
ana, Sravistha or Dhanistha, Satabhisa, Purvabhadrapada, Uttarabhadrapada 
d midway between the two Asadha and Sravana. as is borne 


y-seven only. Their names are:——Aswini, Bharani. 


phalguni, Uttaraphalguni, Hasta, 
Jyestha, Mala, Parvasadha, Uttarasadha, Srav 
and Revati. The twenty-eight constellations, viz., Abhijit, is locate 


Out by the Sruti text—— ‘ s7ftfsrarl AAA IETS TATA eT PTT: 








a) 


FUSE Op Oo Rr 
We ren ier 





BERR Re Re Meee eR RE RR Re RRR RR Re A Be Ee ACPA BEM A ESE SE SS a ee Hr a ae 





fixed as they are to the wheel of time by God. (11) At a height of two lakh Yojanas beyong 
them is observed Usana (Venus), which traverses the heavens in rapid, Slow and moderate 
marches like the sun, (sometimes) going before, (at other times following) in the rear, ang 
(at still other times) keeping pace with, the sun. Bringing showers (in its train) almost 
invariably, it is ever propitious to (all) living beings and by its flitting (across certain 
constellations) is concluded to be neutralizing the influence of planets (such as the Mars) 
obstructing rainfall. (12) 
Sa Get Medea SURES fees qa: HATA SAAAM: yratur 
Wup earl aaa cana AMAT SM ATAATMT A | YQ l Hd HeaA STAT sha 
SrA aga SAA MAMA eA eA: Walch HIN UP slaw Lead Ate A adv wads 
TAVIS ISA: 1 kV 1 ad SUReTe feast war, Teeatatch aha 
TIsit uURtacat URacat arta afe A Am: CATATAUIT THON ATIVE 1 84 | 
By describing (the course of) Venus, (the course of) Budha or Mercury (too) stands 
described. Observed at a height of two lakh Yojanas beyond Venus, Budha, an offspring of 
the moon, is generally beneficent (in its influence). When (however) it outstrips the sun, it 
forebodes storm, a cloudy weather almost throughout (that period), drought and other 
unwelcome conditions. (13) Beyond Mercury, Angaraka (Mars) too is observed at a height 
of two lakh Yojanas. It passes through the twelve signs of the zodiac at the rate of one in three 
fortnights, unless it takes a retrograde course, and is an inauspicious planet, often 
portending evil. (14) Placed at a height of two lakh Yojanas beyond Mars, the glorious 
Brhaspati (Jupiter) passes through one sign of the zodiac in a whole year unless it takes a 
retrograde course. It is generally propitious to the Brahmana race. (15) 
dd SuRsTaisiiciagaradianm: wiyat Una ust Herarar facts: 
Aa Tara el Maa AACAT: WAT fe MAST ACHE: | VE Ae SALAS Uch ever aq ase 
Soest A Us Healt Waqwaaaad wad faders ud yetart wanAfd | V9 


sid AAsrlad He URAC eae TAA) vatlavamats Esfasis tary: | 22! 
Observed at a height of two lakh Yojanas beyond Jupiter, and tarrying in each sign of the 
zodiac for thirty months (two years and a half), the planet Sanaiscara or Saturn (so-called 
because of its slow moving nature) passes through all (the twelve signs) in exactly the same 
number of years and is indeed mostly a source of anxiety to all. (16) At a height of eleven 
lakh Yojanas beyond Saturn are observed the seven Rsis (the seven stars known by the 
name of the Big Bear or Ursa Major), that move clockwise round what they call the highest 


abode of Lord Visnu (viz., the pole-star or Dhruvaloka), (ever) contemplating the (unmixed) 
good of all living beings. (17) 


Thus ends the twenty-second discourse, forming part of an account of the stellar 
sphere, in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samnhita. 





Dis. 23 | BOOK FIVE 531 


spe Be Se BeBe Re BeBe Hee Re Re Re HH Re He Hr He ey 
gant Litssieereerer Se BeBe RR RR He eR REA TA TERA ARRAN AAMAS 


BQ Warayirseanrs: 


. Be Discourse XXIII 
The disposition of the stellar Sphere represented in the form of a dolphin 


AY SAT 
AA AAAI ATA BARON: Ut UEHfNaEha Uae AeTTad a 
Sera Waa cayetor entor ot area: wag efarora: feeeTATOT 
yertaty eemsitesrasiter suet weterqura suafeta: ei a fe wdet vtfectort 
Tetaare rasa See aT WAM HIT UNA aU Rarases Seaver fate: 
WyACAUTAA | 21 ae 


Sri Suka continued : Now, ata height of thirteen lakh Yojanas beyond the Great Bear, 
lies (in the form of the pole-star) what they call the highest abode* of Lord Visnu, where 
indeed resides the great devotee of the Lord, Dhruva, son of Uttanapada, who is being 
circumambulated clockwise with great reverence even to this day by Agni (the god of fire), 
Indra (the chief of the gods), Kasyapa, a lord of created beings, and Dharma (the god of 
virtue)—all moving synchronously (in the form of stars)—and who is the mainstay (resort) 
of (all) those who live (even) at the time of Pralaya (when all the three worlds perish). His glory 
has (already) been described in (Book Four of) this (holy) book (Srimad Bhagavata). (1) 
Indeed he shines eternally (in the form of a star), fixed as he is by God, like a post holding 
together all the multitudes of luminaries, including planets and lunar mansions, that are being 
made to revolve by the ever-vigilant and all-powerful Time of incomprehensible speed. (2) 


| GM Ae SHAE: Paihia: Aatdaad Avs ata 
ITU Weed Uda eat Hletvaeh STA aH AT aA ATS ALAA StToh cat 
Uhtdenuha aufe ae Wer: yateat ama: adanaa: ukadat ud varfator: 
vafaesdarrayeta: aattatcar yfa a cata 31 


Just as (pairs of) oxen, trampling corn (in order to thresh it) while (remaining) tied to a 
postin the middle of a threshing-floor, walk round in their respective spheres, in three circles 
(gradually receding from that post), so the hosts of luminaries including the planets— 
fastened as they are to the aforesaid wheel (revolving movement) of Time either in the inner 
circle (remote from the earth) or in the outer one (nearer the earth) and propelled by the wind 
(called Pravaha and referred to in passage 8 of Discourse XX!)—revolve round the pole-star 
as the pivot till the end of a Kalpa (the life-time of the three worlds) in three courses 
(northward, southward and along the equator). (And just) as clouds and birds such as the 
hawk move aboutin the sky, suspended in the air and helped by their destiny (which keeps 
them floating in the air and prevents them from falling down), so the hosts of luminaries 
(which are no other than particular Jivas appearing in those form)—brought into existence 
by the union of matter and Spirit (occasioned by the destiny responsible for their assuming 
Such forms) and reaping the fruit yielded by their (past) actions—(move about in the air 


and) do not fall to the ground.(3) 


SL saeahhrcich PERSE ad aT STMT aaa | 1 ae 


Visnu ever remains manifest. It is in this sense that it has been spoken of here as well 
it u. It is surely different from the Lord's own realm. known by the name of 





* In the region of the pole-star Lord 
as at other places as the highest abode of Lord Visn 
Vaikuntha, which lies beyond the material plane. 








$32 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


SE Be Be We Re eRe ee Re Ree Re RE Re RE RE RR RR RRR RE RE EEE RE RE RR RE BER BEBE RE BE ERE BE BER, BEEBE BE BEBE Be BEBE BERBER Be BBE He BE Be Be BTL He He He Re Be By oy 


Dis. 23 


TSSTH SAHARA: HUSH AAS YA SA OMA TT Tt THT ETA OTF She Peary 
erat fetal a Heat Mea: | ces SharraderscihyRnNNsT agora aferorarygs | 
STATO SOT fA OM RYAA HUST MT TA TARA UPA Ae, 
SHS Haha (US asta elt SHIGA TST Alaa: 14 IATA efarorararay: srverst yay 
a efaurara: ufvarar: weantutrerere afarramartfanarcteanret steaurqaters 
ehrranictaraeiar yi a afaramat: aulartaretae veraitr efaroreny 


SRI eHerdanramastad 1 SiMeTaneeReTt AA WSR Usa: 
WAVE SUA GSE: Hale aaeaMlaeaNy Cas ARTATH AAA AAI AAA STAN ay 
qq: WUT Usa aaa: Vals y WAY Aes ATT: | 9 t 
Some people declare the stellar sphere as capable of being meditated upon through 
deep concentration of mind as a form of Lord Vasudeva, (existing) in the shape of a dolphin. (4) 
Atthe end of the tail of this (divine) dolphin, whose body lies coiled with its head downwards, 
is allocated the pole-star; at its tail (below the end) are located one after another (the four 
stars representing) the Prajapati (the sage KaSyapa), Agni (the god of fire), Indra (the chief. 
of the gods) and Dharma (the god of piety); at the root of its tail, (the stars representing the 
gods) Dhata and Vidhata; at the hip, the seven stars (of the Great Bear, representing the 
seven seers); on the right side of the dolphin, whose body lies coiled from left to right, they 
locate the (fourteen) constellations that mark the northern course (viz., from Abhijit to 
Punarvasu) and (the other fourteen, viz.,) those marking the southern course (i.e., from 
Pusya to Uttarasadha) on the left side, (even) as on both sides of a (common) dolphin whose 
body is disposed in concentric rings, the parts are equally divided. (To mention the limbs 
separately) at its back is placed the (group of constellations known by the name of) Ajavithi 
(consisting of Mila, Purvasadha and Uttarasadha) and at its belly, the milky way. (5) One 
should locate Punarvasu and Pusya at the right and left loins, Ardra and Aslesa at the right 
and left hind legs, Abhijit and Uttarasadha at the right and left nostrils, Sravana and 
Purvasagha at the right and left eyes. Dhanistha and Mula at the right and left ears 
respectively and the eight constellations from Magha onwards, marking the southern 
course, at the ribs on the left side; and even so one should place the (other) eight, marking 
the northern course, (viz.,) Mrgasirsa and so on, at the ribs on the right side in the reverse 
order (i.e., from Purvabhadrapada back to Mrgasirsa), and locate (the remaining two, viz..,) 
Satabhisa and Jyestha at the right and left shoulders. (6) (Again,) at the upper jaw should. 
be placed (the star representing the sage) Agasti (Agastya) and (the star representing) 
Yama (the god of punishment) at the lower jaw, (the planet) Mars as the mouth, Saturn at 
the penis, Jupiter at the hump, the sun at the chest, (the star representing the divine sage) 
Narayana at the heart, the moon in the mind, Venus at the navel, (the two stars representing 
the twin gods) Aswinikumaras (the celestial physicians) at the breasts, Mercury in the 
outgoing and incoming breaths, (the planet) Rahu at the neck, the Ketus (comets) all over . 
the body and all the hosts of (other) stars in the hair (on the body). (7) 


Ung ea Waa fae: Ades BIAS: HAA Waa aaa Prctrararey sarasa 
TA Vatiietienls Aietretrantatet Ud Are arenfaelterethe tc 
Teaanmranntere tec aaa aacat PRETO | 
Tad: CR at frenret Ayaat 9 AeHICISTATE,  UTTI< I 
alt APTEM Tad AERO WAC ea Tarn? fergerdeenactt ay werfaes ears: | 23! 





_. La 


er ee ee ed) 


; 533) 
Dis. 24 |] BOOK FIVE tr Re Re Be eRe Re REMEBER BERL BEBE E BEBE REE HEHE 


ge Br br Be Be Be Ke Be He Ht Hr Hr Kee Ke He Be He 1 He Ge Re Ke Me Br Ke Ke Hr He He Hr Ge Be Ke He He He He He He Ge Ke Ke He Ge He He Hr He Hr Ht He He He He He Sr ——_——_——————— SM 


And actually fixing one's gaze on this very form of Lord Visnu, representing all the gods, 
in the evening from day to day, one should wait with a concentrated mind upon the same with 
the following (prayer) silently:—"Hail to the Supreme Person, (manifesting Himself as) the 
wheel of Time—the backbone of the luminaries—the Ruler of all the gods! (Thus) do we 
meditate on Him." (8) The form of Lord Visnu (the Ruler of all the gods), consisting of the 
planets, lunar mansions and other stars, wipes out the sins of those who repeat the foregoing 
prayer thrice (in the morning and evening and at noon) everyday. (Nay,) the sin committed 
in the immediate past by him who bows to or even thinks of this form three times (a day) 
disappears at once. (9) 


Thus ends the twenty-third discourse entitled " The disposition of the stellar sphere represented 
in the form of a dolphin" in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SRP HTH 
PII 


sy Mdfaettseawra: 


Discourse XXIV 
The position of Rahu etc., and the limits of the 
heavenlike subterranean regions 


Aya Java 

AMMA Alaqa sg CAM raat aAticlch ASM aaa Ueca Mleaud Waeqoh Aa 
Taananude: HeHa diet eted ad WarHaiter araksrgeam: | @ | daaenurdvset 

sae = — = ; sai: er 
Aa Apsuqreas: Taaaraarvenata | Wi aeayrarwsgaly waar CaVTa Weert 
anica Fada daarmfata aaa Crear: | 3 1 | 
Sri Suka went on : Some people (well-versed in the Pauranika lore) declare that ten 
thousand Yojanas below the sun (a heavenly body called) Rahu moves about like a lunar 
mansion. The deity presiding over it, who was by birth a vile demon, having been born of (a 
mother,) Simhika (by name), attained by the grace of the Lord immortality and the (exalted) 
rank of a planet (thus, influencing the destiny of men), though unworthy of these. (The story) : 
of his birth and deeds, O dear son, we shall narrate later on (in Books, VI and VIII). (1) They 
declare the sphere of the burning sun, that shines yonder, as ten thousand Yojanas, that of 
the moon as twelve thousand and that of Rahu as thirteen thousand Yojanas in extent—(the 
Same Rahu) who assails the sun and the moon on the day when the two dwell together and 
the day of the full moon (respectively), nursing a grudge against them ever since he 
interposed himself between them (in the garb of a god to share the feast of nectar, which was 
being doled out to the gods by the Lord Himself appearing in the form ofa bewitching woman, 
Mohini by name vide Discourse IX of Book VIII—and his identity Was disclosed by the sun- 
god and the moon-god). (2) Seeing the celebrated and favourite missile (discus) of the Lord, 
Sudarsana by name, placed by Him by the side of both the aforesaid (planets) for their 
Protection—on coming to know their (delicate) plight—and formidable by its splendour, 
constantly revolving, he (Rahu) stands facing it for an hour or so (lit., 48 minutes), shaking 





"634 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24 


Re RR RR RR RRR RR RR RR REE RT BT Re BY RT ME Re Be BH PER AE MT SCD CS BE SCOU SC OY Wt BY DUT SUES SS eS ee nee ee eee ee Oe RENE Ee 





with fear and bewildered at heart and retreats even from a distance. It iS this incident (his 
proceeding against either of the two planets in a hostile manner and standing awhile in front 
of it in a menacing attitude) that the people refer to as a (solar or lunar) eclipse (as the case 
may be). (3) | 


SST ECACIMICCICMMIR CEG RICC ER OPT C RIND ISU AMUSE ESC OLIT 1 
FERIA STASI: Warher AAT SAA AT | & | AAS ARTO TAS Sat Ofer 
MAA AAPA TAU Sa: TA AMAT SATA 1G SAUL A Ta eae TMT TT ATT ETL 
Aer YPAAT WHAM AAA AAA aaa aT EM stdet fadet act actldet Astaet 
Taide Urartu ei way fe facrety waniqutiamtyaattayfarasyfate: 
QA ag AAMAS PASTY SST AAAI PAM AM ATH ATI ATES TAT JR ATA 
Syaqueauftedera wratfader Preafat ¢1 ay went was aratfe father: gtr 
ATTA UTA TTS a fee Pera AA ATTRA TA TAT ATT TE TAL TAT 


Acta Salers dgraaanaatsy, 

a 201 at £ aa A Wanenratefy: 
CHlciawieuciaad | 2k laa fe Hetfewarhynraura: Ge AA: Watered | VIA aT Uy aaa 
fecdrafirravaraal aarti eer ere Sareray achufetasntieaya 
aeaduddhieacadecariatenittid adisaaya Vata i esi a fe aat Hearn wala 


Haga Feld War aayaH MSM | VY | Aary Ulaw Saraernt Ura: Gaara Wares 
ated Udhet Al 2&1 


At (a distance of) quite as many (ten thousand) Yojanas (as Rahu stands below the sun) 
below Rahu lie the abodes (realms) of (demigods such as) the Siddhas (a class of beings 
possessing mystic powers from their very birth), Caranas (celestial bards) and Vidyadharas 
(celestial artistes). (4) Below these lies the aerial region, the sports-ground (abode) of the 
hosts of Yaksas (the attendants of Kubera, the god of riches), Raksasas (ogres), Pisacas 
(goblins), Pretas (spirits) and Bhitas (ghosts), extending as far (below) as the wind fiercely 
blows and clouds are met with. (5) At a distance of a hundred Yojanas below that (the aerial 
region) lies this earth (the terrestrial region), extending as far (high) as the foremost of birds 
such as the swans, vultures, hawks and eagles (are able to) soar. (6) The situation of the 
earth as wellas the arrangement ofits parts has (already) been described as itis. Even below 
(in the bowels of) the earth there exist seven holes in the earth (subterranean regions)— 
Situated at a distance of ten thousand Yojanas (from one another) and each extending to the 
(same) length and breadth of ten thousand Yojanas, viz., Atala, Vitala, Sutala, Talatala, 
Mahatala, Rasatala and Patala. (7) In the houses, gardens, pleasure-grounds and stadia in 
these heavenlike subterranean regions—houses etc., exuberantly rich in sensuous 
enjoyments, affluence and joy born of power, surpassing even those enjoyed in heaven— 
live as householders Daityas and Danavas (two species of superhuman beings noted for 
their herculean strength and gigantic form) and serpents (born of Kadri, one of the wives 
of the sage Kasyapa), whose wives and children, relations and kinsmen and servants are 
ever highly delighted and devoted (to them), whose desires are never thwarted even by most 
powertul gods (like Indra) and who divert themselves with their uncanny skill in (various) 
arts.(8) In these regions, O great king (Pariksit), shine forth cities built by the miraculous 
architect Maya, and richly adorned with wonderful house, defensive walls, gates, town halls, 
places of worship, quadrangles and resting-places etc., built of various excellent gems of best 





Dis. 24 ] BOOK FIVE 535 
SAREE SR RG GRR REA Be ATT AR AE AAAS LA IAA ES 


type, as well as with grand mansions of the lords of these regions, whose terraces are (ever) 
crowded with pairs of Nagas and Asuras (demons), pigeons and parrots and Mainas. (9) The 
gardens too (in those regions) surpassingly dim the glory of the celestial world by the 
splendour, delighting the mind and senses (of the spectators), of (their) trees—whose 
charming boughs are weighed down by bunches of flowers and fruits and lovely young 
leaves and which are embraced by the body of creepers—(as well as) of their lakes etc., full 
of limpid water and resorted to by various species of birds living singly as well as in pairs; 
and (even SO) they excel the heavenly world by the sweet and varied notes of birds that have 
taken up their abode in the beds of lotuses andiilies, Kuvalayas, and Kalharas, blue and red, 
lotuses and lotuses with a hundred petals (and so on) in the water of those lakes etc., shaken 
by the leaping of fish—notes that bring a feast of joy (to the hearers) and are confused by 
their uninterrupted sport. (10) There indeed, they say, no fear caused by divisions of time 

such as day and night is observed (among the people since the sun and the moon do not 

shine there and the denizens of those regions are very long-lived). (11) As a matter of fact, 

in those regions the gems on the hoods of the foremost of the great serpents (inhabiting 

them) drive away all darkness. (12) Nor indeed do anxieties and ailments, wrinkles, grey 

hairs and old age (the root of all these) etc., paleness of the body, foul smell (coming from 

the body), perspiration, fatigue and langour—these as well as the changes in age (too) do 

not afflict those residing in these regions because of (their taking) miraculous herbs, saps, 

elixirs, foods and drinks, baths and so on. (13) In fact, death from no cause except from the 

might of the Lord going by the name of his discus (SudarSana) prevails against those blessed 

souls. (14) (And) the moment that discus enters those regions the embryos (carried in the 

womb) of the Asura women generally slip out (from the womb) in their earlier or later stages 

of development through sheer fear (of the discus). (15) 

AMdet AAGASAU Aen aaa at F Al SF YS: VOVTahaaal: HIyateM a Arataar 
Maha UT UM ASIAN Wada: WOT saved tahva: wit: ayaca sia a a 
tat feat waara aferqugqed gee syatse faegisetierqaaeristacaraat yaaa: 
Head Aare FAI VE | 

Now, in (the region of) Atala, lives the demon Bala, son of Maya, by whom, indeed, they 
Say, were released ninety-six (varieties of) conjuring tricks, some of which conjurers practise 
even today. From the mouth of this demon, even as he was yawning (once), sprang up three 
groups of women, called Swairinis (those copulating with men of their class alone), Kaminis 
(copulating with people of other classes too) and Pumscalis (the most fickle-minded among 
the Kaminis). (All) these women render a man, entering this subterranean region, sexually 
fit by (giving them) an elixir called Hataka and afford them sexual delight at will, so they say, 
by their (peculiar) dalliances and sportive glances, love-begotten smiles, affectionate talks 
and embraces etc. When that elixiris taken, a man begins to feel that he is all-powerful, that 
he is all-perfect and, thinking himself as possessing the strength of ten thousand mighty 
elephants, brags like one blinded by intoxication. (16) 

AaISeeATAa Bt WTA Beha: TUM a: Usaha as eos ear TATA 
Ge frepisya Sed Ad: WMT ANAT Cee A Yagataor aa FaayrsqAiahveaan Aaeaqarst 
siisren frat ahasad sleanret qaut OUT ATAU Fea: We Tease | 219 1 

Below that, in (the region of) Vitala, resides Lord Siva (the Destroyer of the universe), 
(known by the name of) Hatakeswara, surrounded by troops of ghosts, forming His retinue, 
and united with His (divine) Spouse (Goddess Parvati) under the name of Bhava (the Source 
of the creation) for multiplying the creation of Brahma (the lord of creation). From Him has 
issued the great river Hataki, charged with the energy of both Lord Bhava and Goddess 








- 


“Lig Bt 
2° 8h ee OF « — © 


536 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 24 


We Re BeBe Re Re ke Be eRe RR A ARERR RR RRR RRR BREE RR RR Re Re RE RE REBT Be Re Re Me BB He He Br Mr Ke Ht Gre He Hr Me HB Be Br Sy Sr Kr Sr Ke Ke Hr Hr Ke Hr Hr ey Wr et tr, 





Bhavani (His Consort), where fire, kindled by. the wind, absorbs with (great) vigour the water 
(of the river), and the same, thrown out (in the form of froth), is condensed into (the variety 
of) gold, known by the name of Hataka which both males and females (who are equally 
strong) in the gynaeceums of the Asura chiefs wear (on their person) in the form of 
ornaments. (17) 

Ads SaHaT: Yael fattest stata wea fog 
PATO AA STHTAN FRAT AS ATA ASAT Waren aal wWraa pH ars TA: Tah org 
Saleen Cayo erarkiape : ardor TATA TET TATA TTT ETT 
SATA SIA 1 Yo LAT WAAR TAT PTAA A TACT Sa TRA Site TAT a 
THI aed deat Wa sous war sige wTateigaate oufrafenes 


Aaeaenigned aectterayaay | 8% AA ale UAT A aM ay faa: APaAMyory 
Ueu: wasn fapitfe ae ta wierd qyaratsaeetacat! ot 
ARRAAHa PAM AH BHATIA LI A aA WIAIAARSNASITe AeA 
Greases «=| areaTaartyadtaraqdiar eet | aM Tareas 
Gears aA Eda aad Aa aSurarsiva aataqad feat aratag sta 
Sara | VBI AA Aaa wTaMeay a Foon atsafaat Gea afaat Hara Fad Carder 
Fe aed ee PARA U-S UN AAT AA AVANT a Al a EAA TEMA: Tages 
Watihad fHacctim aaa | Wx | Gearqeratarntadame: fea ad 4 I cata 
Gea diva Uwe daa wad: udtafa wradrd we cafaaiti ey! aa 
Ae waeaqaaayisian ara: al areaige: uftetrunaaque sutsmifaadttett 26 1 
TATA AUN gett ead Ge MTA] ASA aes TgS Mau Elie Tararurratagyd 
Pommiqe fadgeat Sarg BA Wel quant aerrgarad fattasa serfed: | 20 | 
Below that, in (the region of) Sutala, resides, free from (all) fear, even to this day (the 
demon king) Bali of sacred renown, the illustrious son of Virocana. (Once) robbed of (the 
sovereignty of all) the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) by the Lord— 
who in order to please the mighty Indra (the chief of the gods) descended through (the womb 
of) Aditi (the mother of the gods and a wife of the sage KaSyapa) and appeared (before him) 
in the form of a celibate dwarf—he was admitted (into this realm) through the Lord's very 
grace and endowed once more with overflowing wealth, (the like of) whichis not forthcoming 
even with Indra and others, and continues to worship the same adorable Lord through (the 
performance of) his duty. (18) The (great) fortune which is enjoyed by Baliin the subterranean 
region of Sutala is certainly not the direct result of the gift (made by him) of land (in the 
shape of the sovereignty of the three worlds), inasmuch as it was duly bestowed, with 
supreme piety and with a calm and composed mind full of highest regard, on the celebrated 
Lord Vasudeva (the Abode of the whole universe)—the Supreme Spirit, the very life 
(animating principle) and Soul (the Inner Controller) of all species of living beings, the holiest 
recipient presenting Himself (before him)—and was (therefore) directly conducive to final 
beatitude. (19) A man helplessly (involuntarily) uttering His Name (only) once (even) while 
sneezing, falling down or stumbling and on other (such) occasions actually shakes off 
without delay, itis said, the shackles of Karma (that kept him tied down to worldly existence), 
the means of overcoming which the seekers of liberation find in altogether different 
processes (courses of spiritual disciplines other than the repetition of the Divine Name, such 
as Karmayoga, Jnanayoga and Dhyanayoga, which are so difficult to follow). (20) Hence the 
fortune (referred to above) could not be the fruit of the gift (of land) made—as to one's own 
self—to the Lord, whois the very Self ofall (livingbeings), (particularly) of those who have attained 








pis. 24 ] BOOK FIVE 537 


are He We Br He eR Re RH ae rer tr 
get AAAI SESS ACRE EMERY ORE Re BERT ME BeRe Me BeBe MR Re Re Re BRT BRE RMT RR AR RE ERR ERE REE REE BE BEEBE 


Gelf-Realization, nay, who bestows His own Self on (places Himself at the disposal of) His 
devotees. (21) Nor indeed can It be said that the Lord showered His grace on Indra in that 
He bestowed on him only the illusory pleasures of sense and affluence, which, on the other 
nand, take away the remembrance in relation to the Lord Himself. (22) For, (when) robbed 
of (the sovereignty Of) all the three worlds (and allowed no other possessions) except his 
mere body and thrown intoa mountain-cave, tightly bound with the cords of Varuna (the god 
of water), by the Lord (who did all this) under the pretext of begging for three paces of land) 
because He found no other means (of depriving him of his glory and possessions), Bali 
actually uttered the following memorable words:—(23) "Alas! this glorious god who is called 
Indra is surely not clever in attaining the object of (his) life in that he—whose counseller is 
(the celebrated sage) Brhaspati, exclusively chosen (by him) for deliberation—ignored that 
sage and asked me through Lord Vamana (younger brother of Indra) Himself for (the 
sovereignty of) the three worlds (the objects of his desire) and on no account the service of 
that Lord. (After all) of what account are these three worlds, which change hands at the end 
of a Manvantara (the period of sovereignty of a Manu, extending to a little over seventy-one 
rounds of the four Yugas), a (minute) fraction of Time, which has an infinite duration. (24) 
Itis well-known that my grandfather (the great devotee Prahlada) asked for His service only, 
but not the throne of his father (HiranyakaSipu, the suzerain lord of the three worlds), which 
had (now) no fear from any quarter, even though it was being offered by the Lord on the 
latter's death, (only) because it was something other than the Lord. (25) What individual like 
me, whose passions have not been attenuated and who has totally rejected the Lord's grace, 
can possibly hope to tread in the footsteps of that noble soul?" (26) The narrative of Bali will 
be told at length later on (in Book Eight), at whose door stays, mace in hand, the divine 
Narayana Himself, the adored of the whole universe—Narayana, whose heart is full of 
compassion for His own devotees and by whom Ravana (the ten-headed monster) was 
thrown a hundred million Yojanas away with His toe (when he appeared there) in the course 
of his (expedition for the) conquest of the quarters. (27) 
ad Sedraendet Hal ATA aa a hear dtraa Gaon acitnret Fare uit 
Préteagiaaeiaarerectendeal Weatfaaararal weteas ulicfard faraqagtavar 
Weta 1 22 1 
Below that, in (the region of) Talatala, resides the demon chief, Maya by name, the lord 
of three cities, who had all his three cities (formerly) reduced to ashes by Lord Siva 
(thenceforth known as the Destroyer of the enemy's city) in His eagerness to bring happiness 
(thereby) to all the three worlds, (but) who (later on) secured a footing (in this realm) by His 
grace. He is the teacher of (all) those who are expert in conjuring tricks, stands protected on 
sides by that great deity (Lord Siva) and (therefore) immune trom the fear of Sudarsana (the 
discus of Lord Visnu) and is held‘in great respect (by the denizens of that region). (28) 
adisearaeraa «| eTeaarort wafer tenferet |= eTeagtt AT TT: 
HoH daHwnieraqauntarer aeinaadt: Udder: Taratetetatddigstart: 
araaea sahara frei | 8 I . 
Belo y ion of) Mahatala, lives a many-headed brood of serpents, borno 
Kadra, a ite ihe (eee the chief of them being Kuhaka, Taksaka, Kaliya, Susena, 
and so on. Though possessed of a gigantic form, they are constantly afraid of Garuda (the 
S ‘-ds)—who carries (on his back) Lord Visnu (the Supreme 
Uupreme lord of all the rulers of birds) Ee PSS Pre 
€rson): sometimes they sport recklessly through attachment to their wives, offspring, 


eter 
peors.ang kinsmen. rele erat: wore aa atcha: arctal farraqrarhat gta 
: SSIES . FETA TAT: AAT ATTA A ATT ite TTA 











538 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Dis 
eas rsa San enhaecsaassennaeseeenesnnenenenieaeneteess . 25 


fase sa Aaa a a Mage aA aang forata | Ro | 


Below that, in (the region of) Rasatala, reside (in holes); like serpents, the (notorious 
sons of Diti and Danu (two of the many wives of the sage Kasyapa, the progenitor of the 
various species of living beings), known as the Panis and (further) divided into three classes, 
viz., the Nivatakavacas, the Kaleyas, and the denizens of Hiranyapura. (Natural) enemies 
of the gods, they are very powerful and extremely daring by birth, their pride of Strength 
being quelled only by the brilliant weapon (discus) of Sri Hari, the divine Lord whose glory 
pervades all the worlds. Thanks to the threats in the form of sacred (Vedic) texts employeq 
by Sarama’, the (canine) female messenger of Indra, they are (terribly) afraid of that ruler 
of the gods. (30) 


Aa SeeM Aa et APT HATA ATA ch AGM: Vg ph lereh Ae lglg vate BAIS Es S- 
Hraciyanedaniaa Aah weet frearaha say Ft UsAarayeTae ata 
Ton farhaan Heraora Viaeora: Urdttaataatent caxiferar frerara | 38 | 


sla saerrad AeIgU WAC Gea Waren) veleeatatacrat aaa twa WA AGfets FATT: 1 3 | 


Below that, in (the region of) Patala, dwell the lords of the realm of the Nagas (demon- 
serpents), Sankha, Kulika, Mahasankha, Sweta, Dhanafjaya, Dhrtarastra, Sankhactda, 
Kambala, ASwatara, Devadatta and others, (all) provided with extensive hoods an extremely 
furious (by nature), the chief of whom is Vasuki. The big and shining gems fixed on the hoods 
of these serpents—that are possessed of five, seven, ten, hundred and (in some Cases even) 
thousand heads (respectively)—drive away by their splendour the (entire) mass of darkness 
prevailing in the (nethermost) region of Patala. (31) 


Thus ends the twenty-fourth discourse entitled "The position of Rahu etc., and the limits of the 
heavenlike terrestrial regions" in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


CIS SES eS 


aq Usfavirseara: 


Discourse XXV 
A supplement to the description of the subterranean system 
AY SAA 
deat Actes fisreisagerdt set ar a Hor wradenadt waren sia 
Maia area: Usdvmeararcaant + astride | werd faafrarsct 
Mad SMa: Moana waharra wiser frat fase sa Mesa | 21 aA s al ga 
BIT TAS A SA Perera Pe AS AAT ATS Ui AA BH Uchlayleye a arhAaRTS 


* According to a Vedic legend, the Panis once stole away the earth and hid it under water. Indra sent down a heavenly bitch 
(the mother of the canine race), Sarama by name, to trace out the globe. The Panis tried to confer with Sarama with a view 
to compromise; but Sarama spurned their offer and uttered the following words by way of a threat :— €dl Saul W4: way — 


(Killed by Indra, lie down on the battle-field, O Panis! ) The Panis are terribly afraid of Indra, the legend further tells us, ever 
since they heard this threat from the mouth of Sarama. 





a 


——— ee ore ee _ — - -- - 


pis. 25] BOOK FIVE 539 


HARA SSS SS SSSA LALLA LARA EERE ARATE AE AREER EERE ERR AREER EREERRERE EERE EAE 


WAGs 3! | _ Aeeftncrgnenenfarerantirusnsseraeads: Ae 
MAT ATA TT: KISTSTA UR HVS UTA SATUS aA ERTUT 
wafadtate: Sq ofaciteaPaix: «oada 3 of 29 area STSTa 
aferearamreta Haga afaeaaneeaaas ee rea hranafaeaurare ur 
Hola tatdeinted date fact fretewaka | GLE Ud WMATA SAAN Saas 
Tae CHAT TARTT SIT 1 & | 
Sri Suka resumed : At a distance of thirty thousand Yojanas below (the region of) 
Patala, resides that part manifestation of the Lord, presiding over destruction (a function of 
Tamoguna), who is known as Lord Ananta, and whom the followers of the Satvata 
(Vaisnava) cult speak of as Sankarsana because it is He who fully draws together (perfectly 
unites or identifies) the subject—the perceiver—and the object—that which is perceived — 
by presiding over the ego and is characterized by the l-consciousness (with respect to the 
body, senses and so on). (1) Being (actually) supported on only one of the heads of the Lord 
appearing in the form of Ananta (Sesa) with a thousand heads, this terrestrial globe looks 
like a mustard seed. (2) From between the agitated eye-brows—knit in anger, yet possessing 
a peculiar charm—of the same Lord, when He intends to dissolve this universe at the proper 
time (the time appointed for its destruction), springs up the god of destruction called 
Sankarsana (one born of Sankarsana) appearing in eleven (different) forms, with three eyes 
and holding up a trident. (3) Bowing (at His feet) alongwith the foremost of devotees with 
exclusive and intense devotion, the lord of the serpent-demons indeed behold, in the ruddy 
and spherical nails—bright as rubies—of His pair of lotus-feet, their most charming faces 
with the cheeks brightened by the sheen of their brilliant ear-rings, the sight of which fills their 
mind with rapture. (4) Painting with the pigment-like paste of aloe-wood, sandal-wood and 
saffron the bright, long, snow-white, elegant and charming arm—strikingly set in the lovely 
sphere of His body like silver pillars—and seeking blessings—(of Him), the unmarried 
princesses of the serpent-demons, it is said, put on winsome and graceful smiles under the 
sway of love stealing into their hearts thrilled with the touch of His person, and bashfully look 
at His lotus-like face, delighted through love and inebriety, with His ruddy eyes swimming 
through intoxication and casting a merciful look at them. (5) The selfsame Lord Ananta, an 
ocean of endless virtues, the most ancient deity, resides (there) for the welfare of (all) the 
worlds, having restrained the force of His indignation and wrath (as appropriate to the 
occasion of destruction of the world but inopportune at other times). (6) 





TRUER OCC EO ICCIGRRILME CO COLGIRBIFE GIR MERC CCIE UCICE Ors 
WSMASS ANU Sa HIS HATAaNcited fersthet 19 | 
He is being meditated upon by hosts of gods and demons, Nagas and Siddhas, 
Gandharvas and Vidyadharas and hermits, and is ever cheerful through inebriety has rolling 
and restless eyes, and continues to delight Mis (own) attendants as well as the leaders of 
the heavenly hosts (waiting upon Him) with the nectar of His most charming speech. Clad 
in blue, and having only one ear-ring (in one of His ears), He has one of His gracetul and 
beautiful hands placed on the top of a plough (His favourite weapon) and, (while) like the 
great elephant (known by the name of Airavata) of the mighty Indra wearing (its) girth of gold, 
Lord Sankarsana of beneficent activity wears (on His person) His own sylvan wreath, (called) 
Vaijayanti, whose elegance is enhanced by the melodious humming (all about it) of swarms 
Of bees drunk with the fragrant and sweet honey of the new Tulasi (basil) blossoms of 


unfading loveliness. (7) 








540 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 
LREOAKLKLASKMLKeLBVLHAAAHAHOHHLHAAKAAMAHK KEK AAAH Ree Ree BER RE eB. He BH BH BEE He BE HEHE HY Be Be Be Hr Be BE HY Re He He Be Hr HR Be Prk Hr he wy 


a SS = =a to 
Que wanqad eae qquriianradarnsiemiaamd Ranh 
Sree Tet sty RRS Tear, Ta, aaa ANE: UE Geapeuy 
UUM AAV: AYoHaara | ¢ | 
Heard of as aforesaid from the mouth of a preceptor and being contemplated upon 
(accordingly), Sankarsana enters the heart of the seekers of Liberation and quickly breaks 
asunder the knot of ignorance formed in their heart as a result of tendencies to action, 
existing from time without beginning and constituted of (the three modes of Prakrti, viz. , 
Sattva, Rajas and Tamas. The glorious Narada, son of Brahma (the self-born) duly extolleq 
(on one occasion) with Tumburu (the celebrated Gandharva) in the court of Brahma (his 
father) the glories of the selfsame Lord (as follows):—(8) 


Subakafacaeda sea Heat: Arae: Valero actararssary 
aga yard ane AMM € aq Ae act <1 
Wd A: Yeprwa aun aa da aaeled fawnia aa 
ecient WMUfaee STACI TAMA aNata: 1 0 | 
aaa adaqelddeneterd at aie Utd: 9 Wermsriey 
ewe: wae Forages a wWeeTad sea: 1k | 
Fela aaypacce aye et aria Aaa | 
WiwleMiddianaa WA: cl atatvafenroracasatst|E: 122 
warmurar WTA Tat Staalarequrqu4e: | 
Yet tare: fer sietdat at citetar ent fea fasitiest 


"How can one possibly know in reality the ways (the truth) of that Brahma by whose 
thought (resolve to create the universe) the modes of Prakrti, Sattva and so on—which are 
(severally) responsible for the creation, continuation (preservation) and dissolution of this 
universe—are able (to function), (nay,) whose character is eternal and uncaused 
(beginningless) inasmuch as, though one (before creation), it (produced and) bore in itself 
(this) multiform universe ? (9) The same Brahma (transcendent Reality), in which appears 
as distinct this manifest (gross) and unmanifest (subtle) creation, assumed out of abounding 
compassion for us a form—consisting of Sattva (which is) entirely pure (unmixed with Rajas 
and Tamas)—by which He chose to enact faultless (innocent) sports in order to captivate 
the minds of His devotees, possessed as He is of unlimited energy like a lion (the king of 
beasts). (10) (Even) if a fallen man in distress utters His name (as) heard (from the mouth 
of a preceptor or anyone else) or even by chance, or (even) in a spirit of ridicule, he (not only 
purifies himself then and there but) wipes out at once all the sin of (even other) men (who 
merely think of him, much more of those who see him)! Whom other than Lord Sesa (who 
grants the privilege of His service to those who seek refuge in Him) should one seeking 
Liberation have recourse to? (11) Who can (hope to) exhaust by counting, even if endowed 
with a thousand tongues, the (list of) exploits of that infinite Lord, whose prowess cannot at 
all be measured because of its unlimited nature, and on whose (one) head has been placed 
(by Him of His own free will) the terrestrial globe—with (all its) mountains, rivers, oceans and 
(numberless) living beings like a (mere) atom, while He is possessed of a thousand (such) 
heads? (12) Such is the glory of Lord Ananta, possessed of infinite strength and numberless 
virtues and potencies, who supports the earth (on one of His heads) as a (mere) sport 
(without any effort) for the maintenance of the entire creation, residing below the earth, 
Himself supported by ( none but) His own Self." (13) 





ee 
wa - — 





541 
Dis 26 BOOK FIVE Sr Pe Ke Re Se MAB KAA AAA NAAN 


REAR AREL LEA EERE L EEE EAA ELLA LAL AAAS ELE TIAA LE ALAA HH ASS EEL EALAS 
um @ae yfreuren nad uerndfaite aareesraqafuta: aTart 
aTaaArt: | W¥i Udtadte ws, da: wafteanna ica facranda seat 
fadee aaa caraca faaeneram sfai 2&1 


ee aioe 
These indeed are the only destinations (regions) in this universe to be reached (as a 
reward for merit) by men—seeking (their) desired blessings—according to (the nature of 
their) actions, and created (by God). They have been described (by me) as | was taught (by 
my revered father and preceptor, the sage Vedavyasa). (14) | have described at length, in 
response to your queries, the diverse destinies (both) high and low, reached as a reward of 
virtue in the form of activity practised by man, which are only so many, O king, (Pariksit)! What 
else shall we discourse upon? (15) 


Thus ends the twenty-fifth discourse entitled "A supplement to the description of the 
subterranean system" in Book Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


ag Wefayitseara: 
Discourse XXVI 
A description of the infernal regions 
Wawa 
Wed Udelast cle cafaiaies 
The king (Pariksit) asked : How is this heterogeneity in the universe (to be accounted 
for), O great sage? (1) 
WaAIeaTA 


Prporaicnd: saat Hada: yaaa: Wal Wa WAS ANCA Yate 21 AMart 
Ulafiacenreanenia ata ad: sera aaievarecndet fadest vata ar gareliaerar 
HPIHAMA AALINIAAAIN: Yaa: Meal: Walaa Uys Ua eagears: | 3 | 

The sage (Sri Suka) replied : A doer being swayed by (one of) the three Gunas (modes 
of Prakrti), the destinies reached through the various actions (done by him) vary according 
to the (nature of) faith (by which those actions are prompted, and which is also of three kinds 
according as it is Sattvika, Rajasika or Tamasika in character), and all (those) destinies are 
attained, more or less, by everyone (at different times). (2) Exactly in the same way, the fruit 
Of action accruing to a perpetrator of sin—which is (only) distinguished by the interdiction 
attaching thereto—varies according to the diverse types of faith. Accordingly, we shall now 
describe the more prominent of the thousands of (infernal) states, ordained by God, and 
resulting from sins committed by those who cherish desires (of various kinds) through (the 
darkness of) ignorance prevailing (in their heart) from time without beginning. (3) 


Usa 
art wa way fe eefastar siren afefaciaa aretha sitiv 


The king inquired: Are the infernal regions referred to by you, O divine sage, particular 
Sports on the face of the earth or are they located outside the egg-shaped universe or inside 


it (between some spheres)? (4) 


SE EAE ALS DA IERS OEE OE Pe ee ge teh 
ae ee Py we: we, os ’ - « 9 Ory —~ 





- 


542 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 26 


ARKRAKLHRKARARKAAHRRALARARAARKH HARA AALAH HAHA RASS SES SE SS SEA aS eH ee seg 


RVeaTa 


sane Ua frome fefir afaroreamerenqneukere wererami aren: 
frqarorn FRPST Ka TATOTE VLATT VAT AAT TTS STTVTTATAT aa | & 1a ara 
amar faqust daca: wiaed wifity Taqeasgdqy AAAe Aarantag 
SAA eet gs ATTACH AT: STON GH MTA I & laa fch AH eH rage Watt ster ais 
UST ATA SUA UTA Sao TAMA STMT Ua HEN a: Hest aeh : Hrergaah aaa 
SGU: Hiasilert: Cava Haan vecH Merch saan Fara: WU ret Farerat 
SUT: AAAS AAA AA: OTe | Pea AAT CATO: VCMT Gag oAT Sele Pe: 
Weatadst: fataerarcarsyara: | 9 | 
The sage replied : They lie within this universe below the earth and above the water 
(filling the rest of the space up to the shell of the mundane egg) on the southern side. In that 
quarter reside the groups of the manes called the Agniswattas and so on, contemplating on 
the Lord through supreme concentration of mind and invoking only real blessings on their 
scions (on the earth). (5) There also, it is said, resides the glorious Yama (son of Vivaswan, 
the sun-goa), the ruler of the manes, along with his attendants, and inflicts punishmentin the 
same form as the crime itself on the departed Jivas (embodied souls)—brought to his realm 
by his servants—strictly in proportion to the sin attaching to their (evil) deeds, taking care not 
to violate the commands (the penal code) of the almighty Lord (neither showing any favour 
to the evil-doers by remitting the rigour of his rod nor inflicting a penalty heavier than what 
they deserve, thus holding the scales even). (6) Some (learned men) actually declare the 
number of hells (the departments of punishment) in that region as twenty-one. Now, we are 
going to describe them to you, O king, in order along with reference to their name, 
appearance (the forms of punishment inflicted in each) and character (the nature of sins that 
are sought to be expiated through them). They are named as Tamisra, Andhatamisra, 
Raurava, Maharaurava, Kumbhipaka, Kalasttra, Asipatravana, Sukaramukha, Andhakupa, 
Krmibhojana, Samdamsa, Taptasurmi, Vajrakantakasalmali, Vaitarani, Puyoda, Pranarodha, 
Visasana, Lalabhaksa, Sarameyadana, Avici and Ayahpana. Including seven more, Viz., 
Ksarakardama, Raksoganabhojana, Sulaprota, Dandastka, Avatanirodhana, Paryavartana 
and Sucimukha, there are (all told) twenty-eight hells, places where tortures of various kinds 
are gone through (by the sinful). (7) 
wa Se Wiarnaeacavaretta a fe aremgest Gaeta ania AT 
AM AMA SAS AM aa Wav S A SAMs er Maa Ma AAA silat HYACTATaad Wana 
Tetuanta area ¢1 watarente aq aster yer auidiyaqead aa wht 
Peat area tera Asakriseteye vata war area yeaa Aer Sera 
aquest 1 
Of these, he who takes away (by force or fraud) another's wealth, child or wife is indeed 
bound with the cords of Death and forcibly thrown by the most dreadful servants of Yama 
into the hell called Tamisra. Being tormented in that utterly dark region by being deprived of 
food and water, belaboured with cudgels, and severely scolded and with other (such) 
tortures, the Jiva is filled with dismay and falls into a swoon that very moment. (8) Even sO 
he, indeed, who enjoys the wife etc., of another by deceiving the man is cast into (the hell 
called) Andhatamisra. (As itis) being thrown into that hell and (while) undergoing the tortures 
(peculiar to it), the Jiva (embodied soul) is deprived, through agony, of its consciousness an 


vision, like a tree which Is being cut at the root. Hence they call this (particular) hell (by the 
name of) Anchatamisra (that which is full of blinding darkness). (9) 


aikae a Udeehhtat aAahit yasteur act HemMantet wena a ates fears 





Dis. 26 ] BOOK FIVE 543 


Ge BeBe RRR BR RB LER RR RB BE BRR RB RR BERR RRR RRR RRA RRR RR RRR ERE EERE REBEL REE BRE SELES RE BESET. 





wana TaN tha Praca | 90 1a fag astangn fatéfaa waa: WA AAT A 
Ua Stal Yat aan aaa fafeaha ceshafieang weftta autefrpvaraeades: | 8k! 
Tata Tena aa Pata Get Haren Aa Staal HAUT Uda Ge act CSET: 12 


Again, he indeed who fondly nourishes from day to day his own family exclusively 
through hostility to (other) living beings in this world, regarding the body alone as his self and 
the objects of this world (viz., his wife, children, house and other belongings) as his own, 
leaves them (the body and everything else) here and himself alone (accompanied by none) 
falls into (the hell called) Raurava because of the sin resulting from such hostility. (10) 
Further, the very creatures that were killed by him here are born as Rurus in the other world 
(in that hellish region) and kill the same fellow—when he goes through the tortures inflicted 
by Yama—in the same way as they were killed by him. Hence they speak of that region as 
Raurava (the abode full of Rurus), Ruru being the name of a creature more ferocious (even) 
than a snake. (11) Quite similar is (the hell called) Maharaurava (a class of) Rurus, called 
Kravyadas (flesh-eaters, so-called because of their being carnivorous by nature) kill for the 
sake of flesh the man who solely nourishes (here) his own body (hating others), and 
(consequently) falls into that region. (12) 

afeag at Sa: Ug Ufa at wore satrata ae ot Gearerte fantsaayqa Gare: 
Hrlaieh aatdet Sued | 83 laheate fagraraelelep A chlelg adage Ath SIMs S et 
Wana Aa SATA ANAM aA Sasa: AaaaNVA aA SAA aaeS ge 
sed Bia MEdSafasta URerata a aaka agranfor araguaeeiiar | VX 

Again, in (the hell called) Kumbhipaka in the region, the servants of Yama fry in boiling 
oil that merciless fellow, censured even by the Raksasas (those feeding on the human flesh), 
who is actually so cruel as to cook beasts and birds alive..(13) Further, he who is hostile to 
his (own) father, a Brahmana, or the Vedas is thrown into the hell called Kalasutra, 
(consisting of) a burning level sheet of copper, having a circumference of ten thousand 
Yojanas and being excessively heated (both) above and below by the sun and fire 
(respectively); and his mind and body being tormented with hunger and thirst, he continues 
(there) for as many thousand years as there are hair on the body of a beast (for, in fact, he 
is no better than a beast)—(now) sitting, (now) lying down and rolling about (restlessly), and 
(now) springing on his feet and running in every direction. (14) 

Qieae & frracaaeaaeand: wravs wuondedataarad Wave Hyal Wath aa 
SMMfadea MARA BUAdeitedtataaayoadaaieal St ediseitid UA Aqzar 
qhasa: ue ue Prudta taeder URaUSTyTd Tet YS | kh I 

Him, again, who actually deviates here from the path chalked out for him by the 
Vedas, otherwise than in an emergency (warranting such a course) and embraces a 
heretic creed, the servants of Yama throw into (the hell called) Asipatravana (a cluster 
of trees having sword-like leaves) and beat with a whip. Actually running there to and fro 
with all his limbs being torn by the sword-like leaves—sharp-edged on both sides—of the 
Palmyra trees in that grove, and crying ‘Ah ! | am finished! he drops down unconscious 
at every step through excessive agony and, apostate as he is, reaps the fruit of the sin 
attaching to heretics. (15) 


afae A UST WAGES al BevSd GUS Waid AMelot at WNaS A Giana SHA : 
HIATT AAaSIgoaral SUweHI: | VE | , 


Again, a king or a king's officer who inflicts punishment on one undeserving of 








544 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


is. 2 
SAAR EARERAAAAAAA AERA AAELASA ALLL ELAR AA AAT T AAAS LETRA REAR HH ee ee! 


punishment cr corporal punishment on a Brahmana—such an atrocious soul falls hereafter 
into the hell known as Sukaramukha. With his limbs being crushed by most powerful hands 
even as a piece of sugar-cane is crushed (in a cane-crushing machine) here, he is filled with 
(great) consternation (now) shrieking in a piteous tone and now fainting, even like men who 
were detained by him here, though not found guilty. (16) 
aha a yarmivearenfeadnquinatataantareret tat Gear ean hatetterarateret 
aorta (AT ICCefTeOT ss Poict 6s tt eet A: 
aging uatetiaa mh altgenet:  aedlshgeaoredtis 
Preahralreiacteanraeart: UAHA Ta HINT sitar: 1 V9 | 
Again, he indeed whose mode of life in this world (regulated by a number of injunctions 
and interdictions based on the division of society into so many Varnas or grades and 
Asramas or stages in life) has been determined by the Cosmic Person Himself (by assigning 
the different parts of His Body to the four Varnas—the mouth to the Brahmanas, the arms 
to the Ksatriyas, the thighs to the Vaisyas and the feet to the Sudras) and by whom the agony 
of others is (easily) understood (inferred from his own experience) and who (nonetheless) 
inflicts pain on creatures whose means of living (such as sucking the human blood) have 
been (similarly) determined by God (appearing as the Creator) and by which the agony of 
others is not known (inasmuch as they are devoid or reason and as such incapable of 
drawing conclusions) descends after death into (the hell called) Andhakupa because of his 
hatred towards those creatures. Being actually hated on all sides in that region by deer and 
other beasts, birds and reptiles, mosquitoes andlice, bugs and flies and other living beings— 
whatsoever were killed by him (here)—he has his sleep and peace of mind disturbed and, 


finding no rest (anywhere), roams about in darkness just as the Jiva (an embodied soul) 
remains restless in an unsound (diseased) body. (17) 


aheae at seasreangante anastasia aaa: BO Hares 
Tene Todd dat yiddeaast plagues playa: tad pfafura yeaa: past 
Tae MVEM asaya Adad | W261 Aedes A Ha Acie fava Arava 
AMAIA AA Teas Us] AAS MT SaaS: Maver Prep ated 1 2k I 
aieas a strat faa at qed afvefimmeata araqa wera dsanternar gat 
cet YSutcgard had a Yours Wat! 201 ufeag a aalfirmmenaga fra 
adhd Aphve Menai rested 1 22 1 
Again, he who eats here whatever comes to him, without sharing* it (with others) and 
without performing the five (kinds of daily) sacrificest (obligatory on a householder) has 


~ Itis laid down in our scriptures that a householder should take his meal only after he has fed a stranger waiting at his door, 
the servants of his household, the young children and the aged of the family, married sisters and daughters and so on. 

T The five kinds of daily sacrifices enjoined on a householder are given in a nutshell in the following couplet of the 
Manusmirti :— 

Aa Fea: gael TOM eT cat afer Fastsfaterqsr 
(II1.70-71) 

They are :—— (1) Brahmayajna or propitiation of the Rsis (to whom we owe all our knowledge, both temporal and spiritual), 
consisting in teaching and chanting the Vedas and thus sharing with others the benefits of the knowledge bequeathed to us 
by the Rsis; (2) Pitryajna or acknowledgment of our debt to the departed ancestors including the eternal Pitrs in the form of 
Tarpana or pouring water for their gratification; (3) Daivayajfia or propitiation of the gods through Homa or pouring oblations 
into the sacred fire in their name; (4) Bhitayajfia or acknowledgment of our debt to the sub-human creation by offering a portion 


of the daily meal to all creatures; and (5) Nryajna or worship of our fellow-beings, which consists in offering homage toa strange! 
who calls at our door by feeding and affording shelter to him. 





Dis. 26 ] BOOK FIVE 545 
Be REESE SERRE ERRATA EARLE TR AREAL EAA AEA SAE SSE 


been likened toa crow and falls hereafter into the worst of (all) hells, called Krmibhojana. 
Born as a worm in a pool full of worms, a hundred thousand Yojanas in extent, the fellow who 
(thus) ate food a part of which had neither been given to others nor offered as oblation to fire 
lives there on worms, himself preyed upon (in his turn) by those very worms, and subjects 
himself to (suffers) tortures for as many years as there are Yojanas constituting the extent 
of that pool, unless the sin was already expiated by him (during his very lifetime). (18) Again, 
the servants of Yama, O king (Pariksit), tear hereafter (in the hell called Sarndarhga) with red- 
hot balls of iron or pairs of nippers the skin of the man who actually takes away here by theft 
or force gold or jewels etc., belonging to a Brahmana or, otherwise than in an emergency 
warranting such a course, (even) to another. (19) Again, thrashing with a whip hereafter (in 
the hell called Taptastrmi) the man who actually copulates with a woman, unworthy of being 
so used, and the woman, who unites sexually with a man unworthy of being so approached, 
the servants of Yama force the man to embrace a red-hot iron image (of a woman) and the 
woman, a similar image of a male. (20) And him who actually commits here sexual 
intercourse (indiscriminately) with all (including animals), when he reaches the infernal 
region (called Vajrakantakasalmali) hereafter, they place on a silk-cotton tree bristling with 
adamantine thorns and (then) drag him (down along the thorns so as to tear his body). (21) 
a fae & UST USGS at sonaver entaqy fireha & aeater Aarvai 
Riematerereant «= rauiteryarat «aet S areretikaeaedt «So Nea Ss stieaTSs 
faqenrigagueaarn: west adueaqend fauqaqayiftrehyarkeater- 
Araaerate aq ard | 21a fags @ queitudal asviiarantanedadeten: WWreaat 
onttedt & arta tea Gafauyayeranenguiuea Fudka acataatufadasyard | 23 1a hae a 
vated aeuiea wager sdtet a ymfsata aft amtareceayary 
aaqear safuteeated | 2X1 
Again, those Ksatriyas (men belonging to the ruling class) or officers of a king who 
transgress here the bounds of piety (as prescribed by the Vedas), even though they have 
not embraced a heretic creed (and still profess the Vedic religion), fall on their death into (the 
river called) Vaitarani for having violated restrictions (imposed by religion). Being gnawed 
in that river—which serves as a most round (the region of) hell and carries in its flood ordure, 
urine, pus, blood, hair, nails, bones, fat, flesh and marrow—by hosts of aquatic animals here 
and there, yet not disunited from their body or life and sustained by their own sin, they feel 
(greatly) distressed by the thought of the (bitter) fruits of their (evil) deeds. (22) Again, they 
too, who having kept here a low-caste woman (though themselves born of a noble pedigree) 
and cast to the winds (all) purity, pious conduct and restrictions (about food etc.), lead the | 
life of a beast, abandoning all shame, fall after death into an oceanlike pond (called Puyoda), 
full to the brim with pus, faeces, urine, phlegm and dirt, and feed exclusively on that most ) 
detestable stuff. (23) Again, the servants of Yama pierce (in the hell called Prananirodha) | 
with arrows, as a target, those Brahmanas and others, on their death, who, rearing dogs and 
donkeys here and taking delight in chase, actually kill animals otherwise than as enjoined 
(by the scriptures). (24) 7 
a Rae & arftsrent cera y oe fagratd array ferecites agra Ara abreariaraacret 
arafacan fasraha | 24 afeas a art rat fast ta: rea arate ded wpa 
Vapearat urafacen ta: PaaS | AE 14 fag a@ qeaatsat Wer WA Stat aT 
faceata csr wseter at aivarta fe Uta AAG Ase ET: Vat: Aerials fa eiaga 
rd weal 291 aheae at ayd aata wad xeafataa art at wats 4 wea 
Te safer: firantet aerendregrre fyst: ward aa weita 
WTAE aT aaa haraerere Perea Aor Tt Hera oT: Tat TAAL RS I 








546 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 26 


LRA AR KALA RHA AR ALAA ALAA AAAS E ELA EAL A LAL A A EE EE RL Be BR Hh Bh Bag, 
TOS eee Cree?r?‘ee—e ll aS 


Again, those in charge of the infernal region (the officers of Yama) put to (great) torture 
and (then) hack to pieces in the other world those hypocrites who actually slaughter animals 
here in sacrifices performed for mere show (to deceive others), when they fall into the infernay 
region called Vaisasa (ViSasana). (25) Again, they throw into a river of semen (the hell known 
by the name of Lalabhaksa), in the other world, that sinful Dwija (a member of the twice- 
born classes) who, blinded by passion, actually causes his wife, belonging to the same caste 
(as his own), to drink (his) semen here, and make her drink his fill of that semen. (26) Again, 
seven hundred and twenty hounds with adamantine teeth, which are no other than the 
messengers of Yama (representing the three hundred and sixty days and the same number 
of nights constituting a year), indeed veraciously munch in the other world in (the hell Called) 
Sarameyadana, those robbers, kings or soldiers of a king's army who, resorting to arson and 
poisoning actually loot here villages and companies of merchants travelling together. (27) 
He, again, who actually tells a lie here while giving evidence (in a law-suit), in bartering 
(buying and selling) goods or while making a gift, on any account whatsoever, is hurled 
headlong after death from a (steep) mountain-top, a hundred Yojanas high, in the hell called 
Avicimat, where there is no support to stand upon (because of the steep nature of the 
mountain) and where land with a rocky surface appears like water; hence the name ‘Avicimat' 
(having no water* ). There the man does not die even though his body continues to be 
shattered to minute particles, and falls down the moment he is lifted up (to the mountain-top) 
again. (28) 

Aieae ao faUl Ustal AVA aT AAU etecn cra aT Ae Adearsha ar Traht waracerar 
Pra Thera UelssHeaes afeat Fant rota Presa! 29 1 star a aleae ar 

MAA Mat CAAA AAAs aANaAUT Sa GIA A AE Aa A Ade Wa Year 

atcha tirasarepiynn Parad Stat Aral WIAA | Zo | 

Again, if a Brahmana (a member of the priestly class) or his wife or (for that matter) 
anyone observing a sacred vow actually drinks wine here due to perversity or if a Ksatriya 
(one belonging to the ruling or warrior class) or VaiSya (one belonging to the trading and 
agricultural classes) drinks the extract of the Soma plant, the servants of Yama pour iron 
melted with fire into their mouth when they are taken (after death) to the infernal region (called 
Ayahpana), pressing their bosom with their foot. (29) And further he, for one who, (though) 
himself belonging to the lowest strata of society, indeed refuses through self-esteem to 
respect here his superiors in pedigree, austerity, learning, pious conduct, Varna (grade in 


society) and Asrama (stage in life) is as good as dead (through actually living) and indeed 


suffers in terminable tortures when thrown, head foremost, after death into the hell called 
Ksarakardama. (30) 


a fag 4 Geer: Geeta asd aga frat yas ureka diva a ura ga freat 
Aaa Aa TAMTOT: Mien sa Cateetraarangey frat eather a Maat A ETATOTT 
ame Ceara: 122 1a fag ar srarreswva wa at asrarheagarufasrer” Rasta 
VITA SGU Sra Area ASH Vea SHAT BME Waa: SPAT 
ated: Hy deltaltyadeeraqusteaAM Siegel TARA | 32 | 

As regards men who propitiate Goddess Bhadrakali, the god Bhairava and other deities 


here by actually sacrificing human beings to them and women who eat (the meat of) such 
human victims, the men (thus) slaughtered like beasts are reborn as torturing agents in the 


"A sheet of water with a ruffled surface is called 'Vicimat' (having waves or ripples). Therefore, 'Avicimat' means a place 
where there is no such sheet of water actually present but which only appears to have such a sheet of water. 





ss rT’ f° 3?rt SEs BETTE 


Dis. 26 ] BOOK FIVE wat 
BRE RR SI A AE EAM REAR A HAE RACA HAEEAA LE ASEAAAAIESE RE 


form of troops of Raksasas in the abode of Yama (in the hellknownas Raksoganabhojana)and, 
cutting up those men and women into slices with their sword like butchers, drink their hot 
blood and dance and sing in (great) merriment even as those (very) men and women who 
ate (the meat of) their human victims did here. (31) Again, they who actually torture here 
(either) in the woods Or in their village (itself) innocent creatures, anxious to survive— 
inspiring them with confidence by allurement (of various kind) when they have come near; 
and treating them as playthings when they have been transfixed with an iron pin or tied with 
a thread—recollect their sin when their bodies too are transfixed with stakes etc., in the 
course of tortures inflicted by Yama (in the hell called Sdlaprota) on their death, and they are 
further tormented with hunger and thirst and are assailed on every side at every step by 
buzzards, quails and other birds with pointed bills. (32) 


a fae a Yaesahat AT Seaurauran gear wayareast tea wa exer 
Praha aa TA Saefeal: UST: WATTS SUA Tahar ser facta! 3314 fae ar 
sree S FT TRUay Yo Petit Aas aaa aA SMUT Shear eat Preeti | B¥ 
afeae ot sthaaasanTary, at Teurerapaaranyre rata ures Barer Patter cet aes 
Fara Orage aut GACVUSt Wat: MEHlHacad: WaRTSAAE Saher | 34 | Aheae aT 
sTemiuntnegiittdtaten: uddstifagst selergifadar uftepsrmrormeaaeat 
Prffaatandt we saredtatiarta a ate tea cacarenicen aUaaUIgTAS: Aaa AL 
Prodi aa & fangs Wages erage arent sa Uadiss a Ga: aaah 13 | 

Again, those men who, fierce by nature like serpents, actually molest (other) living beings 
here, themselves fall after their death into the hell called DandaStka, where, O king 
(Pariksit), serpents with five and even seven heads approach and devour them as they would 
devour rats. (83) As regards these who actually shut up living beings here in dark holes, 
granaries and caves etc., the servants of Yama likewise thrust them (in their turn) into holes 
etc., in the other world (in the hell called Avatanirodhana) and confine them there with 
poisonous fire and smoke. (34) Again, vultures, buzzards, crows, quails and other birds with 
adamantine bills forcibly pluck out with great mightin the infernal region (called Paryavartana) 
the eyes of that sinful-eyed householder himself who, full of wrath, looks on strangers or 
(other) known visitors here with a malicious eye again and again as if he would actually burn 
them. (35) Again, he who, proud of his opulence and full of egotism, looks askance at others. 
and distrusts all (including his elders), and who, with his heart and face withering through 
anxiety about his wealth being exhausted or lost and himself knowing no peace of mind, 
guards his treasure like a devil, accumulates sin in the process of earning, augmenting and 
Preserving wealth and (consequently) falls after his death into the hell called Sucimukha, 
where, it is said, the servants of Yama (the deity presiding over righteousness), like tailors, 
_ Stitch, all over, the body of the sinful man, clinging to wealth like a demon. (36) 

wdfaen acaHl aarea Ufa wide: Heady way a wad waredaida 4 
Sfateafear aafeavarahad wataur fagia ata eatqatia sara ge I Give a 
SUVast t fafasthd 1 391 

Tieraiareininarect ana thousands of such infernal spots in the abode of Yama; and all 
those treading the path of unrighteousness—whosoever have been spoken of here as well 
as those that have been left unmentioned—enter all these spots one after another, O ruler 
Of the earth. And even so those following the path of virtue enter other regions (heaven etc. ); 
and with the residue of both virtue and sin (when the fruit of the bulk of their stock has been 
f€aped) they both (the virtuous as well as the sinful) return to this land of Bharatavarsa (the 


land of rebirth). (37) 








548 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


[ Dis. 2 
ee rire ttt tet tenner nnn nn nn nnnen errr eee eae 


frafrcaanrmnt srada aed: | Udraravsnien avaqayren wroty feenfeaq 
SUMaa Ad aladl ARTAUTT AAT Aa qe aed way Baan poaaaavtaated: wats 
TUNA Maat A SAAS WTA: UAHA SATAY Segara aM GAT | RS 


The path characterized by Nivrtti or cessation of worldly activity (leading to fina 
beatitude) has been told in detail at the very outset (in Il. li. 24 et seqq.). Of this extent Only 
is the egg-shaped universe, which is depicted in the Puranas as divided into fourteen 
spheres and which is the (most) well-known (and) grossest form of the Supreme Person, 
Bhagavan Narayana Himself, consisting (as it does) of the (three) Gunas (modes) of His own 
Maya (deluding potency known by the name of Prakrti or matter). He who, full of reverence, 
reads (all alone), hears (as recited by another) or recites (to another) the account of it (as) 
told (by me) comes to realize even the incomprehensible (most subtle) aspect of the 
Supreme Spirit, the theme of the Upanisads, his mind being purified through faith and 
devotion. (38) 


Seal Wei AMT Wat WA wad Aha: | eaet Psat VA: Yau fear Aafaha 1 Be 
grad ahalaty:- ayaa aettch ATV ech ace 
Tiel Wal da AULeddivara Wet ay: Aaetsilattcnaea! Xo | 
RETTTT AWA Vetays tA: | 2G | 


at Bak BRS x 
FoI my 


Std Usa: tH-et: AAA: 
Ul Skt: So Aca 


Having heard of the gross as well as of the subtle (incomprehensible) aspect of the Lord, 
the striver should gradually fix his mind with the help of his subtle intellect on the subtle 
aspect, when it has been fully concentrated on the gross aspect. (39) In this way has been 
described by me for you, O king (Pariksit), the relative position of the earth with its (various) 
divisions (Dwipas) and subdivisions (Varsas), rivers and mountains, of the aerial region, the 
(Seven) oceans and the (seven) subterranean regions, the (four) quarters and the infernal 
regions, as well as of the luminaries and the spheres, constituting the wonderful gross 
(material) Body of the almighty Lord, (and) the abode of all species of living beings. (40) 


Thus ends the twenty-sixth discourse entitled "A description of the infernal regions" in Book 
Five of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the 
Paramahamsa-Samhita, consisting of eighteen thousand Slokas, 
composed by the (divine) sage Vedavyasa. 


SE Poet Pavet Fs 
CII rs 


END OF BOOK FIVE. 





e 
tc 
= 
. 


ay: they: 
BID WIA Sez: 


Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana 
Book Six 


Discourse | 
The introductory part of the story of Ajamila 
UMA 


frafrart: afaa snet wat amimnaiuesa seu aad: | 2 | 
sqafioansa aAquafawat wWlatsmactpatoet: wa: ga:1 21 
AMSA AAT AtHIAqalolar: | Wad ASM Sel: Aa Ad: | 3 | 
Prasdrasaeraareta eet al <1 
MNIAUS Ha aMTSaAMd: | safrat faawont a atengufsy: 1 & | 
see ITS aa ARC Ae Coe 


The king (Pariksit) said : The path of Nivrtti (cessation from worldly activity)has been 
duly delineated by your revered self, following which final beatitude (in the form of non-return 
to this world) is attained along with Brahma (the creator) when He (Brahma) has been 
reached by gradual stages (such as the attainment of the abode of the fire-god). (1) And the 
path characterized by worldly activity has also been described (by you in Book lil), O 
(venerable) sage—the path which has for its goal (the attainment of) heavenly and other 
Sense-delights (the product of the three Gunas) and which leads to repeated embodiment 
through the (same) Gunas (for the enjoyment of such pleasures) in the case of the Jivas on 
whom Prakrti has not ceased her hold.(2) The various regions of hell, which are symbolic 
of unrighteousness, have also been depicted by you. And so has been told at length (by you 
in Book IV) the story of the first Manvantara, over which presided (the Manu called) 
Swayambhuva (son of Brahma, the self-born), and so the posterity of Priyavrata and 
Uttanapada as well as the story of (both) these kings. You have also narrated how the 
almighty Lord brought into existence the (seven) Dwipas (the principal divisions of the 
Garth's surface) and (as many) oceans, as well as the mountains and rivers, gardens and 
trees, the disposition of the terrestrial globe—with (special) reference to its divisions, their 
distinctive character and extent—and (likewise) of the luminaries and the subterranean 
regions. (8—5) Now be pleased to explain to me, O highly blessed one, how a man in this 
world can (manage to) escape from hell, full of various horrible tortures. (6) 








550 . SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


sie LaeA ERE REST RE RAE E ERSTE SEERA ERR EERE TREE ESET Bobb t tet mb te were OS. I 
Sh SAA : 
a Afesamfafa auigs: aaa pata snore: 1 
qua wa meni a athie A vader: 1 © | 
aerate 9 ep © add et ferrerettssara | 
au asl Yeotad aa fang fafead eat Paria ¢ | 


Sri Suka replied : Ifa man does not atone during his very lifetime and in the proper wa 

(as laid down in the scriptures such as Manusmrti) for sins committed (by him) with his mind, 
speech and hands (body), he inevitably and actually goes after death to the infernal regions, 
that have already been described by me to you, and which are provide with means of severe 
torments. (7) Therefore, with a body not (yet) incapacitated (for penance), one should take 
prompt measures here, even before death, for the atonement of one's sins, after weighing 
the gravity and lightness of the crime, just as a physician who knows the cause of maladies 
would adopt prompt remedies before it is too late, duly considering the seriousness or 
mildness of a complaint. (8) 


UMNATA 
aa aa | Aaeeisfed| Hata yet facet: safer Her ¢ | 
wHlafradasvalenereata AA: | Waa sae «AR HAART 1 Qt 


The king said : Since a man, though knowing a sin to be hurtful to his self on the 
testimony of what is actually seen and heard of by him, repeats it (even after atoning for it), 
having lost control (over his self), how could there be (any) atonement (for his sins) under 
the circumstances (so long as the sinful propensity is there)? (9) Now he is absolved from 
a sin and now he does it again. Such being the case, | account (all) atonement fruitless 
like the bath of an elephant (which throws dust on its body immediately after it has washed 


itself). (10) 
AMP SAT 

ado adit A didi sedi stageentheareraiad 8 farraiar_i 22! 
Waid: wade oneastanara fel ud Fanner aA: AAA caedd [kx 
qa seed wa a aa alata aaatena ad fata aire 
eearaiest ahr ada: sgatan: faa aecte  aupqeaftarm: 12x! 
SidkhasM AM  ACAUTAUT: | ste sata Hiceda aAtenfra VreHt: 124 
4 AM Waar Wer Yad aa sifets: | aa PONMAMUAGeIAIaay 12S | 
Hata Wa Sle UM: AAlsHalaa: | Yate: Aeaal BX ARTAVTATAUM: 12! 
THis dint Aneel a Reaahd ws Gupta: 1e¢! 

aa: HwMaentacaatard AeTOTATAT ae | 

Aad aa weiyas dae waste asada fe alotirenat: 121 


Sri Suka replied : Indeed the counteraction of a (sinful) act through (another) action (by 
way of penance) is not accepted as radical (since there is every possibility of a mans 
falling back into sin even after the process of expiation has been undergone, so long as he 
is identified with the body), the ignorant (those identified with the body) alone being qualified 
for it (the expiatory process). Self-knowledge (alone) is (therefore) the (true) atonement (for 
it is knowledge alone which eradicates ignorance, the root of sin). (11) Maladies do not 
actually attack him who eats only wholesome food. In the same way, he who practises self- 





Dis. 1 ] BOOK SIX 553 
SR ARAL SLSR LIES RRR RE ER ARABELLA LAR APRA DA SILAS SIE EASE ES. 


(words) to them in a voice (deep) as the rumbling of clouds. (37) 
lame Hy: 
gia oa ada afe fdaeniu:iaa ade aera aa ate mar i3cl 
apuhead fired que: fee aren wiritftaatL cue: fe after: aa anathaenfatarqurry 13% | 
The messengers of Visnu said : If you are really servants of Yama (the deity presiding 
over righteousness), (please) tell us the true character of virtue and also the means of 


ascertaining it. (38) How is punishment meted out and who is intended to be its object? Are 
all the doers subject to punishment or (only) some (doers) of the human species? (39) 


qAGH Hq: 
aastiedt mt wedefoda:i act ana: mana WaT ixol 
a Rae Ae Garda: | quamteareddwterdt ada ixe 
qaish: G aega: aa: wear fea: | a aH: ret emt stat Da Saet ANAT: 121 
wat fag: WH wee geadiad amatalaa avendha after: 1x3 
asad fe usta facta aren: | carton qoregisha tara Mende 1x 
wt mam ameat anf ae adifea: 1a wa ache Yer aM dacua a ixul 
aXe Cea aaa Ua | WA WaaAMaaartad ise | 
adaisaean: caret Wong aw wa ODI EC rts pic Cole tach 
wa Gt ta: «ude | faogaftismdintatsgd = oaret | amare: 1x2! 
aaa Gh wed ada fia aa yYyanat aAsaaafaaen ixel 
usaf: ped wai as aaa cafe: i uma ews AM Sa AAealsad i4ol 
aedd, Sewne fos waferd vedi eadsqaafa ura edatensaritert 1421 
Casha Aas waif. areal ae sae HAonsssrea Yellt 1421 
a fe afaraumi oq fasaada add daa: wad Wl: amifacdord 143 | 
weq franerh alarm Yadd aaa aaetst Mat ala 14s 
we osafaaga 6ogere)= facade: iomeiia, a wa Afaudigragiigetad 1441 
The messengers of Yama replied : Dharma (righteousness) is (that which is) enjoined 
by the Veda and the reverse of it (that which is forbidden by the Veda) is Adharma 
(unrighteousness). And we have heard (from Yama and others) that the Veda is Bhagavan 
Narayana Himself (from whom it has emanated) and self-born (in the sense thatit flows from 
His nostrils by way of respiration without any conscious effort on His part). (40) It is by 
Narayana that all these existences (living beings) made up of (the three modes of Prakrti, 
viz.,) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, are duly evolved in His own being with (their distinctive) 
qualities, denominations, activities and forms. (41) The sun, the fire, the sky, the air, the 
Indriyas (the senses of perception and the organs of action), the moon, the morning and 
evening twilights, day and night, the (four) quarters, water, the earth, Time and Dharma (the 
god of piety)—these.indeed are the witnesses of (the good and evil actions of) a Jiva (an 
Embodied soul). (42) Unrighteousness as ascertained by (the evidence of) these are 
determined to be a fit occasion for punishment. And all doers (without distinction) deserve 
punishment in consideration of their (sinful) actions. (43) For good as well as evil deeds are 
capable of being done by men given to action, O sinless ones, inasmuch as they are (ever) 


[S64] B. M. 20— ~ 


 — 


554 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Bee Re Re Re RRR REE Re RR Re ERR RE BEBE RET Re BEB BEBE BE RE BeBe BY BY BEBE AY He Br Be GYM BY BY HY BY HY Br Br By Hr By Br Hr Hr Hr Sr Sr or fr temnewnwwny OS: 1 
Liu 


associated with the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), and no one invested with a body can hel 
doing action (with one's mind, speech or body). (44) He alone by whom a virtuous or sinfy act 
was performed in this world reaps in the other world the fruit of it in the same manner and to 
the same extent it was actually done. (45) Just as in this world, O jewels among gods, there 
are found three varieties of living beings (viz., those living a life of ease, those dragging a 
miserable existence and those who are partly happy and partly miserable, or again those who 
are tranquil by nature, those who are ferocious and those who are dull, or, according to a thirg 
classification, those who are pious by temperament, those whoare vicious by nature and those 
who are of a mixed temperament, and as this heterogeneity cannot be explained except by 
assuming that the said three types of beings severally performed meritorious, sinful and mixeg 
deeds in the past), so from the diversity (in the proportion) of the three Gunas (manifested in 
the form of virtuous, sinful and mixed types of actions on the part of men in this world) it is 
inferred that they will reap the three corresponding types of fruit (in the form of happiness. 
misery and a mixture of both) in another life. (46) (Again,) just as a current period of time 
indicates the characteristics of the past as well as the future rounds of the same period, so the 
current life (of a man) is illustrative of the merits and sins of the past as well as of the future 
incarnations. (47) (Our master,) the omniscient Yama, who is (another) Brahma (as it were), 
clearly perceives (while) at his (own) capital (Samyamani) by his very mind the former state 
of existence (including the record of virtuous and sinful deeds) of a departed soul and reflects 
with his mind on his future (destiny) too. (48) (Even) as a man in sleep (the dream state) treats 
as his self the body revealed in the dream alone and not the one existing before the dream 
state nor that which will follow the dream state, so the ignorant Jiva (too) identifies itself with 
its existing psycho-physical organism (the one revealed by its past actions) alone and has no 
knowledge of the one preceding it nor of the succeeding one, having lost (all) memory of its 
past incarnation. (49) The Jiva, itself constituting the seventeenth principle (over and above 
the sixteen constituents of the subtle body, with which it stands identified, viz., the ten Indriyas, 
the mind and the five objects of senses, viz., the subtle elements), discharges its own functions 
(of grasping things, locomotion and so on) with the five organs of actions, perceives the five 
objects of senses with the five senses of perception and experiences with the sixteenth (viz., 
the mind) the threefold objects of the senses of perception, the organs of action and the mind, 
all alone. (50) This well-known subtle body, consisting of (the aforesaid) sixteen parts, and a 
product of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, endowed with the three potencies of 
illumination, activity and obscuration respectively) and exceedingly tenacious, subjects the 
Jiva again and again to transmigration, which is a source of joy and sorrow, fear and 
affliction.(51) The ignorant Jiva (which stands identified with a body and), thathas not subdued 
the five senses of perception and the mind, is prompted (by that subtle body) to fall back upon 
action, though unwilling (to do so), and veiling itself with a network of Karma, even as a Silk- 
worm wraps itself in a cocoon, stands bewildered (finding no way out of it). (52), Indeed none 
remains actionless at any time even for an instant; for everyone is forcibly impelled—by 
attachment etc. {born of the three Gunas—Sattva, Rajas and Tamas—anq) resulting from the 
impressions of past actions—to do action against his will. (53) Having found an occasion in 
the form of merit or sin resulting from one's past actions, a psycho-physical organism 
(consisting of a gross and a subtle body) actually moulds itself either after the womb (the 
mother's body) or after the seed (the body of the father) according to the irresistible tendencies 
of the Jiva (occupying it). (54) This degeneration of the soul (in the shape of loss of its blissful 
character and its being reduced toa wretched state as a result of identifying itself with a psycho- 
physical organism) has been due to its association with Prakrti (Matter). (And) the degenera- 
tion ceases before long through devotion to God (and by no other means). (55) 





555 
Dis. 1] BOOK SIX «chess 


CHAR RAERAARE AHAAHAKAAAAAAAKAAAAAAAAAAEAAAAAAAAAALAAAAAAAA AAA AAAS 


qaratatagqegrt WP Ega: | OF pe era 141 

unde at ate: figeecgepe fas: | otela dd ange: mousrafepart 14C! 

cel aiid ares we yfteridk a aq aa uerefoiaaaa 14e! 

ma faeseiien ata fuaaimiedty Wed seeded igo! 

qt oat amied sen ufefermmiam egeaast eda fanifea: 1621 

MMIACAISSAM BWA AMAIA Walle AWA Bat Acaafae 12! 

Afar ae faeces: | aaa AAT ware wefan «2 1631 

ama aera fase aad senard: am: sdiea ae amex! 

fast euratastet Se uefa ofr fawasifram: wfvarrsfagelt: 1641 

AAA ATS ATL SUNTAN: Hela: Herel Waa 1 GE I 

qt wager aaidnfda: istada «Ss fat @TETTERTferfor ict 

ad Ui quel: art pdfeniear Aemisndaedat aa auea yeeafa ec 

fq SerTad ASN URASa Alecia TESA SSI HAASE: 121 

This fellow (Ajamila) was indeed endowed with learning (the knowledge of the Vedas 
and other scriptures), a (veritable) abode of amiability, good conduct and virtues (like 
forgiveness), had taken a vow of worship, prayer and so on and controlled his senses, was 
gentle (and) truthful, well-versed in sacred formulas and pure (in habits). (56) (Nay,) he 
worshipped the sacred fire (by pouring oblations into it) and served his preceptor, strangers 
(calling at his house) and elders, was a friend to all living beings, free from egotism, pious, 
taciturn and uncavilling (by nature). (57) One day, this Brahmana went to the woods in 
obedience to his father's command; and as he returned therefrom, taking fruits and flowers, 
sticks for the sacrificial fire and KuSa grass, he saw (on the way) a (most) profligate Sudra, 
who was a (most) libidinous and shameless fellow, drunk with spirituous liquor distilled from 
meal, sporting with a harlot of the same class—who was not only (similarly) drunk, with her 
eyes swimming through intoxication but stood by his side in a half-naked condition (with the 
knot of her loin-cloth loosened)—and (also) singing and joking with her. (68—60) Seeing her 
folded in the arm of that SGdra, which was painted with unguents exciting lust,.this man 
(Ajamila) was inspired with extravagant passion and succumbed to (the darts of) love all at 
once. (61) Though controlling his mind by recourse to reason with all his firmness and by 
dint of his learning, he could not compose it, agitated as it was with love. (62) Possessed 
by the devil of love excited by (the sight of) that (lewd) woman, and (thus) deprived of reason 
and thinking of her alone with his mind, he actually deviated from his duty (neglected all his 
Sacred obligations). (63) With the entire fortune of his father (at his disposal) he indulged her | 
alone through carnal pleasures delightful to her mind so that she might be pleased (with 
him).(64) The sinful fellow, whose judgement had been crippled by the sidelong glance of | 
that lewd woman, abandoned before long his own wedded wife, a Brahmana girl, still in the 
Prime of youth and bestowed on him (by her father) in view of his noble pedigree. (65) (Having 
Spent on her all the fortune of his father,) this stupid fellow brought money from here and there 
by fair and foul means and maintained the family (progeny) of this woman, who was (soon) 
the mother of many children. (66) Because this fellow—who having violated (the injunc- 


tions of) the scriptures, acted according to his own will and was (therefore) censured by 
(all) worthy men—led a sinful life and lived for a long time in an impure state; eating the food 








a 


556 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA | [Dj 

- 3 CRRA LAAT A ERLE ELLE LEAL SEALER ALE LAL LEE EEE ETERS LALLA ERB Te triewee 4S 
polluted by the touch of a harlot, we shall accordingly take this sinner, who has done No 
atonement (for his crimes so far), to the presence of Yama (who wields the roq of 
punishment), where he will be purified through punishment. (67-68) 


Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the story of Ajamila, 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


°. ys 4 
LYDON OD 


31g fedirarseara: 


Discourse Il 
The messengers of Lord Visnu expound the Bhagavaia 
Dharma (the cult of Devotion) and Ajamila 
ascends to the Lord's supreme Abode 


My Java 
W A Wage 3 anecitaafar sueaia aM Wet Selledaeniiaar: | et 


Sri Sukawenton: Having thus heard and (duly) followed the dissertation of the messengers 


of Yama, the aforesaid messengers of the Lord, who were masters of the moral science, now 


replied to them (as follows), O king (Pariksit) ! (1) 
rE Fy: 
Set mS adem: wed aul aateveaguMag auet aftfad geri 2 | 
Seat fart a A BWI: Bea: GAT: | ale MAG ANA H Atha SOT Ws: | 3 | 
aeleratte TUbitEcted | A ASAT =HPed slHeeqadd | ¥ | 
qas RR ster on: alata fda: 1 wa aduent at a fe ae am ay: 1 & | 
a wa aoe pata faerie yaat ago sree | & | 


The messengers of Visnu said : Oh, whata pity that unrighteousness should penetrate 
the court of the knowers of Dharma (the secret of virtue), where punishment is unnecessarily 
inflicted by those very knowers of Dharma on sinless people who do not deserve any ! (2) 
If iniquity appears in (the heart of) those who are protectors (like a father) and teachers of 
the people and are beneficent and even-minded (to all), whom shall the people resort to for 
protection? (3) Whatever a superior man does, that very thing the common (ignorant) man 
(also) does. The people (at large) follow that which the former sets up as a standard (to be 
followed). (4) Like a brute, the common man himself has no knowledge of righteousness OF 
unrighteousness and (generally) sleeps at ease (over this question), resting his head on the 
lap (utterly depending on the wisdom) of another (his ruler or preceptor). (5) How can it be 
worthy of the latter, if he is full of compassion and deserves the confidence of (all) living 
beings, to seek to harm the unwary world that has thrown itself entirely at his mercy, reposing 
(full) trust on him ? (6) 


aa fe adfdat smrateieamit ae ensex feast ama eer RI | 
Gra garisa gd Westen aa anand we aqrereri ¢ | 


Pahl 


Dis. 2 ] BOOK SIX 557 


Be Br Br Be BEEBE Be BBL Be EGE Be SHG He Be BeBe Re Ht Hr Hee Hr Hr Hr Br Sx Kr Ke Br Hr Br Kr Ke Kr Ke Ke Hr Pe Kr Kr Ke Ke Br Kr Br Re Re Be Pe Ke eRe He He Be Br Be Be Re Be He Sr Br Br Wr Br Br Br Br Be Wr 


wt: Gat eset Eacun: | ahaa & a urdiedisatt ¢ | 
adarrarradnttata Geer ametewt 4 faandaatera afd: 1201 
1  fepcefensigenfefiraen  fagnererrar 4 warfefaa: | 
aa BAAR Ed ASTANA HAL 128 | 
‘eft oafe past feat wa: yaafafe eq 
center etforgae: we aaarad: 1221 


This man has actually done atonement (not only for the sins of this life but) even for sins 
committed (by him) through millions of lives (in the past) in that he uttered, though in a 
helpless state, the name of Sri Hari, which (apart from its being the highest atonement for 
past sins) is a (direct) means to the attainment of (supreme) felicity (final beatitude). (7) The 
atonement for (all) the sins of this (erstwhile) sinner must have been made by the mere fact 
that he pronounced a mere semblance of the four-syllabled name of the Lord, 'NARAYANA’, 
while exclaiming (calling his son in the words): "Narayana, come (here) !"(8) The articulation 
of aname of Lord Visnu—that is the only thorough atonement for the sins of all classes of 
sinners, be he a thief, a drinker (of spirituous liquor), one guilty of treachery to a friend, a 
Brahmana-slayer, one sharing the bed of a preceptor's wife, a slayer of a woman, a king, 
one's own parent or a cow and whatever other (types of) sinners there may be; for thereby 
(by the utterance of the Lord's name) the Lord's (own) mind is directed towards the utterer 
(who is thenceforward remembered by Him as His protege). (9-10) A sinner is not purified 
to that extent (So thoroughly) through fasting and other processes of expiation recommended 
by the expositors of the Veda (Manu and others) as he is by words standing as names for 
Sri Hari, articulated (merely with the tongue); for the utterance of such words puts him in mind 
of the (divine) attributes of the glorious Lord (and thus qualifies the man for final beatitude 
by drawing him towards the Lord, the Bestower of Liberation, unlike the other forms of 
expiation, which exhaust themselves in wiping out the sins). (11) For, the process of 
expiation is not complete if one's mind runs back to evil ways even after the said process 
has been gone through. Therefore, in the case of those seeking the eradication of their (stock 
of) sinful Karma the uttering of the praises of Sri Hari is the only remedy; for the same 
undoubtedly purifies the mind. (12) 

a 860 aaa (CINTA I deat «Maa faa: waz 123! 

Therefore, do not take, by a wrong path (the path of the sinners), (the soul of) this man, 
‘who has done atonement for all (his) sins in that he articulated the Lord's name in full (while, 
as a matter of fact, it wipes out one's sins even when uttered in part) and at a time when he 
was about to die (when there was no possibility of his reverting to the path of sin and thereby 
incurring any more sin; for one cannot ordinarily be expected to take the Lord's name 


precisely at the moment of death). (13) | 
sa ule at elt eoada all AqvoaaaeUMAteeay fag: 12x! | 
Ufad: eafedt Wa: Weed led: lekRaate Gated AAPL A! | 
TS a oA a Weir a oa Al Mais WIM WealeHlh Ae: 1961 
Tara eA A TaTOTfefsa: arent )« ayaa «= dqdiigneteraar 1201 
SaMeaa4r Weleda ae! Asta Gat Gece AMA: 12cI 
aan aeaaaaaarh FSSA | AAAS AMAT + HPealltraseated: 1231 


The learned recognize the articulation of a name of Lord Visnuas capable of eradicating 





: 





Y 


558 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 
ARSC HARA AAA A AAAS EAA A REAR ERSTE SERA AREAS ERE S SESS S SESE S SSSR ERED SRSA ASR E ER EO tree 
all one's sins, even when itis intended to denote someone else, or when itis uttered jestingly 
(in love but not jeeringly) or as an interjection in the midst of a song or out of (Seemin 
disrespect (but not real; for disrespect actually shown to the Lord or a jeer flung at Him 
constitutes in itself an unpardonable sin). (14) A man who articulates the word 'Hari' (or, for 
that matter, any other name of the Lord even ) involuntarily (without any conscious effort on 
his part) when fallen down, stumbled, bitten (by a snake or any other poisonous creature) 
heated (by fever etc.), injured (by a blow) or when he has broken a limb, no longer deserves 
(to suffer) torment (in hell). (15) Arduous and easy processes of expiation have been 
thoughtfully prescribed by the great sages (law-givers) in the case of (comparatively) great 
and small sins. (16) Those sins are (certainly) got rid of by the said processes of expiation 
such as austere penance, charity and Japa (muttering of prayers), but not the kerne| 
(vestiges in the form of impressions) of those sins, which is (also) traceable to the 
unrighteous acts. Those impressions too are obliterated through the service of (devotion to) 
the Lord's feet. (17) Any name of the Lord of excellent renown, which is distinctly pronounced 
(by aman)—(whether) knowingly (with the consciousness that it wipes out all one's sins) or 
unknowingly (without such knowledge)—destroys a man's sins (as Surely) as a fire 
consumes the fuel (under all circumstances, no matter whether it has been kindled by aman 
who knows its burning properties or by an innocent child who is unaware of its burning 
capacity). (18) Just as a medicine possessing the highest potency is sure to produce its 
salutary effect even on one who is unaware Of its efficacy, though taken by chance, so does 
the Lord's name (which is as holy as any sacred text or formula) reveal its efficacy (in the 
shape of wiping out all one's sins) even in the case of him who is unaware of it, when uttered 
by him (even) casually. (19) 
Meh Sara 


aq wa gamuta at wamad qaid araqenfadea fas qearoerierol 
git Sealed are amt Ae AAdH i aa = aC (Gs ATTeTMAATAARaT 122 | 
Sri Suka resumed : Having thus expounded in a well-reasoned and conclusive way the 
cult of Devotion to the Lord (with particular reference to the marvellous efficacy of the Divine 
Name), O king (Pariksit), and extricated the said Brahmana (Ajamila) from the noose of 
Yama (the god of punishment), the messengers of Lord Visnu secured his release from (the 
grip of) Death. (20) Thus foiled in controversy (by the Lord's own messengers), the 


messengers of Yama returned to the presence of Yama (their master) and faithfully reported 
everything to king Yama, O subduer of foes. (21) 
fest: 


Tat: Sepit Ad: | dare farce fae: faga_ aaateda: 1221 
a 86 fea «= weresinge: | aeeT ORR aI feSTET 1231 
SaIesaaavd st AAPA: | et wnvad Ae Afael A WMS IRs! 
SPU ATA ATeICaSTAUTE: | STAT) Tae RASA: 1241 
CS Co Henican: | aa fagitad Ae qacat Sradissemt 126! 
fren fanied ahagepd Honsion! fear set adi aise Geared 1291 
qa 9 fit artery aukadtiatt ware wae Aaa 12C! 
ise Akh Ue Ah Yarcleul! aden: ara aa facta anata: 12°! 


Disentangled from the noose (of Yama) and rid of fear, the Brahmana (Ajamila) was his 
former self again (became healthy and pious as before) and, delighted with their sight, 
bowed his head to the servants of Lord Visnu. (22) Perceiving him eager to speak, the 
servants of Bhagavan Visnu (the Supreme Person) suddenly disappeared at that (very) 





Dis | seatbshtsssnssneeesszusaersieer eso oe ote ane 
spot, even as he looked on, O sinless one! (23) Having heard from the mouth severally of 
the messengers of Sri Krsna (Lord Visnu) and Yama an exposition of the cult of Devotion 
to the Lord—which is untainted by the three Gunas (inasmuch as it is concerned from the 
beginning to the end with the worship of the Lord, who is entirely beyond the realm of the 
three Gunas and takes one beyond the world of matter, which is a product of the three 
Gunas)—and the path of worldly activity (which is mainly concerned with the world of matter 
and holds out the promise of heavenly bliss, a product of the three Gunas, and has been) 
taught by the three Vedas (which mainly deal with rituals), Ajamila too now soon conceived 
devotion to the Lord as a result of hearing the glories of Sri Hari (the Destroyer of all sins) 
and great was his repentance as he recollected his (past) sin. (24-25) (He said to himself,) 
"Oh, it was the worst tragedy for me, who forfeited my Brahmanhood by being born* 
(reproduced in the form of sons) through a Sudra woman, because of my being unable to 
curb my (lower) self (animal passions) ! (26) Fie upon my wicked self, condemned by (all) 
good men, the blot of my race, who kept an unchaste wench given to drinking, having 
abandoned a faithful wife who was yet very young. (27) Oh, my aged parents, who were 
without a protector and had no other relation (such as a son) and were much afflicted 
(because of me), were forthwith deserted by my ungrateful self as by a vile man. (28) As such 
| shall surely fall into a most dreadful hell, where lustful men, who have violated Dharma 
(righteousness) suffer tortures inflicted by Yama. (29) 


faite a steathad, Mategetergr | & Ae sta 8 A Ai reads UTRIATTTa: 130 | 
aq a wm UM: fegisgansech: | aarradtaan acest ual wa: 1321 
aa 6 Oat) «=o fageitmenit i ufadet aged Aare A yelefa 1321 
saat feaaorear «Ss aa aclod: | aqpueda «=oeUt «fiat amfterdia 1331 
@ dle fda: amt seat ual WU ARMA Age 13x! 
aisé dat afaent adfedfsare: aa a ya snemaael aafa asd 134i 
faqer ft) perfec | ade Aa: HEU sear 1361 
Tea owed «alferenssemraar | faifedt ada mistg7 sare: 1301 
ToTefafa 46 Saret «= fecarfaearcfettiferti art at anafa ape denldarfefs: 1321 


"Was (all) this wonder seen by me in a dream or with my own eyes here (in waking life)? 
Where have they now gone, who proceeded to tear me (my life) from my body, noose in 
hand? (30) Again, where have those four angelic persons gone, who were (so) good-looking 
and got me released while | was being taken to the infernal regions (situated below the 
earth), fastened with nooses? (31) Though | have been so accursed (in my present birth), 
yet | must have earned (in my previous lives some) extraordinary merit which blessed me 
with the sight of those foremost gods, as a result of which my mind is so calm and cheertul 
(today). (32) Otherwise (but for such extraordinary merit) my tongue, the tongue of an 
impious fellow, who kept a Sidra woman, was not fit to utter the name of Lord Visnu—the 
only means of capturing Him—in this helpless state and at a time when | was on the verge 
of death.(33) The two stood poles asunder—myself, a wicked swindler, lost to (all) shame, 
who violated his Brahmanhood, and the (most) auspicious name of the Lord, ‘Narayana’.(34) 
Having controlled my mind, Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as the organs of 
action) and breath, | shall as such so endeavour that | may not drown myself in the 


“ There is a Sruti text declaring that a man himself is born for a second time in the form of a son through his wife, thus 


accounting for the epithet ‘Jaya’ used with reference to a wife :-— 
ASA AM elit AeA Sat FA: | 








560 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


SO ee eee. IS. 2 


eRe, 


blinding gloom of transmigration again. (35) Having got rid of the bondage of mudane 
existence—so well-known (in the shape of ties of attachment toson, wife, house ang 
SO On), and resulting from ignorance (manifested in the form of self-identification with 
the body etc.), and from the craving for the gratification of the senses and activity (in 
the shape of endeavour to procure such gratification)—benevolent to all living beings. 
free from craving for the pleasures of sense, friendly and compassionate (to all) ang 
with (my) mind fully controlled, | shall redeem myself, completely dominated as |am 
by the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) in the shape of woman, by whom my wretchegd 
self has indeed been fully toyed with even as an animal kept for pleasure. (36-37) 
Giving up the sense of 'I' and ‘mine’ in relation severally to the body and whatever 
is connected with it, and with my thought fixed on the real substance (the Spirit), | 
shall devote my mind to the almighty Lord when it has been purified by chanting His 
names and praises and other ways of Devotion (such as hearing His praises and 


remembering Him)* (38) 
A Fara 


sit | Sartde: TT ATTY | Agrenequara AAI: 138 1 

@ dem tage srt arene: iseredherat gat AA STA 101 

ad Wha sem faa iag wag  sgqeaquach ise 

ARIANA eA START AT SAT, Ut: | Sasa, Whaat Rial fest: 121 

feat woat def usm aitteqiaa: aed Aye waaay <3 

ais facet fast uemesinst: 1@n fanaa aal aa fora: ofa: ive 
Sri Suka began again: Having thus conceived a thorough aversion to the pleasures 
of sense, thanks to a moment's association with the pious servants of Lord Visnu, and 
throwing off all fetters (in the shape of affection for his mistress and children), Ajamila 
retired to Gangadwara (the sacred spot where the holy river Ganga descends into the 
plains, and which is now known by the name of Hariksetra or Haridwara). (39) Settling 
down at that holy place (an eternal abode of the Lord) and betaking himself to the path 
of Yoga, he withdrew all his senses (from their objects) and fixed his mind on the 
supreme Self. (40) Then, dissociating the mind from the body and senses etc., through 
concentration of the same, he devoted it to the essence of the Lord, (known by the name 
of) Brahma, that is all consciousness. (41) When his mind was (thus) irrevocably fixed 
on the aforesaid Brahma, the Brahmana beheld in front of him the same (angelic) 
persons and, recognizing them, as seen before, bowed his head to them. (42) Having 
quitted his (earthly) body at that sacred place (Gangadwara) on the bank of the (holy) 
Ganga (immediately) after their sight, he forthwith assumed a (divine) body similar 
to the form of the Lord's attendants (dwelling by His side). (43) Mounting an aerial 
car made of gold, the Brahmana (Ajamila) ascended with those servants of Lord 
Visnu (the Supreme Person) through the heavens to the (divine) realm (known by the 


name of Vaikuntha), where resides the Spouse of Sri (the goddess of beauty and 
prosperity). (44) 


wa a fayiadadest aren: ufa: ufaat aeledor | 
Forearm frat edad: wel faq waa eq ixul 
We: wt adept 6 agaat | tefcargaitcfara | 
41 aqt: wdgq Get Al wea aie adisze ive 





Di mf J BOOK S IX | = 1 
or Or Br Br or Or Br Br Br Br Br Br Gr Br Or Sr Hr hr 
geht Sr tr Br fr ort Liitieeseseeteetirerere Be Re Be Rr Rr BeBe ROR RE REE RE RE RE BEEBE ERE BEBE BEBE BE aria 


in this way that Brahmana, who, consequent on his having kept a woman of the 
menial class had transgressed all his sacred duties and broken his vows (of fidelity to 
his wife and SO On) and who had not only fallen (from his Brahmanhood) due to his 
reprehensible conduct but was going to be cast to hell (by the servants of Yama), was 
at once completely freed (from the noose of Yama) by uttering the Divine Name. (45) For 
those seeking liberation there is nothing more efficacious in cutting the root of sin (in the 
form of identification with the body) than chanting the Name and glories of Lord Visnu 
(whose feet purify those who resort to them). Thanks to the chanting of His names, the 
mind does not (ordinarily) get attached to (sinful) actions again, whereas it remains 
tainted with Rajas and Tamas (even) after purificatory processes other than this have 
been gone through. (46) 


7 OH Te qaftitemere ware Sat as TeaTgetdad 1s | 

Ta 8 We ait Afar angst: | geet Wat fawjesteh adlad ixct 

frat eA TU, aatoenitar stenftretsennga fe Ga: sree FO Ise 
Sit STSrad AN URS Ueda TESS SITEIA fedraseara: 121 


He who, full of reverence hears this legend, which is a most profound secret (of the 
scriptures) and is capable of destroying (all) one's sins, as well as he who repeats it with 
devotion (after hearing it) never goes to hell nor dare the servants of Yama look at him. 
However accursed (sinful) he may have been, such a mortal is adored (hereafter) in 
Vaikuntha (the realm of Lord Visnu). (47-48) Even (a great sinner like) Ajamila, who 
‘uttered, while dying (in a helpless state without reverence) the name of Sri Hari and that 
too in its secondary application as denoting his son, ascended to the Lord's (divine) 
Abode ! What wonder, then, if one who pronounces it with reverence should attain to His 


Abode? (49) 


Thus ends the second discourse, forming part of the story of Ajamila, 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SISSIES 


AA Pata searea: 


Discourse Ill . : 
A dialogue between Yama (the god of retribution) and his messengers | 


urai gat sade 7 fe aaa git A fafa! 2 | 
did the god Yama (the deity presiding over righteous- 


The ki iksit) said : What na (I é 
ness) ante Hiei. awa all this (animate) creation Is and whose authority was thus 








me ame || 
a2) ¥ qt. 


562 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 3 


BERR BRR RR RRR RR RRR RRR ARK BRB BRB BAH, Br BH Br Br HEH BY BY srennennnnnnnranannenrmeb ors: 


obstructed, say in reply to his servants—who had been foiled by the messengers of Lord 
Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Mura)—on hearing their report ? (1) (Such) supersession 
of the authority of the glorious Yama at the hands of another was never heard of before, O 
(holy) sage ! (And) none other than you can resolve the doubt which will arise in the popular 
mind on this point; that is my conviction. (2) 

MI SAA 


Tage Us aren: seeder: iat famed daria 3 1 
Sri Suka replied : The messengers of Yama, whose efforts (to execute the commands 
of their master) were interrupted by the servants of the Lord, O king, submitted to their 
master, Yama, the ruler of the (city of) Sarnyamani (as follows). (3) 


Tg Hg: 
ala Gaile AI sacle a sali afaed ada: ad menfeatneda: 1 x | 
afe Udeal Sieh WI cUSseNhOr: | Hal Ail A al HS Fasgqaa art & | 
ford Wyse Cage ao arqaqrant fe am ausmatiam & | 
ae «UAT AURTUTIeHa: | SRM USER FUT BUTAMfade: | © | 
wea a faedt quel a oleh adasemiaaitized: fear a fasefer ¢ | 
aaa ACMA AAAS | AAA Allee fsa UIA Waa a1 et 
dre Afeqhrarat afe a awa aaqianaiatfed om = afteraagdigol 


The messengers of Yama said : How many in this world are the rulers of human 
beings performing actions of three kinds (virtuous, sinful and of a mixed type)—rulers 
who are responsible for the manifestation (dispensation) of their fruit (in the shape of 
happiness, misery and a mixture of both)? (4) If there be in the world many a ruler 
wielding the rod of punishment, who would suffer death (the tortures of hell) and who 
would enjoy immortality or heavenly bliss (in the event of a split, resulting in a complete 
deadlock); whereas (in the reverse case , i.e., in the event of harmonious relations, 
obtaining between them) who would not experience the tortures of hell as well as 
immortality too (for, while one ruler may ordain hellish tortures in the case of a particular 
man in view of a grievous sin committed by him, overlooking his meritorious acts, 
another may condone his faults and reward his virtuous deeds with immortality and the 
orders of both will be executed as carrying equal force). (5) If there be a plurality of rulers 
in this world for (the control of) the vast number of men engaged in action, their 
authority will (no doubt) exist. Such authority (however) would be only secondary 
like that enjoyed by tributary chiefs (inasmuch as it would extend over a limited 
section of humanity and would not be absolute and primary, thus rendering it necessary 
to postulate another ruler exercising primary, and universal authority). (6) Therefore (a 
plurality of rulers being out of the question), you are (to our mind) the one Supreme Lord 
and ruler of all living beings—including the guardian deities—capable of distinguishing the 
merit and sin of men (who alone enjoy freedom of action), and (actually) wielding the rod 
of punishment (for the evil-doers, and rewarding the virtuous). (7) Such as you are, your 
authority stands superseded and no longer prevails in the world today, as is evidenced 
by the fact that your command was set at naught by four wonderful angelic persons ! (8) 
They forcibly released a sinner who was being taken by us under your order to the infernal 
regions (the places of suffering), cutting the nooses (with which he had been fastened).(9) 
We are keen to know them (their particulars) from you, if you deem it good for us (as 
otherwise by showing disrespect to them through ignorance we may bring harm even to 





pis. 3 ] 
sea ssbavesnnanntensenaesseeewssesersenssy st) seteseseerercessieesereeeeeeteTtoet 
ou). 1he moment the word 'Narayana' 
"Do not be afraid !" (10) yana was uttered (by the sinner) they hastened in saying 
SR Sara 


ee = ak OTE: SSAA AH: | Sic: MQM Ne BL TTT BE: 128 | 
sriSuka continued : Thus interrogated the celebrated god Yama, the controller of living 


beings, was (greatly) delighted and replied to hi 
on the lotus-feet of Sri Hari. (11) : mls Messengers\(as fcllaws) conte Estee 





q Sara 
Tt Red oomenyEs ook shi uae feel 
werdise feufasrrren veins ae at a cle: 122! 
a owmafatfa safer amt wenfa aie: | 


ae ates a a Aen rereaee es fenat aafa 1231 
ate Test festa: waar: ararsfaaen: uaatsat farfis: 1 
stieatast adaisey areal sWegU «=O STTUTI: afer: 121 
wt at 8 fangs §  qaredisepremen: | 
wetted a fag: wear: avert sie fee aatsazieul 
4 a a wfivhegial er fi aud faaen 
STAM AE Gaae «=—-_- aaa: «= UL NGI 
wera eT: «= et Ss renters: 1 
meat MT RA eM «| AUTO ATET: 1201 
qa 6 feet: = aa gfe | Berge 
qafa  daiedd: uta was aia addsrieci 


Yama said : The Supreme Lord of the mobile and immobile creation is other than me 
(and all other guardians of the spheres—Indra, Varuna and others). It is by Him that the 
whole universe stands pervaded on all sides as a piece of cloth by its warp and woof. (Nay,) 
itis from His part manifestations (Brahma, Visnu and Siva) that the evolution, maintenance 
and dissolution of this universe proceed and the (entire) creation is subject to His control 
even as a bullock tied with a string passed through its nostrils is controlled by the man holding 
the string. (12) Just as a farmer ties (his) oxen with tethers to a big cord (to keep them 
together), He binds men with (different) denominations (Brahmana, Ksatriya and soon) to 
His own Word (the Veda)—allots them different duties as enjoined by the Vedas; and, bound 
by (these) strong ties in the shape of class, names and obligations (attaching thereto), the 
aforesaid men meticulously bear offerings (do homage) to Him (through the scrupulous 
discharge of their duties). (13) Myself (Yama, the guardian of the southern quarter), the | 
mighty Indra (the guardian of the east), Nirrti (the demon presiding over the south-west), ' 

aruna (the god of water, presiding over the western quarter), the moon-god (the guardian 
Of the north), the god of fire (the guardian of the south-east), Lord Siva (the guardian of the 
north-east), the god of the air (the guardian of the north-west), the sun-god, Brahma (the 
Creator), the (twelve) sons of Aditi (presiding by turns month after month, over the sun), (the 
Sroup of gods known as ) the Vigwedevas, the (eight) Vasus (another class of gods) and (the | 
| 





5 -ni ind-gods), the (eleven) Rudras 

9roup o the Sadhyas, the (forty-nine) Maruts (win ¢ 
he Baie oe a iaier destruction) along with the Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed 
with mystic powers from their very birth), the creators of the world like (the sage) Bhrgu, the 








564 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3 
RRARHAAAAAAHAAAARAAAAAAE AAA ALAA LALLA RENAE A TLE ALAS ALES ALATEST eee 
rulers (adored) of gods (such as the sage Brhaspati, the preceptor of the gods) and others 
too who are untainted with Rajas and Tamas and in whom Sattva predominates have no 
knowledge of His intention—dominated as they are by His Maya (deluding potency)—much 
less those other than these. (14-15) Even as colours (the objects of sight) cannot perceive 
the faculty of vision, which reveals them, the Jivas cannot grasp or reach with (their) senses 
of perception, mindor organs of action (which predominantly manifest the activity of the vita} 
airs) nor with (their) intellect or speech Him who is the seer of all living beings, though 
dwelling in their very heart (as their Inner Controller). (16) Charming messengers of the 
aforementioned Sri Hari, the Supreme Person, the absolute and transcendent Lord, the 
Controller of Maya (Prakrti), generally go about in this world (for the good of the Jivas), 
endowed as they are with a form, virtues and disposition similar to those of their (divine) 
Master. (17) Those most wonderful servants of Lord Visnu, who are adored (even) by the 
gods and whose (transcendental) forms cannot be easily perceived (by earthly beings), 
protect mortals devoted to the Lord from enemies as well as from myself (Death), yea, from 
everyone else. (18) 


a qd Watetacuit a a fagkeat aie ear: | 

a fagqen sa wae: paN  faenecaroned: 12°! 
Saspke: 2: HAR: afaet Aq: i Neal sal set afedarafendaq i201 
deat fasdiat at wamad weriqgd faqs aft & areargana ize 
Wilama lense war ad: at: waa: i akan sanafa aarazeuniafs: 1221 
THERUAea «Rt: UR Oe: Lamenfeeist «ata = yeoreneqedd 1231 

UMaine Ut skit Wiad WorHdarary 

fara Gata, aasnitetsta anata reat gart AAA 1 ey | 

wor ae die¢ A Vermisd com faatfeaafada arazaieq | 

7a Vetpqakdtegutadat ane welt afi acqar: 1241 


Asa matter of fact, neither seers nor even gods nor the foremost of the Siddhas can precisely 
know (the secret of) virtue (as) expounded by the Lord Himself; how, then, can the demons, 
human beings, Vidyadharas (celestial artistes), Caranas (heavenly bards) and others know 
it?(19) Brahma (the self-born), the sage Narada, Lord Siva (the fountain-head of blessedness), 
the sage Sanatkumara, Lord Kapila, Swayambhuva Manu, Prahrada, king Janaka, Bhisma, 
the demon king Bali, the sage Suka (son of Vyasa) and myself (Yama)—these twelve (alone) 
know (the essence of) Dharma (as) taught by the Lord—secret, pure and difficult to 
understand—by knowing which one enjoys immortality (in the shape of final beatitude). (20-21) 
To develop loving attachment to the Lord through the utterance of His Name and so on— 
this alone has been declared to be the paramount duty of (all) menin this world. (22) Realize, 
my boys, the glory of uttering the name of Sri Hari, by which alone (pronounced unintention- 
ally once only) even (a vile sinner like) Ajamila was liberated from the noose of Death! (23) 
To celebrate duly the virtues and exploits of the Lord and to chant His name—this much is 
not needed for (merely) wiping out the sins of men ! For even the (most) sinful Ajamila 
attained liberation by (simply) calling his son at the pitch of his voice (and not with proper 
intonation) as Narayana (and that too) while on the verge of death (when neither his body 
nor his mind was in a sound condition). (24) Alas ! the average learned man (well-versed 
in the scriptures—whose judgement is completely bewildered by the all-powerful (divine) 
Maya (deluding potency) and whose thought is focussed on (the teachings of) the three 
Vedas, full of sweet and attractive encomiums (on the efficacy or rituals as leading to 





heaven)—generally does not realize the aforesaid ai yi areniaine 
engaged in grand sacrificial undertakings. (25) eR B AUS uM NIUE 


ana TSE Terie wie, uch deft wREMaale: 1261 
a eatheagutettaatasnnen a Ueda: ana SASS: | 
a, ATreten etieniiqam ast ad a a aa: swam ae 1201 


zh TEAR RR Wgpraurenferarencrereresrere | 
ist: Uae Tanita ye fraacift aeqenr ic! 
Mal 4 ake wmagueamid aay a anf TAIN arary_ | 
ears At anit ahet waht aAaeaedisHahreaeIrl 12° | 
Ad Saal A MTA Fea: GUO AR: Wedded A: | 
armel + fagat wfenaetat anfertitafe za: geart aya 1301 
Pondering thus, the wise indeed resort with an undivided mind to the practices (the chanting 
of the Divine Name and so on) making for loving Devotion to the Lord possessing infinite virtues. 
They do not merit punishment at my hands (because ordinarily there can be no question of their 
committing sins). Even if a sin is ever committed by them (through inadvertence), the (very) 
utterance of the Name of Lord (who is widely sung) obliterates it. (26) The sacred stories of those 
pious souls who regard all with the same eye and have taken refuge in the Lord are constantly 
sung even by the gods and Siddhas. Never approach such men, protected as they are by the 
mace of Sri Hari. Neither we nor the Time-Spirit has the power to punish them. (27) Bring those 
impious men (alone to me) who are averse to the joy inhering in the honey-like sweetness of 
the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu (the Bestower of Liberation)—incessantly tasted by flocks of 
noblest swans in the form of ascetics of the highest order, who have nothing to call their own 
and who are connoisseurs of sweetness—and have given their heart to the delights of home 
life, which lead one to hell. (28) (Further,) bring those wicked fellows (for punishment to me) 
whose tongue neither recounts the virtues nor utters the name of the Lord, whose mind never 
contemplates on His lotus-feet and whose head does not bow even once to SriKrsna, andwho 
have never rendered (any) service to Lord Visnu (in their whole life). (29) Ah, may that most 
ancient Person, Bhagavan Narayana, put up with the offence* committed, through the 
instrumentality of our messengers, by ourselves, His ignorant servants, who crave His 
forgiveness with joined palms; for forgiveness (alone) becomes the greatest of the great, Hail 


to the all-pervading Supreme Person ! (30) 
Ta agit fawisirageteart vearait aed feglenrhten epi 138 | 
saat wort dtatoqera eee: | AAT FaNAa AFA ara Acasa: 1321 
poreaaagenl 7. Tages dt Asaey | 
SIL HIE STAT: TBAT SH AT UT SA: GA: AL 133 | 
naa f the names and praises of 
Th ksit (a scion of Kuru); know the chanting o 
Lord See OEE ene to the (whole) world and the complete atonement for the 


aye ifi hrough fasting and other means as 
greates e mind is not purified so well t 
nea Seen Le engendered in the heart of those who repeatedly hear or narrate 


* The messengers of Yama argued with the servants of 
the abode of Yama not with standing their remonstrances: This 
for which he seeks His forgiveness here. 


Lord Visnu and insisted on taking away the soul of Ajamila to | 
is evidently regarded by Yama as an offence against the Lord, 
: 
: 





> _ 


566 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


tre 


a  . ire 
accounts of the extraordinary exploits of Sri Hari. (82) He who enjoys like a bee th 
sweetness of Sri Krsna's lotus-feet (by contemplating on them) delights no more in the 
enjoyments brought forth by Maya (Prakrti) , once they have been given up by him an 
conducive to suffering. The other man (who does not enjoy the sweetness of those feet ang 
who is (consequently) buffeted by desires takes fo action (alone in the shape of an expiato 
process) in order to atone for his sin—action which leads only to sin again (inasmuch as jt 
does not purify the mind and thus proves no better than the path ofan elephant, which throws 
dust on its body as soon as it emerges from water after the bath). (33) 

sa audited wnated daa fateaftret anise | 
SaaS wa WEA ws a fara aa: Tyla A WAT 1 BS 
sherairt wg sar aera: i aware yea std afta 134 
sf StaeerTad FE TRASH fecal WHA TAGSTAaTe Feilaiseara: 131 
The servants of Yama were not at all surprised to (hear and) realize as such the 
greatness of the Lord, depicted by their master (Yama). Afraid of men depending on the 
immortal Lord (Visnu) they shuddered even to look at them from that moment, O king 
(Pariksit) ! (84) Dwelling on (the summit of) Mount Malaya and worshipping Sri Hari, the 
glorious sage Agastya (who was born of a pitcher) narrated (to me) this secret legend. (35) 


Thus ends the third discourse, forming part of the dialogue between Yama and his servants, 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 





BAA AT{ASeATA: 


Discourse IV 
Daksa extols the Lord who appears in person before him 


UHNATA 
Cage aT ARTA | Taferore| Grates SAT AST TAA |e | 
cela carafe ag a WTA AMT | ST AM Ba Mast war UW: 1 2 | 
The king (Pariksit) submitted : The genesis of the gods and demons, human beings 
and Nagas (serpent-demons), beasts and birds in the (very first) Manvantara (period 
covering Seventy-one and odd revolutions of the four Yugas), presided over by Swayambhuva 
Manu, was described by you in a nutshell (in Book III). (1) | desire to know from you the 
details of it, O glorious sage, as well as how and with what power the Supreme Lord evolved 
the subsequent creation (referred to in IV-xxx. 49). (2) 
Yd Saq 
sit avd tstiaiquatr: i sf erat seme AeA: | 3 | 
Sita continued : Suka (the son of Badarayana), the great contemplative sage eve! 


united with the Lord, welcomed this noble inquiry of Pariksit (the royal sage), on hearing It, 
and replied (as follows), O jewels among sages ! (3) 


Mh SAT 
aql Sata: GA ee weafee: \ardaqgiene «6 cet «| wider X | 


567 


Dis. 4 BOOK SIX Be Rr br Br Br Re Be Be BRE Be He BEBE BELL BLL 


BeBe GERBER ARR BB BEBE BEBE RE BEBE BEBE BBE BEBE RE BERTH BEBE BE BE BEBE BE RE BEBE BEBE ER BEEBE BE BEBE BE BE BEBE BER BES BE ee 


Ga: BAAR adifearwa:i qed aga a ageetesata! & | 
aati Ae HSE | Users Wem SN A Basa | & | 
Mm gaat Arm desea sree i faadifasat qa wenat ada: Wal: 1 9 | 
sat STOfaafasinars «6s era: | anerdiaeetias «= Gatsifsife «= fay: 1 CI 
3a UU «=e: «eM Hee setae feuer A aAdea: | g | 
ga oa faariem eater umen:iseta fe wet gam feeds 20! 
smfdsad Adal at wala aed dita fen faamen as a: wfadtte: 1221 
deamt feet sega aan fren: ufa: 1 ofa: senat frart yet qa: Ted 122! 
srdeey | ATATeIsset «= aitdient: 1 ad ahgwaditereata aaitfedt gat 1231 
a: aquldd ee stermqyeam sahara aed A WUnaftadd 12x! 
ae adhd: faemt frame a: 1 ae Met aw Hen uehea Mayers eal 


Sri Suka began again : When the ten Pracetas, the sons of king Pracinabarhi, emerged 
from the lake (which was as extensive as an ocean) and saw the earth covered with trees 
(due to the suspension of all agricultural activity and the state of anarchy that prevailed 
consequent on the retirement of king Pracinabarhi from active rule at the instance of the 
celebrated sage Narada), they got angry with the trees and breathed out wind and fire from 
their mouths with the intention of burning them, their wrath having been stimulated by 
asceticism. (4-5) Finding the trees being consumed by (the joint action of) wind and fire, O Pariksit 
(a scion of Kuru), Soma (the moon-goaq), the mighty ruler of (the deity presiding over) the 
vegetable kingdom spoke to the Pracetas (as follows), as though appearing their anger :— (6) 
“It is not (quite) becoming of you to bear hostility to the poor trees, since you are declared 
to be the rulers of created beings and (as such) eager to promote their growth. (7) Oh, the 
immortal and all-pervading Lord Sri Hari, the Ruler of (all) Prajapatis (the lords of creation, 
Brahma and others) has brought into existence the (various) trees and annual plants (cereal 
crops) as the (source of) food of the manes and gods (respectively), (8) (Flowers and fruits 
etc., the produce of) the immobile creatures (viz., trees and plants) constitute the food of the 
mobile ones (the winged creatures); the footless (viz., grass and sprout etc.), of those 
walking on feet (the graminivorous quadruped); (from among the quadrupedq) the handliess 
(the deer etc.), are the food of those provided with hands (the lion and other carnivorous 
beasts); while quadrupeds (such as the bovine species and other milch cattle) as well as the 
annual plants (cereal crops) are the source of food for human beings (the milch cattle 
Supplying them with milk and oxen helping them in their agricultural pursuits and producing 
their staple food in the shape of cereals). (9) Moreover, how can it be worthy of You—who 
have been commanded by your father (king Pracinabarhi) as well as by the Lord (the adored 
Even of the gods) to procreate children, O sinless ones—to burn away trees (that sustain 
all living beings)? (10) (Therefore,) follow the path of the virtuous—trodden by your father, 
grandfather and great grandfathers—and curb your intensified anger. (11) The parents are 
the (true) friends of children; the eye-lashes, of an eye; the husband, of a (married) women; 
the sovereign, of a people (and through them of all living beings including trees); the 
householder, of mendicants; and a wise man is the friend of a ignorant. (12) The almighty 
Sri Hari indwells the hearts of (all) living beings as their Inner Controller. (Therefore,) regard 
the entire creation (both animate and inanimate) as His abode; in this way He will be really 
Propitiated by you. (13) He who subdues by means of an inquiry into (the true nature of) the 








568 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4 


RRA AAA EAA AAA SELL LEE LR LB EB BLE LE BEBE SELB BEB BE BEL EBT BEBE BBE BEB Be Br BB BH tr orgy tire 


Self, violent anger gushing forth from the cavity of the heart in his body is able to transceng 
the (three) Gunas (the realm of matter). (14) Add no more to the number of trees (already 
burnt, helpless as they are, andletthe su rviving ones enjoy your protection. Letthis €xcellent 
maid (Marisa by name), brought up by the trees (as their own daughter), be accepted as q 
wife (by you).” (15) 

SUA at HTT UT a tT Sat ae ere eg 


Sweet «SC WaMaEa: wade: feoiae senfaaio alert smgkare: ie 
am wast wat eat edace: ita wae wa ameafed: OT ec! 


Having thus pacified the Pracetas and handed over (to them) the beautiful daughter of 
Pramloca (a celestial nymph), king Soma (the moon-god) returned (to his abode) and the 
Pracetas wedded her consistently with virtue (as this union, though forbidden by the Sastras as 
falling under the category of polyandry, had been permitted by the Lord—vide IV. xxx. 15-16—and 
had thus been more than legalized). (16) From their loins through her was sprung Daksa, the 
Pracetasa (son of the Pracetas, as distinguished from his previous incarnation, which owed 
its existence to Brahma himself), by whose progeny” and their descendants all the three 
worlds were filled on all sides. (17) (Now) hear from me attentively how Daksa, who was 
(extremely) fond of his daughters, procreated beings (both) by his mind (sheer force of will) 


and by seed. (18) 

[| SOTA: «0 ST: | PATA EM aY: Vlessietena: 1221 

waeferetet «= TERT SIsTTU fa: | fareactaqused Glsea geht AT: 1201 

caret ATCC (CTCL SUT AMad ATTA TATA 122 1 

sTeteeeetE MTATANASTL | Pa Aaah Henge adi eH: 1221 
Daksa (a lord of creation) procreated these beings, dwelling in the air, on land and in 
water—gods, demons, human beings and so on—by his mind (thought-projection) alone in 
the first instance (to begin with). (19) Seeing the procreation of his race not multiplying, the 
said Prajapati (Daksa) proceeded to the hills adjoining the Vindhya mountain and practised 
austerities (that were) hard to perform. (20) Bathing there thrice a day (in the morning and 
evening and at midday) in the holy lake called Aghamarsana (that which washes off one’s 
sins), which was supremely efficacious in destroying one's sins (as could be expected from 
its very name), he propitiated Sri Hari through (his) asceticism. (21) He extolled the Lord, 


who is beyond sense-perception, by means of (the hymn called) Hamsaguhya. | shall (now) 
repeat to you that hymn through which Sri Hari was pleased with Daksa. (22) 


THN NAeara 
aa: UtaMaadc asa POAM ATA aaa 
AA aia = eNO ATT 1231 
4 ae Gel Uesisdia Gel: Aa ae daea: she! 
Wt | aa afertt | reBere «= aera 12 





*Itshould be noted here that while this Daksa was born in the very first or Swayambhuva Manvantara of the present Kalpa 
(round of creation), he begot offspring only in the sixth (Caksusa) Manvantara, i.e., after a period of five Manvantaras—vide 
IV. xxx. 49. Thus it will appear that he devoted this inconceivably long period of his life in austerities as a preparation for his 
momentous role of creation and in order to regain the extraordinary and surpassing splendour and eminence acquired by him 
in his previous incarnation. 





Dis. 4 ] BOOK SIX 569 


See Be BES SR RRR RR RR RR RRR BR RR AR Re Re Re BARR RR RRR REREAD IR 
ceisecisan waal wae ae a fae: ut at 
wt TT 8 Umit weet ag ads 1241 
TNT aTat TARTRATE Seay fereaayarare, | 
a gad aca weer gaa ast yess aa: 1261 
THifoswtee 6 fat «= rainfifafss «© Grafs: | 
ae a aft wget wine frenifd erie! 
a a TATRA TAO: 


a wa TH A a fageq: selene: 1221 
Tehran freftd firnafirat waar ala ae 
a Ud wed qured fe ada a a qunorfaetoam: 12e1 
ae at a a aa at aaa am get ara ai 
WTR UEC CLC RRL IO 
Tera dat aft a faaedaeyal vata 
edt dat qeguemte ast ads wise 
aed weit ai adtsatmentfiatasgertar: | 
stefan «feet oarrarert: aad ut wane geai32 
ASAE Usa Ue aaa Ward: | 
wat watt a wares a ua am: sealed 1331 
ame: ufsfaniiat wra gat A pedraaneisxl 
The Prajapati prayed : | offer salutations to the self-effulgent Supreme of infallible 
consciousness—the Controller of both the Jiva (the soul as reflected through the three 
Gunas or matter) and Prakrti (the basis of such reflection)—whose true nature is not 
perceived by those that take the objects of senses (the products of the three Gunas) to be 
real, and who is beyond (all) the means of cognition. (23) | make obeisance to that Supreme 
Lord whose beneficent nature and friendly (helpful) attitude (as the Prompter of the senses 
and the mind) the Jiva dwelling in this body, His constant companion, does not know—even 
though the Lord lives with the Jiva as the latter's Friend (in the same body), He being the seer 
of this visible universe (and therefore not open to perception)—just as an object of 
perception cannot perceive the illuminating quality of the sense that perceives it. (24) The 
body, the vital airs, the senses, the internal senses (the mind, understanding, intellect and 
the ego) and the gross and subtle elements know neither themselves (individually) nor any 
other (among themselves) nor that which is beyond (all these, viz., the Jiva). The (conscious) 
Jiva (however) knows all (these, including itself) as well as the (three) Gunas (the root of all 
the aforesaid categories except the Jiva); but, though knowing (all) these, it does not know 
the all-knowing Lord who is infinite (and therefore unknowable). | (hereby) extol Him. (25) 


Hail to that pure Substance (Brahma), revealed (only) ina pure mind, thatis realized through . 
Its absolute existence (consisting of consciousness and bliss) when the mind, which | 
| 
. 





manifests this world of names and forms, (altogether) ceases to function (attains the state 
sorption into the Self) due to the extinction of all cognition and 
nd Him out by their purified intellect (as distinct from their lower 
nstalled within their heart—though veiled by His nine potencies 


of Samadhi or complete ab 
recollection. (26) The wise fi 
Self, referred toas'l'and) as! 








570 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA iDisws 
(viz., Prakrti or primordial matter, Purusa or the individual soul, Mahat-tattva or the Principle 
of cosmic intelligence, Ahankara or the ego and the five Tanmatras or subtle elements), 
consisting of (or dominated by) the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), as well as by 
the sixteen other principles (viz., the mind and the five senses of perception, the five Organs 
of action and the five gross elements viz., earth, water, fire, air and ether)—(even) as those 
well-versed in rituals produce the sacrificial fire hidden in (pieces of) wood by reciting the 
fifteen sacred texts known as the Samidheni Mantras. (27) Indeed He is realized in the form 
of the joy of Liberation when Maya (Prakrti), the source of all distinctions, has been negated 
(by the process of elimination). (Yet) it is He who bears all names and assumes all forms, 
possessed as He is of potencies too numerous to be described and which constitute His very 
essence. May He shower His grace on me. (28) Whatever is described in words, determined 
with the intellect, or perceived with the senses or even pondered with the mind cannot be 
His essential nature. For all that is a manifestation of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas); while He, as a matter of fact, is (but) indicated by the evolution and dissolution of 
the universe (which is a product of the Gunas as being the cause of such evolution and 
dissolution). (29) Wherever, from whatever motive, by whatever means (or with whatever 
instrument), for whomsoever (or whatever purpose), whatever, however and whosesoever 
work whoever does (by himself) or is prompted (by someone else) to do, all that is Brahma, 
which is their cause (and therefore identified with them) inasmuch as It is known to have 
existed before them (all), and which is the ultimate cause of all (other) causes, both earlier 
(such as Brahma) and later, and is without a second, whether of the same category or of a 
different kind. (30) Hail to that all-pervading Self, possessed of endless virtues, whose 
manifold potencies (Prakrti and so on) indeed become the ground of disputation and 
concurrence between theorists putting forward their claims (with eloquence), and delude 
their mind now and again. (31) In Yoga (which is primarily a system of religious worship) and 
Sankhya (the science of Self-Realization), which, though professing faith in the one Reality 
(viz., God), ascribe two distinct and mutually contradictory attributes to It—the one claiming 
that (when conceived in the form of the Cosmic Person) It has hands and feet etc., 
(corresponding to Patala and the other Lokas), and the other denying them (and declaring 
lt as without name and form)—and (yet) have a common basis (in the shape of God), that 
which is found to be common and beyond dispute (the dispute centring on the issue of Its 
having hands and feet and so on) and which is (equally) acceptable to both (viz., God 
Himself, whose existence is presupposed by both and who is the ground of all negation) is 
Brahma (to whom all controversy relates). (32) May that almighty and infinite Supreme be 
gracious to me—who, though devoid of (material) name and form, manifested from time to 
time forms (consisting of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas) through descent (into the 
world of matter) and names through (various) exploits, in order to shower His grace on those 
who resort to the soles of His feet (for protection). (83) May that Lord grant my wish, who 
though dwelling in the body of (all) men (as their formless Inner Controller), appears 
diversified (in the form of different deities) according to their (individual) tendencies (formed 
in previous lives) and in consonance with the systems of worship of recent origin (followed 
by them), even as the air breathes fragrance of various kinds on coming in contact with the 


odour of different flowers etc., (which is an attribute of earth) or appears dusky-white when 
the colour of dust is transferred to it. (34) 


a SAI 
sft Wa: Wayad: a aaa | Sree, PENS WTA wHAIS: 1341 
ema: = AA | MeraBTEN: | aeReVeTheaNgerq-areMraren: 13&1 





Dis. 4 ] 571 
I SRR REC R B RAAE REBECA RBBB RRC RE RAE BE Re BeBe IR ARERR RARER REALE SARA firth saat SUSE iene ee es ee BBB R RRR ERE LEBEL LER 


Uidareat «= RATA: «Ss WeqMATTT: lSAnIOTa A 4 era: 1391 

nellenttenem: Wrinhiss: | apagelaararga Tad: 1321 

Wee SH fT AYA: adi aARereel: ume: Pega: 131 

Raarisprates: ardent: ed ate faearmaazaa: ixot 

TAT eUSag A NepTe sero: 1a estefan. ise er | 

sTgkaatteneiea ga Fett: se 
Ste qed Arh See sek fast: «  aduqrifente  Baled: 1X21 
Sri Suka continued : Thus extolled, the celebrated Lord, who is (extremely) fond of His 

devotees, appeared (in person), O Pariksit (the foremost of the Kurus), before Daksa (even 
while he was glorifying Him) on the strand of that sacred lake called Aghamarsana. (35) He 
had His feet (legs) flung across the shoulders of Garuda (the king of the birds) and was 
possessed of eight mighty and exceptionally long arms, in which He carried a discus, a 
conch, a sword, a shield, an arrow, a bow, a noose anda mace. (36) Clad in yellow and 
dark-brown as acloud, He hada cheerful countenance and eyes sparkling with joy. His body 
was adorned with a garland of sylvan flowers (extending up to His feet) and bore the brilliant 
mark of Srivatsa (a curl of hair covering the footprint of Bhrgu) and the (famous) Kaustubha 
gem. (37) He wore a large crown (on His head) and precious bangles (about His ankles) and 
a shining pair of illigator-shaped ear-rings, and was (further) adorned with a girdle, rings, 
bracelets, anklets and armlets. (88) Possessed of a form that captivated (the people of) all 
the three worlds, the Lord of the whole universe (consisting of the three spheres, viz., earth, 
heaven and the intermediate region) was surrounded by His (own) attendants—Narada, 
Nanda, and so on—as well as by the chief among the gods (the guardians of the spheres) 
and extolled by Siddhas (a class of demigods possessed of mystic powers from their very 
birth), Gandharvas (heavenly musicians) and Caranas (celestial bards), who were singing 
songs (of praise) behind Him. Filled with awe and yet extremely rejoiced at heart to behold 
that most wonderful beauty, Daksa (a lord of created beings) fell prostrate on the ground and 
could not speak anything because of his senses (the channels for the outflow of the mind) 
being flooded with intense delight as rivers with mountain-torrents. (89—41) To that 
Prajapati, who was a (great) devotee (of the Lord) and desired to be blessed with progeny, 
and who was (still) crouching as aforesaid, Lord Visnu (who is supplicated by men), the 
Knower of the mind of all living beings, spoke as follows. (42) 


Wada Aer «fatal War! Ganga Aaa Ala wa at Wa: 1x31 
Siitsé A wera aaselegent qa: 1 AAT a AAT aq Yarafeyra: 1s 
aa wat warns aaat faqee: i fayat AA Pel YA yieda: isu 
a W wed weleaen frenssepfa: | sighs sedat sie at srerega: GT: xe | 
aenaraanat «aR fest ae: i aaa saama faa: ive! 
TESTA «|= UT urfette: | Aaisseiitad UsTel: AAR: AAEM: 1X1 
a a aq ugeat wa diafagied: 1 aA faotarmryed:  «altendforixe 
aq asfifedt waaMistad ceive feagst GH Aaeragsfay: 1401 
wa ougereng afer A Nomad: | aifeent aA ettel ster afer 148 
frearcraranic 9 sorentferd wa: | faqareraraatioa akan srafrerf 1421 








a 


572 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA ‘ 


PERRRRRERRRAAUEEAELER RAMEE SEER EAAE REARS SAE TENE ET EAE ER ERIE BB h fetter ett tre ey OS: 4 
fr tra, 


AMSAT ISAT: val faery araat i adtaan aioara heart a a afer ius | 


The Lord said : O highly blessed Daksa (the son of the Pracetas), you have full 
achieved your end through asceticism in that you have developed supreme devotion to Me 
thanks to your reverence solely directed towards Me. (43) | am pleased with you, O Iorg of 
created beings, inasmuch as your asceticism is conducive to the growth of this creation; (for) 
it is My wish (too) that all created beings should thrive. (44) Brahma (the creator), Lord Siva _ 
(the source of the universe), yourselves (the lord of created beings), the Manus (the 
progenitors of mankind, presiding over different Manvantaras or periods covering seventy- 
one and odd revolution of the four Yugas), and the chief of the gods (the guardians of the 
spheres, Indra and others)—indeed these are My glorious manifestation making for the. 
prosperity of (all) created beings. (45) Asceticism (in the form of contemplation accompanied 
by the practice of Yamas* and Niyamas) is My (very) heart; worship (in the form of the 
muttering of prayers with all auxiliary practices, Nyasa etc.), My body (because it gives a 
concrete shape to meditation and serves as a protective covering for it even as the body 
protects the heart); the (mental) activity (preliminary to meditation in the shape of forming 
a conceptual image of the object to be meditated upon), My exterior; sacrifices well- 
performed are the (various) members of My body; the merit resulting from such scrifices, My 
mind (which has its seatin the heart, i.e., has its source in meditation); and the gods (enjoying _ 
a share in the sacrificial oblations) are My vital airs (which are sated through such obla- 
tions).(46) Before creation | alone existed and that too in a state of absolute inactivity; there 
was nothing else in the form of the perceiving subject or the percieved object. | was mere 
consciousness and unmanifest (too); it seemed as if a state of deep sleep prevailed on all 
sides. (47) When in My infinite Being, possessed of endless attributes, sprang up through 
Maya this cosmos made up of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), there arose in that 
very cosmos Brahma, (the self-born), the cause (creator) of all, not born of a mother's 
womb.(48) When that great god girded up his loins for the work of creation, he as a matter of 
fact thought himself unequal to it as it were, though supplemented with My energy. That 
all-powertul divinity accordingly practised severe austerities as enjoined by Me, by recourse 
to which he evolved at the very outset nine lords of creation including yourself (your previous 
incarnation). (49-50) This daughter of Paficajana, a lord of created beings (like you), Asikni 
by name, should (now) be accepted (by you), O dear Daksa, as wife.(51) Following the 
righteous course of sexual intercourse between a (duly) married couple, you shall again beget 
progeny in large numbers through her, who will (also) follow (like you) the prescribed course 
of sexual union between a (duly) wedded couple. (52) All created beings (coming) after you 
will be born (again in the form of their children) (only) by copulating with My Maya (enchanting 
potency in the form of woman) and bear offerings to Me. (53) 


Sara 
yaaa aera we faa: | astusend sa adaradad aft: 14x! 


‘hess ao AMAA FE URAe Siena TEA Taeiseaa: 11 
Sri Suka went on : Having spoken thus, Lord Sri Hari, the Promoter of the universe; 


disappeared on that very spot, like an object seen ina dream, (even) as Daksa looked 
on. (54) 





Thus ends the fourth discourse in Book Six of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as 
the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


* For the import of the Yamas and Niyamas vide IV. xxii. 24. 


573 


Dis. 5] BOOK SIX ee 
perder RRR ERE RBBB RE RRR RRR ARERR RE RARER RRR ERASER EA REALE LEE EE ELSE SES rar 


ZI USaseara: 


Discourse V 
Narada subjected to an execration (by Daksa) 
Myh Sava 


wat a Wert a fawmrudiea: i gdievdaad wise fay: 2 | 
sgerenigiort da cera qai fast ska: somal ste saafearss 2 | 
wa 86nd = feet: bagel qaeafafegrefaa 3 1 
RACES ETE LCC fafryanenan: |e oR A MaaISeaT | X | 
ae a Walt «fares 4 afam: isetfaqga adam aafden cael gi & | 
Java AA FAM: HA MMT A WN: | Bes Yat ga atferan ad uresen: | & | 
qe ws fas <amestrini aged fed oft gad Ygactaim © | 
adipic «= Wa «= WEL ef fase etuel wa aftr ¢ 1 
wei wiuguesmage  faafsa:ismaeanfanma sat ai afters | 
Sri Suka resumed : Indeed energized by Lord Visnu's Maya (creative power), 
the aforesaid Daksa (a lord of created beings) begot through Pancajani ten thousand 
sons, known as the Haryaswas. (1) Alike in conduct and disposition, all those sons 
of Daksa, O king (Pariksit), proceeded in a westerly direction (to practise austerities) 
when commanded by their father to beget offspring. (2) There they reached a most 
extensive and holy lake called Narayanasara, situated in the area where the river 
Sindhu (the modern Indus) falls into the sea, and resorted to by sages and Siddhas 
(a class of demigods endowed with mystic powers from their very birth). (3) By 
merely bathing therein they not only had their mind thoroughly cleansed of all 
impurities (in the shape of likes and dislikes and so on) but also developed an 
inclination to follow the path of ascetics of the highest order (the path of Renunciation 
and Self-Knowledge). Yet they practised severe austerities alone, bound as they were 
by the command of their father. Narada (the celestial sage), it is said, saw them intent 
on increasing the population (of the world) and forthwith said, "O Haryaswas, without 
having seen the end of the earth how will you actually (be able to) beget progeny? 
Though protectors (of men), alas ! you are ignorant ! (4—6) Similarly, without fully knowing 
the country inhabited by a single person, the hole with no visible outlet, the woman assuming 
different forms (at will) and even so the man whois the husband of a harlot, the river running 
both ways (both forward and backward), the wonderful house built of twenty-five materials, 
the swan, at one place, which has a strange story to tell, and something exceptionally sharp 
and strong (as though made of razors and adamant), independent and revolving, and 
without having understood the command of your omniscient father, suitable for you, how will 
you proceed with (the work of) creation?" (7—9) 


AIA SAA | 
tera «= ada ikeafteediieat i ara:me gq GaN: wea ferrgaftiar igo! | 
qY at vlad awanfe Poe step aa ater feaacdfasac ie?! | 
Uh waa wa eta: W:idqdepma da: faracmdfasiadiee | 
War, tata ae treat faoert adt ai serenfae se feeracnfadadies! 








ae 


574 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


PREP RARRLRRARE AR A  RR LRR LR R  RR RHR RPh y arnt, Dis. 5 


Br Br tr ¥; 
ARTEMIS aha: ARota Wontar | casredae feerrrendiaad 1 ex | 
Weve wart HPArdad Tedhaeyete feereenahasad 1 et | 
gaara wat aemerdtarmi ane ania fenaeHddag i ee 
aasfaaticat YSssetedury| steaTeragqeaae = fatentfasiaa ie) 
tat | Me ETM ATARI! fafamaanaa fenrracnateasad 122 | 
Sloah wfretent ad frendasrn| aaa fentrerennftaa 129 | 
sree faquest at a ac fradeniad daqeqa = qoilasmguentd io! 
sft srafaat ws wit wedae: 1 saget Oe ead 
Sata fauiagitaaenas | araus fawsreea olarqacah: 1221 

Sri Suka continued : Hearing these enigmatic words of Narada (the celestial sage), the 
Haryaswas themselves presently pondered over them with their own intellect, which was 
endowed with innate quickness of perception. (10) (They said to themselves): "The earth 
(referred to by the celestial sage) is (no other than) the field (in the shape of the subtle body, 
yielding the crop of merit and sin, happiness and misery etc., and) known as the Jiva 
(because conditioning it), which has existed from remote antiquity and serves as a fetter for 
the soul. Without seeing its extinction what is to be gained through useless actions (actions 
not conducive to Liberation)? (11)The Lord is the sole (almighty) Ruler (of the country in the 
shape of this universe), the witness of all the three states of the mind (the waking state, the 
dream state and the state of deep sleep) and hence known as the fourth or transcendent 
principle, who is supported by (none else than) His own Self and is higher than (the cause 
of) all. Without seeing Him who is eternally free from birth (and death), what purpose can 
be achieved by man through useless activities (which are not dedicated to Him)? (12) What 
is to be achieved in this world through useless acts (Serving as a means for the attainment 
of heavenly bliss and other enjoyments of a transitory nature) by him who has not realized 
the self-effulgent Brahma, on attaining which a man does not return (to this mortal plane) 
any more than one who has reached the heaven-like subterranean regions returns to the 
earth (in the same life). (13) The intellect of a Jiva, which is imbued with the three Gunas 

(Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) and which takes the shape of the various objects of senses 

(colour, taste and so on) is like a wanton woman appearing in various (attractive) guises and 

possessed of (many alluring) qualities. What can be gained in this world through useless 

(feverish) activities by him who has not risen above such a diversified intellect (and attained 

discrimination)? (14) (Again,) what is to be gained here through useless (indiscriminate) acts 

by the man who does not recognize himself as having fallen from his greatness through 
identification with such an intellect and follows, like the husband of an unchaste woman, its 
courses (in the shape of joy and sorrow and so on)? (15) What can be achieved through 
useless actions by the man who is so forgetful (under the sway of Maya) that he fails to 
recognize the frightfulness of (the river of) Maya, that (alternately) brings about (both) creation 
and destruction (thus flowing both forward and backward) and acquires (great) impetuosity (in 
the shape of an unusual outburst of anger, pride and other undesirable impulses) near the 
ghats and banks of its stream (in the shape of meditation, worship and other spiritual 
practices). (16) The Purusa (the Lord dwelling in the body of every human being as the Inner 

Controller) is the wonderful mirror (ground and illuminator) of the twenty-five categories 

(constituting the human personality, viz., the soul, the Unmanifest or primordial matter, the 

Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence, the ego, the five subtle elements, the mind 

and the ten Indriyas and the five gross elements). Without knowing Him as presiding over the 








Dis. 5 ] BOOK SIX 575 
8 Sa RRR RL Be Be ARAL RC SPE ACRE BRERA PEPE RRC EBERLE IED ERE 


(aforesaid) collection* of causes and effects, what is to be gained here through useless 
actions (that are done with the consciousness that the doer is a free agent, and which, 
therefore, tend to veil one's true nature). (17) Ignoring (refraining from the study of and 
refusing to follow) the body of teachings establishing the existence of God, which not only 
distinguishes Spirit from matter (even as a swan, according to the traditional belief, 
instinctively Separates milk from water where the two are mixed), but further enables one 
to perceive the true nature of bondage and liberation, what can be achieved here through 
useless actions (that tend to direct one's mind towards the external world)? (18) (Again,) 
what will be gained here through useless actions (whose fruit is swept away by the ravages 
of Time) by him who has no knowledge of the wheel of Time, whichis (ever) revolving, sharp- 
edged and independent and destroys the whole creation (and who resorts to various 
activities under the belief that their fruit is eternal). (19) How can he who does not know the 
precepts of his (Second) father, the Sastra (which invests him with a second body in the 
shape of the sacred thread and whose advice is as Salutary as that of a father—precepts 
that turn him away from worldly activity—and who has faith in the path of worldly activity 
(which has reference to the three Gunas, i.e., the world of matter), proceed to act in 
conformity with such precepts ?" (20) Thus resolved, O king (Pariksit), the HaryaSwas, who 
were (all) of one mind, went round the sage (from left to right, as a mark of respect) and took 
to the path (leading to God-Realization) which does not bring one back to the mortal 
plane.(21) Having fixed his undivided mind on the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu (the Controller of 
the senses) as revealed in the notes of the gamut, which stand as a symbol of the 
(all-pervading) Brahma (and lead to its realization), the sage (Narada) went about the 
spheres.(22) 


TR Pera Ga ARersloanfeaml| sada Gh: Sea AIS AAT War 123 1 
a Wa: Wess uftaad: | WaMsae eet: Wawa Agel: 12¥1 
ast far aarfes: seret gasat: iat sada fag: wudst: 1241 
agueaataredt ferfrefrrererat: | it Hel UR AYRISA Wed qT: 12EI 
sIstan: cHldferarar afdfagausrt: | aN AA «| (sseah 1 2191 
3 aml ART wea Ager ifayeadawaa aeeaa eatafe 121 
sm aaf wusex sfeetferat gh: isda ane: Sle atesmelt gdadiRe! 
aaron: aa wed frat aaistasagqued! wgqut waco: 1301 
MI wat wreat Asafewskt vd A Yay: Yet whe: Te Ale 13g! 
UWidgrat saat aneisaeeria: rast aramrart wiquraa arte 1321 


* According to the Sankhya system of philosophy, which recognizes the twenty-five categories enumerated in the above 
verse, Prakrti or primordial matter is the cause of all causes. From Prakrti follows the Mahat-tattva, which in its tum brings 
forth the ego and the ego gives rise to the five subtle elements, the mind and the ten Indriyas (the five senses of perception 
and the five organs of action); and from the five subtle elements are evolved the five gross elements (earth, water, fire, air 
and ether). Thus it will appear that while Prakrti is an uncaused cause, the Mahat-tattva, the ego and the subtle elements are 
both causes and effects—causes in relation to their effects and effects in relation to their causes. The remaining sixteen 
(besides the Purusa or soul), viz., the mind, the ten Indriyas and the five gross elements TO) ne effects AEE er as Dey 
are Causes of no other category; while the Purusa or soul is neither a cause nor an effect. This is summed up in the following 

name of Sankhya-Karika:— 
: apiaagee: xs 
oo i Mc i CR: 


It is in this sense that the human body has been spoken of in the above verse as a collection of causes and effects. 


verse of ISwara Krsna's popular manual on the Sankhya system, known by the 





SS 


576 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


BeBe hee Se eRe Re RR RRR RRR RRR LEAR EAE RL LER ERE LE EL HB BER ER Ber tg Dis. 5 


iid Ndi wenqre Aa: | arena a faded afar aia 133 | 

UA Shi SAA Ae VRATL TSATTT: | Gaara GARIN 13x | 

Gala ARelaa  YARiefagqfesa: | caftqueae Terfgep hare: 134 
Having heard of the straying of his virtuous sons (from the path of worldly activity) at the 
instigation of Narada, Daksa fell a sorrowing and felt (much) distressed. (Indeed) itis a source 
of grief to have good children. (23) Fully consoled by Brahma (who was not born of a mother's 
womb), Daksa begot through Pajicajani (his wife) a thousand sons more, known as the 
Sabalaswas. (24) Expressly enjoined by (their) father to beget children, they made a firm 
resolve to practise austerities and repaired to (the lake) Narayanasara, where their elder 
brothers had achieved their object (in the shape of God-Realization or divine love). (25) Their 
mind thoroughly cleansed of (all) impurities through a mere bath in that lake, they practiseg 
great austerity there, muttering the most sacred syllable ‘OM' (a symbol or appellation of the 
highest Reality). (26) Living for some months on water (alone) and subsisting for several 
months on (nothing but) air, they worshipped Bhagavan Visnu (the Lord of all sacred texts), 
repeating the following sacred formula : (27) "We make obeisance to Lord Narayana (the goal 
of all the Jivas), denoted by the mystical syllable OM, the highest Person the Supreme Spirit, 
appearing in a form made up of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and Tamas, the purest of the 
pure."(28) The sage Narada, O Pariksit (a King of kings), approached those (other) princes 
also, who were thus intent on renewing the creation, and addressed to them enigmatic words 
similar to those addressed (to their elder brothers) before:—(29) "Duly hear from me as | tell 
you, O sons of Daksa, the following precept. (Try to) discover the path trodden by your (elder) 
brothers, for whom you cherish such (great) affection. (30) A brother who knows his duty 
(towards his brothers) and follows the exalted path of his brothers, and who is followed 
(everywhere) by his virtue rejoices (in the realm of the Maruts) along with the Maruts (the forty- 
nine wind-gods, who are all excessively fond of their brothers)". (81) Saying this much, the 
sage Narada, whose sight never fails to bring its reward, withdrew; and they too followed the 
path of their brothers alone, O noble one! (32) Having taken to the noble and agreeable path 
leading to (the realization of) the Supreme—a path which can be reached only by those whose 
thought is turned onward (away from the world)—they, like the bygone nights, do not return 
even to this day. (33) Seeing many an evil portent at this time, the Prajapati (Daksa) heard of 
the ruination of his sons at the hands of the sage Narada as before. (84) Overpowered with 
grief for his sons, he got angry with Narada; and, on meeting with the sage, addressed him 

(as follows), his lips quivering through rage. (35) 
Gal SAF 

Stel Aaa A aTefesA AKA | starerHrdeienrot faaitatet: wefeia: 136! 

l feend: stra: aT clemaleval: cid: 1391 

Wa a Peet gem afaiire: adem ae aster facuam: 136! 

AZ OAPTaM e TeeET: | et wat Glee «A Aysenafium 138! 

7a Gat fart: Md aa Safer Wer | awa aI 89 - Aeataltardazy, sol 

TT A srt Yar fawadtenram ffdda wat aera ae fire: at: 1x2! 

Tea SH Meat yeti gaa ait fart wa afta ise! 


TePat TARA: UA: | aeewehy I YS A Waa Waa: UAL ISB! 
Daksa said : Ah, appearing in the garb of a holy man, O wicked one, you have done 2 
(great) disservice to our youngsters—who were (all) virtuous—in that you showed them the 





Dis. 5 ] BOOK SIX 577 


SB A RRA BERLE BAR RRR BRR R REAR RRR RARER RRR ARERR RARE RR REAR RELL LEE REESE ERE SEE 


path of a mendicant. (86) You have ruined their interests, O sinful one, in both the worlds 
(here as well as hereafter), while they had not yet been exonerated from their threefold 

obligations, nor had they pondered over the futility of (worldly) activities (and were thus 
unqualified" for taking to the path of renunciation). (37) Mercilessly unsettling in this way the 
mind of youngsters (intent on promoting the righteous cause of creation), you have tarnished 
the fair name of the Lord, and (yet) you shamelessly move in the midst (count as one) of His 
attendants ! (38) Barring you—who have trampled (our) love and actually shown enmity 
(even) to us, who are not enemies—the votaries of the Lord are undoubtedly ever anxious 
to shower their grace on (all) living beings. (39) Vairagya (freedom from attachment to the 
world) cannot be engenderedin the mind of the people in this way by you, who have assumed 
the guise of an ascetic without true wisdom, even though you regard (Vairagya as conducive 
to quietism and) quietism as a means of cutting asunder the bonds of attachment. (40) (For) 

a man cannot realize the bitterness (painful consequences) of the pleasures of sense 

without tasting them. (Therefore) he whose mind has been unsettled by others would not feel 

disgusted with the world so fully as he might of his own accord (through such realization).(41) 

We (quietly) put up with the wrong which you did to us, householders, vowed to the 

performance of rituals and intent on achieving heavenly bliss, even though the wrong was 

such as could not be easily forgotten. (42) (Yet) inasmuch as you have done an offence 

against us for a second time. O fool responsible for breaking the continuity of our race, 

therefore, you will have no halt as you wander through the spheres. (43) 


sR Sara 
siwmae «= teIe «SAG: «= STA: | Ua aeanel fe fafaaae: qa isxl 
Sit SMT AS URAC Seas THA ARG AA VSAISEATA: 141 
Sri Suka went on : The sage Narada, who was esteemed (even) by the virtuous, 
accepted the curse (pronounced by Daksa) with the words "Very well !" That he who is 


himself powerful (enough to retaliate by uttering a counter-curse), should put up with 
another's offence, this alone entitles a man to the title of a pious soul. (44) 


Thus ends the fifth discourse, entitled "Narada subjected to an execration", 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 





* Every member of twice-born classes is born, so declare the Vedas, with a debt to the Rsis, the manes and the gods. 
Itis (1) by studying the Vedas with a vow of strict celibacy in the prime of his life, (2) by marrying and begetting children after 
finishing his studies and (3) by performing sacrifices that he discharges these three debts :— 
TA & AMA Mad ACTA ANA AHA Sa: Waa FAA Us A AG 4: Yat Foal Aaa ara | 
*We read in the Manusmrtithat a member of the twice-born classes should set his mind on Liberation only after he has 
discharged the aforementioned threefold debt, and that he who strives for Moksa without having discharged these three debts 


f il ” es , 
alls in the scale of spiritual evolution saift aaeea oa MA Praeea 
| spe «Mal og «Saar | ASCT: II 





“Se 


578 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 6 


Se eee eee ee en eee ete Caaneeateabbebeneeaneneeaseenwenanenass Oo! rire, 


BAY ABSA: 


Discourse VI 
The posterity of Daksa through his sixty daughters 


Mh SATA 

dd: wreiddsteamaaia: warjaiafs agama eq: fuqacen: 12 | 

ea ania arafeee fora cnari adiier:qparaal BB aeata ao: 1 2 1 

AR A at aa Ayia ywefeactat sngftarera: 1 2 | 
Sri Suka resumed : Pacified and prevailed upon by Brahma (the self-born), Daksa (the 
son of the Pracetas) then begot through Asikni (his wife) sixty daughters, who were (very) 
affectionate towards their father. (1) He gave away ten (of them) to Dharma (the god of 
piety), thirteen to the sage KaSyapa (son of Marici), thrice nine (twenty-seven) to the moon- 
god, two each to the sages Bhuta, Angira and Krsaswa and the rest (again) to KaSyapa (who 
is also known by the name of Tarksya). (2) (Now) hear you from me their names as well as 


of their offspring, by whose children and their descendants (all) the three worlds (heaven, 
earth and the intermediate region) were filled on all sides. (3) 


UTM Hhotaaa Mel Aeadt | aqded! Aseat aac: qa A! x | 
Ud ann saeaedt  Waifaea sndieaareds ealaea: | & | 
HEU: Uses Himeetat Aa: 1 Yat quifer ama: eat aAraetdisvad! & | 
fateang faa sisi saad | areal Tog area aieifataed acda: | 9 | 
Teds TIA Ade aAyad: | Aad alaeara see sit a fae: ic 
Getter tam vedas siti a a ws sawha YAM Geet! @ | 
GSM Used: HMA: AEC: Wa: | adaisst aal: yaretat aratht A OT 1201 
SUI: SON Yatsenistetar aafasrag: | sorenfiad: usm wlan waresy: 1Ve 
Woes Wat Ge sq: Wise: | gaa wat enforga fafaen: ge 1221 
Aha ae Wal Gaeica: Wer: | sautat aatet wat sfeorenrea: 1231 
wes aide 8 fasmeaieqed: | cee adiua: frat et: mew 12x! 
ESIC ECSIE | faaennissecdttata: | dat Aqseresye fad Great Al: Fat: 1241 
a a Se 6 three aamisa ya aa sraf ag 126! 
Bhanu, Lamba, Kakubh, Jami, Viswa, Sadhya, Marutvati, Vasu, Muharta and Sankalpa 
were (the names of) Dharma’s wives; (now) hear (the names) of their sons. (4) Of Bhanu, 
in the first instance was born Devarsabha and from (the loins of) Devarsabha, sprang up 
Indrasena. (Even SO) Vidyota was the son of Lamba and from (the loins of) Vidyota appeared 
(the Spirits presiding over) the clouds. (5) (Again), the son of Kakubh was Sankata and 
Sankata’s son was Kikata, from whom appeared (the spirits presiding over) the fortresses 
on earth. (Similarly) Swarga was the son of Jami and from (the loins of) Swarga appeared 
Nandi. (6) The sons of Viswa were the ViSwedevas (a group of gods, ten in number); the 
learned speak of them as issueless. Again, the group (of gods) called the Sadhyas was born 
of Sadhya and Arthasiddhi was (the name of) their son. (7) Marutvan and Jayanta were born 


of Marutvati; (of these) Jayanta was a part manifestation of Lord Vasudeva (Visnu); he is. 
(also) known by the name of Upendra. (8) Again, a race of gods called the Mauhirtikas (the 


pasuessnsnsnenennenenssesnernenesntns OOK SU cssuanesnananasesnanananannausit ioe escssenersenseasnsseeseenees 
deities presiding over the thirty Muhurtas—each consisting of 48 minutes—comprised in 
every twenty-four hours) was born of Muhirta. They actually dispense to (all) living beings 
the fr ult (of their actions) appropriate to the division of time presided over by each. (9) Of 
Sankalpa, again, was born Sankalpa (the deity presiding over thoughts); (and) Kama (the 
god of love) has been declared to be the progeny of Sankalpa. The eight Vasus (another 
group of gods) are the sons of Vasu: (now) hear their names from me;—(10) (They are) 
Drona, Prana, Dhruva, Arka, Agni, Dosa, Vasu and Vibhavasu. (And) of Abhimati, the wife 
of Drona, were born Harsa, Soka, Bhaya and others (the deities presiding over the emotions 
of joy, grief, fear and SO On). (11) Urjaswati was (the name of) the wife of Prana; and Saha, 
Ayu and Purojava, his sons. (And) Dhruva's wife, Dharani, bore (the deities presiding over) 
the various cities and towns. (12) Vasana (the deity presiding over latent desires was (the 
name Of) the wife of Arka and Tarsa (the deity presiding over excessive longing) and others 
are known: to be his sons. (Similarly) Dhara is (the name of) the Vasu named Agni and 
Dravinaka and others are his sons. (13) Skanda (the god Kartikeya) was the son of Krttika 
(the other wife of Agni); while (the gods) Visakha and others sprang up from (the loins of) 
Skanda. The son of Dosa through Sarvari (the deity presiding over nights) was (known by 
the name of ) Sisumara (the deity presiding over the stellar sphere, already described in 
Book V as resembling a dolphin in shape), a scintillation of Sri Hari. (14) Viswakarma (the 
architect of the gods), the husband of Akrti, was the son of Vasu through Angirasi (a daughter 
of the sage Angira). From (the loins of) Viswakarma appeared Caksusa (the sixth) Manu; 
(the group of gods called) the Viswedevas and the Sadhyas are the sons of Caksusa 
Manu.(15) Usa, the wife of Vibhavasu, gave birth to (three sons,) Vyusta, Rocis and Atapa. 
From (the loins of) Atapa sprang up Pancayama‘*(the deity presiding over the daytime), 
because of whom (all) living beings remain awake and engaged in (their) activities. (16) 
eae yee ural esisy aptfea: | tadisst wat stat am sat qarenfa: ie 
srintiefedemt =8=86oagedt 6 aelfafi exer ued ah afer: 1221 
Taare: «eet Ugur aaaiied ad gaa alent adit 12¢! 
paras watat yaaa! feaorat act tas agi aqdizol 
ameter fara ag: adel afifa ainda wand att wes 1221 
qauigad wes Wee alae qdaye DA gaia: 1221 
Again, Sardpa, the (first) wife of Bhuta, brought forth the Rudras (a class of gods 
presiding over destruction) in crores. Of these, Raivata, Aja, Bhava, Bhima, Vama, Ugra, 
Vrsakapi, Ajaikapada, Ahirbudhnya, Bahurupa and Mahan were the foremost. And the 
terrible attendants of Rudra (appearing in the aforesaid eleven principal forms), (viz.,) the 
Pretas (spirits) and Vinayakas (a class of evil-minded demigods), were distinct from the 
Rudras (being born of the other wife of Bhita). (17-18) Again, the wife of Angira, a lord of 
Created beings, Swadha (by name), accepted the manes for her sons; while (his other 
wife) Sati adopted Atharvaveda (the fourth Veda, henceforth known by the name of 
Atharvangirasa) as her son. (1 9) Krsaswa begot (a son named) Dhtmrakesa through his 
(first) wife Arci, and (four more sons, viz.,) Vedasira, Devala, Vayuna and Manu through 
(his second wife) Dhisana. (20) Vinata, Kadru, Patangi and Yamini were the (four other) 
Wives of the sage Kasyapa (who was also known as Tarksya because of his father, the 
Sage Marici, who bore the title of Trksa). (Of these) Patangi gave birth to birds, while 
alled Paficayama because the period of time presided over by him consists 


* The deity presiding over the daytime isc : 
On an average 7 five aes or fifteen hours including Pratyisa and Pradosa, the morning and evening hours, leaving only 


three Yamas or nine hours for the night which is therefore called Triyama. 





 —= 


580 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


QEHHKAKAKKALAKLHANALKLKAKKBKHKALKHAKHHAKHLKAKLLK BKK AHH HAKHANHAH HAMA Br Br Br Br Br Hr conmmneneranh nis: 6 
& 


Yamini brought forth moths. (21) Vinata (also called Suparna) bore Garuda, who carr an 
(on his back) Bhagavan Visnu (the Lord of sacrifices) Himself as well as Aruna (who js 
thighless*), the charioteer of the sun-god; while Kadru brought forth the numerous 
varieties of Nagas (serpent-demons). (22) 
SRM AAA: UST UNA aM AsAIeI Baaerfet: 1231 
Ua: Fae a aa: Hot SA ara feet: 1 yy AN Sle ATU Aga a 12x 
sq RUA «= aeagaae «| SEIeL| otfefaidiidg: aarst sitet Arar ser 1241 
Gf: saleiaan at ae: aca fafa: | frtaierton stra Be: ALATA: 1261 
aaesrnal a art fear FA aa: Fae AALARAT TT: 1201 
Seed: Wal Us AAMAS: | FOTa Yel: We AGMA AT: 1221 
aierasy weal: arpa fearmhat: | gat aakenaiserst seme 0 1281 
feqet awentsitet gaitat fasag: | sarge: aught: autg: aftetsent: 1301 
Gert 4 qsdal ad Uhuenlsqda: | yaa fawoant fasts asta: 1321 
Wut: Gia Hamgae waa: feai queue wast aaritatest set 1321 | 
aaa «=a (Gs AMT AMRIT: | Uae eae Gera Hie a 1331 | 
wera fama: madaart yaiqemi aint a x aged d &: 13¥1 
SAAS Wa Hea sAeleiifed: | lela: Hrechasy aa Gaanlert: 1341 
dat: wisagartr agai fag: frariser edt wea salrase: 1361 
fasfata: fafenrat ad daasisd | Teas chad wed A surma: 130 
Again, (the deities presiding over) the (twenty-seven) lunar mansions, Kritikat and so 
on, are the wives of Soma (the moon-god), O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata) ! Plagued with the 
devilish disease of consumption due to the curse of Daksa (who got enraged with his son- 
in-law because of his partiality and excessive fondness for one of his twenty-seven wives, 
viz., Rohini, and consequent neglect of others) however, the moon-god got no issue by (any 
of) them. (23) Propitiating Daksa again, Soma secured (from him the boon of regaining) the 
digits (of light) intercepted (from the lunar orb) during the waning (dark) fortnight (but no 
issues even then). Now hear the auspicious names of Kagyapa's wives, the mothers of (all 
species of) living beings, by whom (the whole of) this universe was brought forth—(viz..) 
Aditi, Diti, Danu, Kastha, Arista, Surasa, Ila, Muni, Krodhavasa, Tamra, Surabhi, Sarama 
and Timi. Of (the last-named,) Timi, were born the (numerous) species of acquatic 
creatures; while wild animals (the tiger etc.), are the offspring of Sarama. (24—26) Of 
Surabhi were born the buffaloes, the bovine race and whatever other (ruminant) beasts with 
- cloven hoofs there are, O king ! of Tamra, were born the hawk, the vulture and other 
(carnivorous) birds; while the hosts of celestial nymphs were born of Muni. (27) Reptiles such 
as the snake, O king (Pariksit), are the progeny of Krodhavasa. From (the womb of) Ila 
appeared the whole vegetable kingdom; while the Raksasas (ogres) are the offspring Of 
Surasa. (28) The Gandharvas (celestial musicians) are the progeny of Arista, and beasts 
with uncloven hoofs (such as the horse and the donkey), of Kastha. The sons of Danu 


number sixty-one; hear (the names of) the chief of them. (29) They are Dwimardha, 
Sambara, Arista, Hayagriva, Vibhavasu, Ayomukha, Sankusira, Swarbhanu (Rahu), Kapila, 





* The tradition goes that the egg that bore Aruna was broken before time and hence Aruna was in an undeveloped 
condition without his lower limbs. 
+ For the names of the lunar mansions vide foot-note below V.xxii. II. 


Dis. 6] BOOK SIX oot 
SBR B BRA A ARR LER BBB TARR RETR RPA R ATR RE BE HAAR BEB ABBR B BEARABLE SEEDS 


Aruna, Puloma, Vrsaparva and Ekacakra, Anutapana, DhomrakeSa, Virupaksa, Vipracitti 
and Durjaya. (30-31) Namuci, it is said, married Suprabha, the daughter of Swarbhanu; 
while the mighty Yayati,~ son of Nahusa (a human king), wedded Sarmistha, the daughter 
of Vrsaparva. (32) Now hear (the names) of the four daughters of VaiSwanara (another son 
of Danu), who were (all) charming to look at, (viz.,) Upadanavi, Hayasira, Puloma and 
Kalaka. (33) (Of these,) Hiranyaksat espoused Upadanavi; and Kratu, Hayasira, O Pariksit! 
And urged by Brahma (the creator), the glorious Kasyapa (a lord of created beings) married 
the other two daughters of VaiSwanara, (viz.,) Puloma and Kalaka. Of these (Puloma and 
Kalaka), were born sixty thousand Danavas (great grandsons of Danu), (known as) the 
Paulomas and Kalakeyas, who distinguished themselves in battle. When in heaven (on a 
friendly visit), your father's father (Arjuna), O Pariksit, slew them (all) single-handed in order 
to please Indra (the lord of paradise), inasmuch as they wrecked his sacrificial perform- 
ances.(34—36) Vipracitti begot through (his wife) Sirmmhika a hundred and one sons, the 
eldest of whom was Rahu, who (along with his hundred brothers) attained (through divine 
grace) to the position of a Graha (the deity presiding over a planet), the other hundred being 


(called) the Ketus. (37) 


Bad: sad aa arsfertaqgda: | aa ARTA ea: wiertaate fay: 1321 
fagardar get asia afaat st: 1 ee faenat aout fas: stem Seema: 1391 
faqead: seta daa a aq fayt a near an ea ait aa 
aa YaA Asal Aaa Wea yfa ixol 
Sa Wat SN ual a ad dd: | Hal a audi al a aad Gai aay ive! 
sro Agel Vat dalsdur: Yat: | aa a Alaqet sifastaon alae 1x2! 
yeaa: frst waeniistad gai adisal aaa afad sera fagafes: 1x3 
asda weal ta Aa weal dean faaeas difar ivy! 
aq att gen weeta fesamnifanda uke Weonssietaa aq isu 
sft SHeriad Fea URAEA Alecia THA WIS: 16 
Now from this point onward hear (from me) in order of sequence (an account) of the race 
that proceeded from Aditi, in which the almighty Lord Narayana Himself appeared by 
manifesting a part of His own Being (in the form of the divine Dwarf). (38) Vivaswan, Aryama, 
Pusa, Twasta, Savita, Bhaga, Dhata, Vidhata, Varuna, Mitra, Sakra (Indra) and Vamana (who 
took colossal strides after assuming a cosmic form)—these are the (twelve) sons of Aditi 
(who preside over the sun one after another month by month). (39) The highly blessed 
Samjna, a wife of Vivaswan, brought forth Sraddhadeva, who rose to be the Manu (during 
the present Manvantara), and a son and daughter, born as twins, (viz.,) the god Yama (the 
god of punishment) and Yami (the deity presiding over the holy river Yamuna). Then 
appearing as (assuming the form of) a mare on earth, the same (celestial) lady gave birth 
to the twin born ASwinikumaras (the celestial physicians). (40) (His other wife) Chaya (who 
was no other than a shadow of Samjna) got through her husband (a couple of sons, named) 
Sanaiscara (the deity presiding over the planet Saturn) and Savarni (another prospective) 
Manu, as well as a daughter, Tapati (by name), who indeed chose king Samvarana for her 


husband. (41) Aryama's wife was Maitrka and their sons were called the Carsanis (because 
they were full of wisdom). It was after them (as endowed with a special aptitude for self- 





* Vide Discourse xvili of Book VIII. 
t The storfof Hiranyaksa has already been told at length in Discourses xvii-xix of Book III. 








582 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 
LAPAAAAAEA AAA A EAA AEE ALARA ALLELE REALE R EERE REEL ELLE LSS ELSES SELLE ATE eee ee 
examination ) that the human species was evolved by Brahma (the creator). (42) Pasa (the 
third son of Aditi), who had his teeth broken of yore because he had shown his teeth and 
laughed at Rudra seeing him angry at Daksa (vide IV. v. 21) and consequently lived on flour 
(vide IV. vii. 4), remained without issue. (43) A girl, Racana by name, who was a younger 
sister of the Daityas (the sons of Diti, whose account will follow in Discourse xviii below): 
became the wife of Twasta. Of the aforesaid couple, were born (two sons,) Sannivega ang 
the powerful Viswaripa. (44) The hosts of gods (unanimously) chose Viswarupa for their 
preceptor—even though he was a nephew (sister's son) of their (sworn) enemies (the 
Daityas)—inasmuch as they had been deserted by their (own) teacher, the sage Brhaspati 

(son of Angira), who was insulted by them. (45) 


Thus ends the sixth discourse, in Book Six of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samuhita. 


GIS NIS 


AA ATASeATa: 


Discourse VII 
Deserted by the sage Brhaspati, the god choose 
Viswarupa for their preceptor 
UMA 
Ha Sal: Uhl Sao: AT: | Wertaa Wakes Wt! e | 
The king (Pariksit) said : For what reason were the gods forsaken by their own 


preceptor (the sage Brhaspati)? (Kindly tell me, O glorious sage, the transgression made 
by the disciples with respect to their preceptor, which brought matters to such a pass. (1) 


l 
l 
Soar «= fetaenaeareaisrd: | arostorreaasyoT ATAVUS | & | 
ror: | oaRABseersmrfet: | fase: were wereatarar yerw & | 
a aq Ward cares eianarad II yweaenarearfey: | 9 | 
area = Uae ee Aeeonetiios: usaafe aura ct 
amt fiat deat alae: 3y: | sree aye qui fem siaefatmar |e | 

Sri Suka replied : Indra, who had transgressed the path frequented by the virtuous 
through arrogance caused by the lordship of the worlds, O king (Pariksit), was (one day) 
seated on the throne in his court, surrounded by the Maruts (the forty-nine wind-gods), the 
(eight) Vasus, the (eleven) Rudras, the (other) Adityas (sons of Aditi), (the classes of gods 
known as) the Rbhus, the Viswedevas and the Sadhyas, as well as by the (twin-born) 
Aswinikumaras (the celestial physicians). The (great) Maghava (another name of Indra) 





Las deeueheeseenwessnensencaasevarss Oost orate Te EEE ee 
was being waited upon and extolled. O Pariksit (a descendant of Bharata), by the Siddhas, 
Caranas, Gandharvas, sages who were (great) expositors of the Vedas, as well as by the 
Vidyadharas (celestial artistes) and Apsaras (celestial nymphs), Kinnaras (another class of 
celestial musicians), birds and Nagas (serpent-demons) and his praises were being sweetly 
sung. (Duly) provided with a white (royal) umbrella, charming as the orb of the moon, and 
other insignia of supreme royalty such as chowries and fans, he shone most splendid with 
(his spouse) Saci (the daughter of Puloma), who shared the throne with him. (2—6) When, 
as would appear from the following account, he did not welcome—by rising (from his 
throne), offering a seat and other (appropriate) honours—the chief preceptor of (all) the 
gods including himself, Brhaspati, the foremost of sages, adored (alike) by the gods as 
well as the demons, as he came in, nay, (when) Indra did not stir from his seat even on 
seeing the sage (actually) present in the court, the enlightened sage, a (worthy) son of 
Angira, went out of the court at once and quietly returned to his own residence, though 
powerful (enough to correct his disciple ), (fully) aware of the aberration brought about by 
pride of affluence and power. (7—9) 


waa wsfaaqeetst 9 wetearmem: imma wel wane 120! 
Bel Ad AAT Hd A avai aaa We: Pala cHrepa: 1221 
cl yead Ufved wet freasauat i aareargt wa alatser faaerar: 1221 
q unease feeuniter a waa safsfet sae a a ut faa: 1231 
wa PUA udat aAfe Waia sede A ASreEngal sa 1ev1 
SATS ARTA TTT eTeTUT fast | Saale Frere: sitet aaot War 12k 


Realizing that very moment the disrespect shown by him towards his preceptor, Indra 
spontaneously himself reproached his own self in the court (in the following words):—(10) 
"Oh, my conduct has been deplorably unrighteous in that the preceptor was slighted in 
(open) court by me, a creature of poor wits indeed and maddened by power and 
opulence.(11) What prudent person will covet the fortune even of the lord of paradise, by 
which I, the ruler of the gods (who are predominantly Sattvika by nature), have been dragged 
into (the slough of) egotism (a demoniac propensity)! (12) They do not know the highest 
(standard of) morality who declare that one occupying the throne of a suzerain lord should 
not rise (from one's seat) to receive anybody. (13) They that believe the words of the 
aforesaid misleading guides—who undoubtedly (themselves) fall down into the dark 
regions of hell—surely sink (into the abysmal depths of hell) like those embarking on a ship 
of rock. (14) Guilelessly touching his feet with my head (therefore), I shall presently propitiate 
the (kind-hearted) Brahmana, the preceptor of (all) the gods, who is endowed with 


fathomless intelligence. (15) 


Ua fardadere Aaa Wa Yer! qeenhatictsest THM 126 | 
TAR: Pat ated War Sue! are fer Gea: wl aed: 1201 
capa: da snr AML ea NAT Aeghet ateafea: 1321 


Hager EeMntiaretested: LAAT BAO WY: Asst AdheNI: 12e1 

Aedes | aaa AMTAIITSST: | HUET WaT «ea Sata Ofte 1201 
While Indra was pondering thus (even at the court), the all-wise Brhaspati (who knew 
what was going on in Indra's mind as well as what was in store for him) disappeared from 
his house by dint of his extraordinary Yogic power. (16) Getting no clue to the whereabouts 
of his preceptor, though looking for him all round, the glorious Indra reflected by force of 
reason (how to get the better of his powerful enemies, the demon hosts, in the absence of 








584 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


So eee eat aenaeReebeRENentieenesheennrnren, mee l/ 


a wise counsellor), but felt no peace of mind, though united with (closely and devotedly 
followed by) the gods. (17) As soon as they heard of it (the weakness of Indra) the haughty 
demons all took up arms and made preparations for war against the gods, following the 
advice. of the sage Sukracarya (their wise preceptor). (18) With their (foremost) limbs 
(heads), thighs and arms torn asunder by the sharp-pointed arrows discharged by the 
demons, the gods, led by Indra, approached Brahma (the creator) for protection, their heads 
bent low (with humiliation). (19) Seeing them afflicted on all sides in this way, the glorious 
and birthless god Brahma (the self-born) was moved with supreme compassion and spoke 
comfortingly (as follows): (20) 
Senara 


Sat Ad GAS DNR a: Ha Hedi afas wet 9 ataatarerad 1221 
ARIAT «Ua: UI: | Neileea: ahea: GSM SALAM: 1221 
Teed feed: asa Nello Wafanar| Tatar Ya: HITANT Aika: | 
ated Feat wae yeaa: 1231 
fafasa te TOTARANETAA POM aaa: | 
a fasrnfa-arrel tarot VaAVSUT ARINTVTEL 1 2X | 
we fageaq se fas wat aisqamad 
aufsdsaia a fama at afe afteraqae awe Rul 
Brahma said : Alas ! your conduct has really been most unwelcome, O jewels among 
gods,in that, proud of power and pelf, you did not welcome a Brahmana who had not only 
disciplined his self but who had (also) realized (his identity with) Brahma (the Absolute)! (21) 
It was the fruit of that misbehaviour (on your part) that you suffered defeat at the hands of 
others (the demons)—who are your (sworn) enemies and had grown very weak—in spite 
of your being rich and powerful, O gods! (22) O Indra, look at your enemies, who had (once) 
grown extremely weak because of the disrespect (shown by them) to their preceptor 
(Sukracarya) but who have now gained in strength again by propitiating the sage Kavya 
(Sukracarya) through (their) devotion. (Nay,) devoted as they are to Sukra (a scion of the 
celebrated sage Bhrgu), they may (one day) take possession of even my abode 
(Brahmaloka)!(23) Treasuring the precepts of the Bhrgus (Sukracarya and others) as their 
(only) wealth and their secrets being impenetrable, they hold (the dominion of) heaven as 
of no account (easy to acquire). (As a matter of fact,) no evil can (ever) befall the kings who 
look upon the Brahmanas, Lord Visnu (the Protector of cows) and the cows as their masters 
(Protectors). (24) Therefore, immediately resort (for protection) to Viswarupa—son of the 
god Twasta—a Brahmana given to austerities and self-controlled. Treated with respect (by 
you), he will (surely) accomplish your ends provided, of course, you tolerate what he does 


(his partiality towards the demons, with whom he is connected by blood on the maternal 
side—vide, VI. vi. 44). (25) 
Ayah Sava 


a Wage We seo faacac: | safe eapqusea «Owe 126 | 


Sri Suka continued : Thus spoken to by Brahma (the creator), and relieved of (their) 
anxiety, O king, the gods approached Viswartpa (son of Twasta), the seer, and, embracing 
him (as a younger kinsman), spoke (as follows). (26) 


Ga Hy: 
aa dsitaa: STA sms vst CHM: Mea aed fret arate: 1291 


Dis. 7 ] BOOK SIX 585 


Br Br BeBe REBEL BEB BER BEBE BEBE BEBE BEA Be Be BEG RR Bee Be Be Re RR BRR RR RE RE RRL RRR ERE LL REALE REE LER LE LEED 


Gat fe ut ed: fegasCt aay at UAaat wer feraa were 12C1 
srarat serott Af: faa aft: Ts: | WMT ASaddidatar Arad farcdteta: 1291 
caret APM yftetenaniie: wei sacar aft: ade carer: 1301 
qed agenda | TEL aceon «=a TTT 1321 
quiag mead sfes sat qeqiamen fasten: quae asa 132i 
a Tara wig afagmepufiare | saesaa a ce sal AST SUNT 133 


The gods said : We have called at your hermitage as unexpected visitors (deserving 
your kind attention); may all be well with you. (Now) be pleased, dear son, to fulfil the timely 
wishes of your uncles (ourselves). (27) Indeed service of parents is the highest duty of 
virtuous Sons—even of those that have been blessed with sons. O holy Brahmana, much 
more of celibates. (28) A preceptor (who invests one with the sacred thread and teaches the 
Vedas) is Veda incarnate; a father (or uncle) is an image of Brahma (the lord of creation); 
a brother is an effigy of Indra (the chief of the gods); (and) a mother is a direct incarnation 
of the goddess Earth. (29) A sister is an embodiment of tenderness; an unexpected visitor 
is the very incarnation of virtue; a guestis an incarnation of the sacred fire and all living beings 
are embodiments of the (supreme) Self (Lord Visnu). (30) Therefore, getting rid, by virtue 
of your asceticism, of the affliction of your parents in the shape of their discomfiture at the 
hands of their enemies, O dear child, you ought to do our bidding. (81) We choose you, a 
Brahmana established in (identity with) Brahma and (therefore) worthy of adoration (for all), 
as our preceptor, so that we may easily and fully conquer our enemies through your 
(spiritual) glory. (82) Indeed, as a means of accomplishing one's ends, the wise do not 
condemn the act of bowing at the feet of the younger. Setting aside (the knowledge of) the 
Vedas, O (holy) Brahmana, (mere) age is no criterion of seniority. (33) 

BEATA 





snafea: gam: uakifea aga: ia fadeceee saa: soar fret 13x 
The sage (Sri Suka) went on : (Thus) importuned by the hosts of gods to accept the 
Office of their priest, the said Viswarupa, (who was) a great ascetic, felt delighted and replied to 

them in soft words (as follows). (34) 
fqaReaq Sava 
fanffa adeiedgad sae wet q afeet aren olhaivatada | 

Fareed Aksar: FT Ua AIS SAT 1341 | 
siesamt fe wi fiewed we faire: | | 
aa fame ¢ miteeitea: okt waft aa aft: 136i | 

aaa a sfasat wefe: sifid fadi vact sifid aad sroresr aera 13191 
ViSwaripa said : Priesthood has been condemned by the virtuous as involving the loss 
of the spiritual glory investing a Brahmana. Yet how shall a person like me, O masters, 
(venture to) turn down the solicitation of guardians of the spheres (like you), by whom he 
deserves to be commanded; for obedience alone is declared (in the scriptures) as conducive 
to his good. (35) Sila (gleaning grains left ina field after reaping the harvest) and Unchana 
(picking up grains lying scattered ina market-place after the piles have been removed from 


there) are the (only) wealth” of the destitute (Brahmanas). (All) acts (such as pouring 
oblations into the sacred fire and feeding an unexpected visitor), appropriate to noble souls 


* Sila and Ufichana have been glorified in our scriptures as the best means of livelihood for a Brahmana. 


[564] B. M. 21— | 





* 


586 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


PARE LASALLE AKLKAALKALKAAAARLKARKHKAHAHKA AD HAAR AA AHA VH A H Hr Ki Hr Fe Hr Br Br Ar Br Br Kr Hr Hr Br Hr He Wr Hr Hr Rr Ke Br He Hr Hr Hr AS} 


being accomplished in this household life by me with the aforesaid means, how shall | take, 
O suzerain lords, to the reproachable vocation of a priest, with which a fool alone remains 
pleased. (36) Yet | dare not decline what is earnestly asked for by you (my elders), which 
is of no account. (On the other hand,) | shall (presently) accomplish all that you have 
solicited, even at the sacrifice of my life and my (highest) interests. (37) 


Hy JaTaI 

aq wd sfaae fagect nema: iadee gage amu aarfimt isc 

atest fa damien facar snkseneraesa aeren fae fay: 13¢1 

aa wa: aeetat firasqranqidy: iat sie a Aesta fase sare: xo! 

Sa SAP Tad ASM GRASS fecal WEEH TAAISEAT: IN| 

Sri Suka resumed : Having thus promised them (the gods), ViswarUpa, (who was) a 
great ascetic, discharged, as requested, the role of a priest with supreme diligence. (38) 
ViSwarlpa (who wielded extraordinary power by virtue of the Lord's grace) snatched, by 
means of a prayer addressed to Lord Visnu (in the form of what is known as the Narayana- 
Kavaca and stands incorporated in Discourse viii below), the fortune of the Asuras (the 
enemies of the gods)—though protected by means of the prayer taught by Usana 
(Sukracarya)—and restored it to the great Indra (the lord of paradise). (39) The said 
ViSwarUpa, noble-minded as he was, taught to the great Indra the above-mentioned prayer, 


protected by which that mighty god with a thousand eyes was able to conquer the demon 
hosts. (40) 


Thus ends the seventh discourse, in Book Six of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


GENE 


| a 


Discourse VIII 
The text of the (holy) Narayana-Kavaca (a prayer invoking the 
protection of Lord Narayana) taught (to Indra) 
WMATA 





aa WA: Aeata: ware aera wistaa faite feta qys Bree | QI 

wmMaaaente ad ATAU, | AEM SSAMTAA: Wa GA Welsstaye | 2 | 
The king (Pariksit) submitted : O divine sage, teach me that prayer (serving as a 
protective armour against all evils and) invoking the succour of Lord Narayana (hence 
spoken of as identical with Him, there being perfect identity between God and the means 
of realizing Him), protected by which Indra (who is endowed with a thousand eyes) 
thoroughly and entirely subdued as though in sport the enemy's troops along with their 
mounts and enjoyed the fortune of all the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate 


region); and (further) tell me how, protected by that armour, he was able to conquer the 
enemies who came to take his life on the field of battle. (1-2) 


Dis. 8 ] BOOK SIX 587 


RBBB BRB BBB RR BeBe BRB BEB RY BR BR Be He Be Be RR HE BEBE BR Be BBR Be Be Be Re Be BeBe Re Se Be Be Re Be Re Re Re Re RRC RC Re RE BERBER REBEL RE BEE ERR LEBER 


Sy Jara 
qa: Wtfereeanst 6 mega aaue ante afeeanat: AT! 3 | 
Sri Suka replied : Appointed as a priest, ViswarUpa (son of Twasta) taught the Kavaca 


(prayer serving as a protection), named after Lord Narayana, to the great Indra, who had 
inquired about it. Listen to it with undivided attention on this occasion. (3) 


faery Jara 





erated odd: Gale gleRantserean | wwraqranmtgreEIdY 19 | 
weeded ats | faeeragq «gel wert ¢ warded wren faraen fest c | 
det Arise wdafyinenmeadiesa waghiside aa: 1 <1 
aearert met ad adiea fafriéarai o% fama aa fa 1201 
Sa Ua eda eta vegrkefaedar feendsrenargers THAGSTEL 122 | 
VisSwartpa began : In the face of danger, a devotee who has finished his bath and 
other purificatory rites (such as Sandhya) should wash his hands and feet, (thrice) sip 
a little water (with the Lord's names KeSava, Narayana and Madhava on his lips) and, 
(thus) purified, squat (on a proper seat) with his face (turned) towards the north and 
wearing a ring of the sacred KuSa grass (on the ring finger of each hand). (And) after 
silently performing (what is known as) the Nyasa (consecration or spiritualization) of the 
(various) members of his body and hands with the two Mantras (sacred formulas 
mentioned hereafter), he should arm himself with the protective covering (in the shape 
of the following prayer) sacred to Lord Narayana. (To commence the rite of Nyasa or 
consecration) he should (first of all mentally) locate the syllables of the (eight-syllabled 
Mantra) "OM Namo Narayanaya"—OM and so on—in order of sequence in his feet, knee- 
joints, thighs, belly, region of the heart, chest, mouth and (crown of) the head (thus identifying 
his body with the Mantra and thereby spiritualizing it and making it fit for putting on the divine 
armour), or even in the reverse order (known as the Samhara-Nyasa, as opposed to the 
Utpatti-Nyasa, placing the syllables "YA' and so on—followed by an Anuswara or nasal 
sound represented by the letter 'm'—in his head, mouth etc.). (4—6) Thereafter he should 
perform the Karanyasa (consecration or spiritualization of the parts of both his hands) with : 
the twelve-syllabled Mantra (OM Namo Bhagavate Vasudevaya), locating the syllables | 
beginning with OM and ending with ‘YA’ in his (eight) fingers and (upper and lower) thumb- 
joints. (7) (Thirdly) he should place the (first) syllable 'OM' of the following Mantra “OM | 
Visnave Namah" in his heart, then 'Vi' (the first letter of the second syllable) in the crown of ) 
his head, and'S' (the second letter of the same syllable) in the middle of his eye-brows, and ) 
the (third) syllable ‘Na’ in the Sikhan (the tuft of hair more or less in the rear of the crown). | 
(8) He should (mentally) unite (identify) the (fourth) syllable Ve’ with his eyes and the (fifth) | 
syllable 'Na' with all the joints (of his body). Then putting the (last) syllable ‘Ma’—followed 
by a Visarga (a distinct hard aspiration, represented by the letter ‘h’) and the interjection | 
‘Phat'— to the use of driving away evil spirits, he should assign it to all the (ten) directions . 
(in order to block them against the inroads of evil spirits and demons etc., repeating the | 
formula "Mah Astraya Phat" and snapping the thumb and the middle finger together 
successively in each direction sought to be so blocked). (In this way) the wise devotee | 





e 


588 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis: g 


BeBe Bete RR AAR EEE EA LEELA LEAL ERE LEE LAE LE SES SES SESE SSS ae rite 


RAL AAR ARR A LE AR ARERR AEE AA ALLA ELE RE LL ESS ES SEE SEER EERE ERE Settee 
becomes a (very) embodiment (as it were) of the Mantra. (9-10) He should (then) visualize 
himself as (one with) the Supreme Self, possessed of six divine attributes (viz., power, virtue 
fame, affluence, wisdom and aversion to the pleasures of sense , each in Its fullest measure), 
the object of his meditation, manifested in the form of learning, glory and asceticism, ang 
repeat the following prayer:—(1 1) 

%  Eifdearmm  adat wzenefa: ads | 
CUES ICRC CIMELELE G SATUSHTONSEAME: 122 
SOq_ At td weafaidtra ae = ARM! 
weq aagarnisam fifama: sad  faweq: 1k21 
Sigeentsrartey ay: Urea SAAT: 
fags’ ieC(iéiTeTERC(asiésfeN = egy TT: 1g 
Tae «= Teal IHU: ; aut: | 
unispega  fasava  aaeeisee AAS IY! 
aeMickaenmd, Waa: Wd RN ead! 
Saat aA: uate Wore: alas: caren 12! 
CAeAisad «= IAeaTeaitet a ART | 
tated: oo geardarnid fat oaitat =| Pare eu 
Tada wade eee wares  ffsiaren | 
Wigs lnleddisrirde asl Wi wmMlelaaeeha: 1c! 
fet «=| Tara USNS TTI 
mich: he: mleded Wid wlaaretecndracde: 1°e! 
ao 0oalal «Tet ose Wee saganMay: | 
ARTE: oe SarTaHAearat fasttsarfot: 1201 
case 4860 eI SC TaCiédREITTG: Sse Ss TL 
aa gale «= seretetSsdPaitey Ss UemISa, USAT: 1281 | 
Saaaamana ei: wae danse wards: | i 
qmaistiaqaet sud fadet was  calodtd: 1221 


“May Sri Hari, denoted by (the mystical syllable) OM, afford me protection on all sides 
as well as from all dangers—Sri Hari, who has His lotus-feet placed on the back of Garuda 
(the king of the birds), nay, who wields in His eight arms (hands) a conch, discus (lit., that 
which is provided with a number of spokes), shield, sword, mace, arrow, bow and noose and 

= who is (naturally) possessed of the eight mystic powers (the faculty of assuming an atomic 
form and so on). (12) (Appearing) in the form of the divine Fish, may He protect me in water 
from the (various) species of aquatic creatures, representing the noose of Varuna (the god 
of water). May He, who appeared of His own will in the form of a religious student, dwarfish 
in stature, guard me on land; and may the same Lord, appearing in His cosmic form aS 
Trivikrama (He who measured the entire universe in less than three paces) guard mein the 
air. (13) May the almighty Lord Nrsimha (who appeared in a queer form, half man and half 
lion), the Slayer of Hiranyakasipu (the leader of the demon hosts), protect me in places full 
of danger, such as a forest (infested with wild beasts etc.) and the fore-front of a battle—Lord 





Dis Dasenssssssseestsenseeeseee todo ee 
Nrsimha at whose tremendous peals of laughter, when He raised them, the quarters 
violently echoed and embryos were discharged (from the wombs of Asura women). (14) May 
the celebrated divine Boar, in whose (sacred) person the (various) sacrifices stand 
represented, and who lifted up the earth on His tusk, protect me on the road, May Rama 
(Lord ParaSurama) guard up on mountain-peaks and may Sri Rama (the elder brother of 
Bharata), accompanied by (His still younger brother) Laksmana, protect us (when we are) 
away from home. (15) May (the divine sage) Narayana keep me aloof from violent religious 
practices (such as the employment of spells for malevolent purposes) and all (sins of) 
omission; and the sage Nara, from pride. May Datta (Lord Dattatreya), the Master of Yoga, 
guard me against (the risk of) abandoning the practice of Yoga and may Lord Kapila, the 
Lord of Prakrti (consisting of the three Gunas), save me from the bondage of actions 
(prompted by the aforesaid three Gunas). (16) May (the divine sage) Sanatkumara guard 
me against (the shafts of) Love; Lord Hayagriva (having the head of a horse), from (the sin of) 
neglecting (omitting to salute) the (images of) gods met with on the way; Narada (the foremost 
of celestial sages), against drawbacks in the worship of the Deity (in the shape of the thirty- 
two transgressions* enumerated in the works on Devotion); and may Sri Hari manifested as 
the divine Tortoise keep me away from every description of hell. (17) May Lord Dhanwantari 
guard me against unwholesome diet and Lord Rsabhadeva, whose mind is perfectly subdued, 
from the fear of the pairs of opposites. Again, may Lord Yajna save me from public scandal; Lord 
Balarama (the elder Brother of Sri Krsna), from death at the hands of ahuman being and Sesa (the 
lord of serpents), from (the clutches of) the class of serpents known as the Krodhavasas. (18) May 
Lord Dwaipayana (the divine sage Vedavyasa, so-called because He was born in an island) 
guard me against ignorance and Lord Buddha, against heretical creeds and neglect of duties. 
(And) may Lord Kalki, who assumed that glorious manifestation for the preservation of 
righteousness protect me from (the impurities of ) the Kali age, the refuse (dirtiest period) of 
time.(19) May Lord KeSava (the Supreme Deity the Ruler of even Brahma and Siva) protect 
me with His mace in the morning (the first of the six divisions of the day, each consisting of two 
hours); Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows), who holds a flute (in His hand), through the Sangava 
hours (the second part of the day); Lord Narayana (who has His abode in water and who weild 
an uplifted javelin), inthe forenoon and (the all-pervading) Lord Visnu, carrying Sudarsana (the 
chief of all discuses) in His hand, at midday. (20) May Lord Madhustdana (the Slayer of the 
demon Madhu), who wields a terrible bow, protect me in the afternoon and Lord Madhava (the 


eS oo eee ces =e Once C8 Ven oe AR ae, wreee 


* The thirty-two transgressions to which a worshipper of the Deity is liable are as follows:—(1) To ride into the premises 
sacred to a deity or to enter a place of worship (even) with wooden sandals under one's feet; (2) failure to celebrate or attend 
(when invited) sacred festivals such as the Rathayatra (conducting the Deity in a festive procession on a chariot on the day 
appointed for the same). Janmastami (the Birthday of Lord Sri Krsna) and so on; (3) failure to salute an image of the Deity 
after beholding it; (4) to visit a temple in a an impure state; (5) to salute the Deity by raising only one hand; (6) to go on walking 
round the Lord without pausing a while before Him after every full round, or merely walking round in front of the Lord; (7) to | 
squat with one's legs stretched in front of the Deity; (8) to squat with one’s kness up and encircled by one’s arms before the 
Deity; (9) to lie down before the Lord; (10) to dine before the Deity; (11) to tell a lie before the Deity; (12) to speak loudly before 
the Deity; (13) to talk with another before the Deity; (1 4) to exclaim in front of the Lord; (15) to quarrel in front of the Deity; (16) 
to torment another before the Lord; (17) to bless another before the Deity; (18) to speak harsh words to another before the 
Deity; (19) to cover oneself all over with a blanket before the Deity; (20) to revile another before the Deity; (21) to extol another 
before the Deity; (22) to utterindecentwords before the Deity; (23) to fast before the Deity; (24) to worship the Lord with ordinary 
materials even when one can afford to offer Him more valuable articles; (25) to eat or drink anything that has not been offered 
to the Deity; (26) failure to offer to the Lorda fruit peculiar to the season before giving it to anyone else; (27) to offer some fruit 
or vegetable with its front part removed from it for being cooked as food for the use of the Deity; (28) to sit with one’s back over 
against the Deity; (29) to salute anyone else before the Deity; (30) failure to greet one’s preceptor, enquire after his health and 


extol him; (31) to indulge in self-praise and (32) to revile any Deity whatsoever. 





> . 


590 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Di 
Re Ree Re Re Re eRe Ry Re Re BR RE RE AR RT Be Re REE BER Be er He BH eH Br Hr Br Br Br Hr Rr Hr Br Br Br Br Hr By Hr Hr Br Hr Mr Br Hr Br Hr Hr Wr Hr eearwenmenh ois, 8 


Spouse of Goddess Laksmi) manifested in three glorious forms (Brahma, Visnu and Siva), a} 
dusk. May Lord HrsikeSa guard me in the first part of the night (and) Lord Padmanabha (Who 
has a lotus spring from His navel), alone, during the second part (till midnight) as well as at 
midnight (during the third part). (21) May the Lord bearing the mark of Srivatsa (a white cur 
of hair representing the foot-print of the sage Bhrgu) on His chest, protect me in the latter 
(fourth) part of the night; Lord Janardana (who is supplicated by men), carrying a sword (in His 
hand), at the close (during the fifth part) of the night; Damodara (Lord Sri Krsna as bound at 
the waist with a string to a wooden mortar used for threshing paddy etc.), by mother Yasoda 
as a punishment for His childish pranks), at dawn and Lord Visweswara (the Ruler of the 
universe), manifested as the Time-Spirit (or Death), during both twilights (morning and 
evening). (22) 


Ue Wma wad wade Wace 
aay carmaker mat sat amet = eae: 1231 


a 

as fasaqa permit  dineistcea = mm i2ul 

a faneufaankeagoa an feta  ferr 

aa dissdx crea fsa et caer 261 

(Addressing SudarSana, a divine attendant of Lord Visnu, who when commanded by Him, 

assumes the form of a discus and is employed by Him in destroying His adversaries or the 
enemies of His devotees,) Revolving all round, (when) hurled by the Lordin the form of a discus 
with a rim fierce as the fire raging at the time of universal dissolution, (pray,) completely burn, 
(O) completely burn (my) enemy's host at once, (even) as fire helped by the wind consumes 
(a pile of) hay. (23) (Similarly addressing the Lord's mace, Kaumodakt in living form,) Beloved 
as You are of the invincible Lord (whose servant | am), and sending forth sparks whose 
impact is as deadly as that of a thunderbolt, O mace, (pray), thoroughly crush, (O) 
completely pound the Kusmandas (a class of imps), Vainayakas (a class of malevolent 
demigods who are living obstacles to all noble and benevolent undertakings), Yaksas (a 
species of ghosts), Raksasas (ogres), Bhitas (ghosts) and Grahas (a class of evil demons 
who seize upon children); and pulverize, (O) crumble to dust, (my) adversaries. (24) 
(Addressing the conch of Sri Krsna, named Paficajanya,) Blown by Sri Krsna and shaking 
the hearts of (my) foes with your terrific blast, O lord of conches, may You (be pleased to) 
drive away the Yatudhanas (ogres), Pramathas (a class of attendants of Lord Siva), evil 
spirits, Matrkas (female imps posing as mothers), goblins, Brahmaraksasas* (the ghosts of 
Brahmanas who in their lifetime carry away the wives of others and the property of a 
Brahmana) and other evil-eyed spirits. (25) Directed by the Lord, O sharp-edged Nandaka 
(the foremost of all swords), may you (be pleased to) cut down, O mow down, my enemies: 


host. (Pray,) cover the eyes of (my) wicked foes, O shield with a hundred moon -like buttons! 
and blind the eyes of the evil-eyed. (26) 


wal Ma HesyT Hea TA Va al gee seed yeetiseea wa at 12 
aalvacita WIAA SUA | TAY Malad GEN A aA: Ha-sdlaet: 122! 


* Tea Alfa Ga AAAS Fl Aes rset SH wats were: 11 
Also cf. Manusmrti XII.60. (Yajnavalkya-Smrti Ill. 212) 








Dis. 8 ] BOOK SIX 591 


Pe ee ee SSS Se BR Be Be Be Be Be Be hehe Be Be BR Be Be Be HR He Re Re he Re Behe Be Re Ae Re Re AREER ERIE 


Tes! WM weed: wy: wee fagada: SATA: 12°! 
Patras etahrerarargentt A: 1 Gg, Ur (OTA eSJHUTI: 1301 
am fe Waa Aye: WaeE AI ae A: Ba Urq ARMaqUsal: 1321 
adaradaart facut: aA YSUTIGSSTeM oA Behl: SAAT 1321 
wa Aaa adel sam eft: ia wa: wedt: ger ada ada: 1331 
tateay Tearedaey: WerMedafesttar. antde: | 
Telqaewtcn wa ce asta TATA: 1 3X | 
From whatever evil Spirits, comets and even men, reptiles and other biting (carnivorous) 
animals, ghosts or even sins we have had fear, all these and whoever (else) have stood in 
the way of our welfare may go to complete destruction through the (mere) utterance of the 
(infallible) weapon of the Divine Name. (27-28) May the glorious and mighty Garuda, who 
is extolled through hymns (of the Samaveda, such as the Brhad and Rathantara), nay, who 
is Veda personified, and (even so) Viswaksena (one of the principal attendants of the Lord) 
protect me from all dangers with their (very) names. (29) May (all) the names and forms and 
weapons of Sri Hari, and whoever carries Him on his back, protect us from all adversities 
and may the foremost of His attendants guard our intellect, Indriyas (the senses of 
perception as well as the organs of action), mind and life (itself). (80) "Even as, really 
speaking, it is the Lord alone who constitutes whatever there is with form and without form, 
may all our troubles come to an endas acorollary to this truth (since this prayer too is inspired 
by the Lord and must therefore turn out to be an accomplished fact.) (81) (Nay,) even as the 
Lord, though undifferentiated in the eye of those who have realized their identity with Him, 
Himself acquires by (dint of) His own Maya (creative energy) potencies (of various kinds) 
as well as forms and names, jewels and weapons, may the same omniscient and all- 
pervading Lord Sri Hari protect us on the strength of this very fact by all His manifestations 
at every place and time. (32-33) (Finally) may Lord Narasimha (the divine Man-Lion) defend 
us in (all) the quarters as well as in the intervening corners, above and below and all round, 
inside as well as outside, dispelling the fear of (all) His people (devotees) by His roar and 
having eclipsed all luminaries by His own (all-absorbing) effulgence.” (34) 
qeaenend ad anaunemenifarereea a4 dadisamen 134! 
Wa anand a a wait aaa Udl al egal Meal: AeA A fayeid 136 | 
qT adige wei der feet aad wad usegreiaat amigas aigfad 1201 
sui feet ge anf alfa eer fast: | aa TG St ACPA 1321 
aaa fama aeidofiteatiaal feore: eiifiidat aa fastata: 1391 
TAA. FE: Aaa Tarek: 1a aAcstadaieetaaa faked: | 
Wel Walaa Aleal AA WAAMd IX | 
O Indra, this prayer, imbued with the spirit of Lord Narayana (and affording protection 
even as an armour), has been (duly) taught to you. Protected by this, you will easily and 
completely conquer (all) the generals of the demon troops. (35) Anyone whom the man 
Wearing (protected by) this armour may behold with his eyes or duly touch with his feet, Is 
immediately and completely rid of (all) fear. (36) (And) no fear from a ruler, robbers, evil 
Spirits and so on, nor from a tiger and other ferocious animals nor from any other quarter can 
ever seize the man who has his mind fixed on this sacred text (prayer). (37) Of yore, a certain 


Brahmana, who was a scion of the sage Kusika and had his mind fixed on this sacred text, 
Cast off his body in a desert through concentration of mind accompained by retention of 





a eee: 
~ Sl a eet em meme 


o- 
= — ee mee ee 
ete 6) + ow eeeemene. a eee 
| oe | 








592 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


BeBe Re Re Re RRR RE RE RRR BERR RE RE RE ROR E RROMRER BRE RE ME Re Ke Me Be Me Be We Me Re Br He Re Re We Be Re Be He He Br er Be He Br By Be He He He Be Hr wr Br Rr Br exnemmens ois: 9 
¥r 


breath. (88) Surrounded by ladies, Citraratha, the chief of the Gandharvas once flew in his 
aerial car over the spot where the Brahmana had died and instantly fell down with his car 
head downwards. Picking up the bones (of the deceased Brahmana) according to the advice 
of (the sages known as) the Valakhilyas (who apprised him of the wonderful efficacy of the 
Narayana-Kavaca and told him that it was impossible for him to proceed further unless anq 
until the bones had been removed from there), he dropped them into the (holy) river Saraswat 
which flewinan easterly direction (close by), bathed (in the sacred stream) and (then) retu med 
to his own abode (the realm of the Gandharvas), amazed (over the incident). (39-40) 


Hyp SaTaI 
qs WM we at aaa aed ia AWelha Yo Ged Adal waive 
wai faerie fagecrsand: | aero aust fata qesqry ise 
Sa SETTad ASM GRAS Gears WEP ATA Hea ATATEHISeAT: 121 

Sri Suka continued : (All) beings (men) bow to him who listens to this (prayer) at an 
opportune moment (when he is threatened with some danger) and who fixes his mind on it: 
nay, heis rid of all fear. (41) Having learnt this prayer from Viswarupa, Indra (who performed 
a hundred sacrifices in his previous life, which entitled him to this rank) completely and 


decidedly conquered the demons in battle and enjoyed the sovereignty of (all) the three 
worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region). (42) 


Thus ends the eighth discourse, entitled "The text of the Narayana-Kavaca taught" 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


et fo ee x 
FDIS EEE SID 


319 Aaquiseara: 


Discourse IX 
Indra slays Viswarupa; and routed by the demon Vrtra (the younger 
brother of Viswarupa), the gods call on the sage Dadhici 


at the instance of the Lord 
Mh SAA 

Tan faaerea rife att andi arate  quilerarefa way 2 | 
Ha ae Sat wei seamen: | staee ae fiat zat: ae qT1 2 | 
awa fe cat ami adem sia) asemiscec UT Alqaeaatat: | 3 | 
aq caeed del amici Gta: | sees acer sicereslatvafesae Sa |X | 
arias ¢ ae ae A sired after: | metas: Guuiwaare aaa fafate: 1 & | 
Teese Wie Ad: | wae A wai a faqea | 

WTA aaa SAMs: 1 & | 
yaa we Ua alge sae et at sagt | 
qi Sdieten a A ast frafaedor wget yeaa ¢ | 





Dis. 9] BOOK SIx 593 


He we We We He We We He We We He He Wee Fe gv. 
tr or Hr He HE REESE SEM ME BEM RE SE HEME RE ME He SEEM MH HME HEHEHE HE HEMET AMEN HE MERCH RE REM THAME TE MERCH AEG HAMIL 
WacHlAa eee 
s es 
Te: Raa: | Giredut areal ura urfa yezad |e | 
oe J] 
FATA TE SHO AY Feaethanai as data faa igol 


Sri Suka resumed : The said Viswarupa had three heads (and the same number of 
mouths), O Pariksit (a descendant of Bharata), by one of which SEAR the sap of the Soma 
plant (the common drink of the gods, usually offered in sacrifices), by another he drank 
spirituous liquor and by the third of which he ate food; so we have heard. (1) Indeed with 
(great) reverence he visibly and loudly proclaimed the oblations poured into the sacrificial 
fire as the share meant for the gods (gefara, s<H™44 and so on), since the gods were his 
fathers (his father, Twasta, being one of them), O king! (2) But he secretly offereda share 
(of the sacrificial oblations) to the demons (as well), as he (somehow) managed to convey 
the same to them even while pouring oblations into the sacred fire; forhe had his sympathies 
with the Asuras because of the affection his mother (Racana) bore to them. (3) Coming to 
know of this behaviour on the part of ViSwariipa, which amounted to an offence (breach of 
faith) against the gods (whom he thus deprived of their rightful share) and a religious fraud, 
and afraid of him (lest he might bring about the destruction of the gods one day), Indra (the 
ruler of the gods) angrily cut off his heads with (great) expedition. (4) The head by which he 
drank Soma turned out to be the (bird) Kapinjala (the francolin); that by which he drank wine 
became the Kalavinka (the common sparrow) and that by which he ate food was converted 
into the partridge. (5) Indra accepted with joined palms the sin of having assassinated a 
Brahmana, even though he was powerful (enough to ward it off). (Remaining tainted with that 
sin for a year,) Indra divided it at the end of a year into four parts and assigned them (in equal- 
proportions) to the earth, water, trees and women with a view to self-purification in the eyes 
of (other) beings. (6) The earth accepted a quarter (of the sin) along with the boon (the explicit 
assurance in return) that a hollow dug into it would be filled (by itself in due course). Abarren 
soil (which is prohibited for all sacred rites) is vividly seen on earth as an external sign of the 
sin of killing a Brahmana. (7) The trees assimilated another quarter along with the boon 
(clear understanding) that their chopped off parts would grow again (in due course by 
themselves). The sin of killing a Brahmana is clearly perceived in them in the form of gum 
(which should not, therefore, be eaten). (8) (Young) women took a third quarter of the sin 
with the boon of constant sexual urge (capacity for sexual union even during gestation). The 
sin is clearly perceived in them in the form of the menstrual discharge from month to month. 
(Hence a woman is regarded as untouchable and unfit for sexual commerce during the 
period of menstruation). (9) Water absorbed the fourthe quarter of the impurity with the boon 
of an abundant supply of the material (from springs etc.). It is seen in the water in the form 
of bubbles and foam (which are therefore regarded as impure and unfit for consumption): 


anyone imbibing these imbibes the impurity”. (10) 
AAR AaB Wes  wWdalgsaet faa ufeat ufe fafaaiees 
BAAS LAA ahaa: | dred sa Gla BIAAHt AA 122! 
fagfaadar dfeas fet ftiaeriosdart werarinaday 23 
AMMAR, AeA ACaATA, | LX I 
east fia yo samira tert qeayaed A Miwa Vet Hei 14! 
aiieikasin frat a aneenifoen freaatiitt sac yaar 126! 
Tem «89 WsesoT | STATUT qede: | fare geaelet dtet ae feat aa get 


5 son (Vigwarupa) had been slain (by Indra), poured oblations into 
Se eee ee 4 der to procure a mortal enemy for Indra, with the 


th i f retaliation) in or 
se eralte tel WA Benn may you grow in power to an enormous degree and 


followi -"O enemy of . 
if OL ORE (Indra) without delay." (11) Now from (the sacred fire called) 


prevalent among the orthodox Hindus, of throwing away the bubbles from water before 
ed water etc., is prohibited in their eyes. 





* This accounts for the practice, 
drinking it; and it is therefore that the use of aerat 











594 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


[ Di 
We Vee We Fe Kee We We We Ve We Be We He He Fe Fe He Wee Se We Bi Ve He We Me WOME ee Me Me We He We Wee Me Me Me ee Ee ME OE Se Fe Me He We Me Ve Me Me Ve Se ee We Nee Se Ve eRe Oe Ree We ¢ ce ¥¢ S. 9 


Anvaharyapacana (or Daksinagni) rose a demon of terrible aspect, who looked like Death, 
appearing (in the form of Kalagnirudra) at the time of universal dissolution for the destruction 
of the worlds. (12) He rapidly grew-to the extent of an arrow’s throw on every side from da 
to day, presented the appearance of a burnt hill (by his colossal size and dark colour) ang 
possessed the glow of a mass of evening clouds. (13) With a beard and moustaches ang 
hair (too) red as heated copper and eyes as fierce as the midday sun he danced as if holdin 
the vault of heaven on the end of his brilliant trident, gave a loud roar and shook the earth 
with (the stamp of) his feet. (14-15) Terribly afraid (of him), all created beings ran to and fro 
(in all directions) as they saw him respiring again and again with his extensive gaping mouth, 
containing fearful teeth and deep as a cavern, which seemed to imbibe the firmament, lick 
the stars with the tongue and devour (all) the three worlds. (16-17) 

aaa gh wade ayaa a ga sid Meh: UM: UME: 12¢1 

a feomfage amon faaqerdn: | a: eideregreane: Aste a Hea: 1281 

dae fataa: aa fasoon weddsta: | NesAeqeaqadRy: aarteat: 1201 

That (apparently) sinful and most ferocious demon was rightly named as Vrtra inasmuch 

as (all) these worlds were enveloped by that (gigantic mass of) darkness appearing in the 
form of Twasta's offspring. (18) Rushing against him with their troops, the generals of the 
gods assailed him, each with his hosts of celestial missiles and weapons; he (however) 
swallowed them all. (19) With their splendour eclipsed (his) nay, amazed and dejected (at 
their discomfiture), they all thereupon composed themselves and (mentally) approached 
Lord Narayana (the most ancient Person), dwelling in their very heart (with the following 


prayer). (20) 
Ga Hy: 


aaeRaeadaaetcht  smellcat Q aagtesra: | 
ama we afeadaisat fadit aeneawt adi A: 1221 
staat «6d COhtguiart SC Rta TCT I 
faqnoadeat «= fe |= a fener: Aelgertictttdtit ATL IRA 
Wiig Wit waa uavqdenssa aa ain 
a Wl aKa ged arassstam, artes FAL 1R3 1 
qa eae SaaTargaoaraaza: Hue | 
Ueitiedd, United dae wae at a alse UM: 12v1 
a Uh gat fom 3: wast aaagam faa 
aa 4 gen ut: atte: ugam fee gentle: 1241 
a 9: wavyerdad  eafifries, fra wal 
PUMA: Waa Healssad, ult Bt al Wire 
Wa dt aamecad uw se Use fae | 
am Ua WO awd GMa a tt area wa erie 


The gods prayed : May our safety follow from Him (the Supreme Person), of whom is 
afraid (even) the well-known Death (the Time-Spirit)—Death, to whom (the five elements, 
viz.,) ether, air, fire, water and earth, the three worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate 
region, including their inhabitants, the creation of the five elements), nay, Brahma and others 
(the rulers of these worlds) and we (gods, who owe our allegiance to these), all pay tribute 
(homage), trembling (with fear). (21) An ignoramus is he who resorts (for protection) to 





Dis. 2 We We We He We Be Se Me See Fr Hr BOOK SIX 595 
anyone else than the aforesaid Lord—who is (ever) free from egotism, who is perfectly 
tranquil (free from likes and dislikes), who has all His desires fully satisfied by the (very) 
realization of His own (blissful) Self and who is (ever) uniform (unconditioned)—in that he 
desires to cross the ocean with the help of a dog's tail. (22) The same Lord in the form of the 
divine Fish—to whose colossal horn king Satyavrata (destined to be the seventh Manu) 
fastened his boat, which Was no other than the earth, and duly got through the peril (in the 
form of the Deluge)—wil Surely protect even His dependants, against the danger from (the 
demon) Vrtra, which is (so) difficult to get rid of. (23) At the dawn of creation Brahma (all but) 
fell from the lotus (sprung from the navel of the Lord) on the water that had submerged 
everything during the period of universal dissolution and which had assumed a frightful 
aspect due to the roaring of its billows raised by the fierce winds. May the same Lord be our 
saviour, with whose help (by whose grace) the same Brahma—who was all by himself—got 
over that peril. (24) That (supreme) Lord, though (all) alone, evolved us (gods) by His own 
Maya (creative energy); and with His help (by His energy and guidance) we (are enabled 
to) create the universe already created by Him. Yet, regarding ourselves as independent 
rulers, we are unable to behold His form although He has been fully active even prior to us 
(as our inner Controller and Director and the actual Creator of the universe). (25) Though 
ever existent, yet manifesting Himself through (various) forms among the gods, Rsis (seers), 
human beings and lower animals by His own Maya (divine will), He protects us in every Yuga 
and (sometimes) even more than once in a Yuga, treating us as His own, when He finds 
us excessively tormented by enemies. (26) We all resort for protection solely to that Shining 
One, our object of adoration, and (final) Cause manifested in the form of the universe and 
yet transcending it, appearing (both) as matter and spirit, and affording protection to all. That 
Supreme Spirit will bring happiness to us, His devotees. (27) 
° My Java 
sft ast wert yquunqufasaai stent ~=fegayeiia: seaenmaet: 1221 
sete: weafsfear sflacrenlequy | ueforfarafasererqeearony, 1281 
at amadl wd saungiefagal: | dead ulin Weeoteeta Ba: 1201 
Sri Suka continued : While the aforesaid gods were thus praying, O great king, the Lord 
appeared (first) in their hearts (in the quarter occupied by the Inner Controller), wielding His 
conch, discus and mace. (28) (Again,) they beheld Him (before them) being waited upon on 
all sides by (His) sixteen attendants—who were (exactly) similar to Him but without (the mark 
of) Srivatsa (the curl of hair on the breast, demarcating the foot print of the sage Bhrgu) and 
the Kaustubha gem (the two distinctive marks of the Lord)—and with eyes resemblinga pair 
of full-blown autumnal lotuses. Overwhelmed with joy at His sight, they all fell prostrate (like 
logs) on the ground, O king, and (then) slowly rising, offered (their) praises (thus). (29-30) 
Gal Hy: 
THe ugdiala aga sd A AA iaae Peta AM: WTeada 1321 
aq A ud faguei: a ued arate «= fereetet eieetfegrretd 122 
The gods said : Hail to You, whose power (to confer heavenly bliss and other rewards) 
Stands revealed in the form of sacrificial performances! Hail to You even as the Time-Spirit 
(that limits the duration of those rewards)!! Hail to You, who have indeed (on many occasions 
in the past) hurled Your discus (to destroy the demons that obstruct the performance a 
Sacrifices !!!) Hail to You who have (by virtue of such exploits and glories) aca 
-Numberless blessed names !!! (31) No one born after creation, O Lord, is fit to know Your 


nee e@r=we: ecu .. 
Ree wemese eases = — ot *« - « - 
t- ooce - 


. 
) 
: 








596 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Bee We Ve Ke Ke Me Ke Ke Kr Ke Re Ke Hee Gr Ke re Me HT He Hee Fe Ke Ke Se Me Fe He Me He Fe He Me Me He Fe Fe He Se He He Me eRe Se Me Me Re Me He Me Re He He We ae oe at Hr vc weal Dis. 9 
SC Ye ae 9, 
Lg 


highest essence (absolute nature), which lies beyond the three courses (of Sattva, Rajas 
and Tamas), You being their Controller. (32) 


So AAS WT ANAT STH CATaUST ASIST ASIA TAF UA 
Umea hae se lhe ade sai uoMeatand. 


ASUS senna sieMaiaraas ape: gaa ute 
afa 18% 1 sta da ar fe faqnafee yofeertafa: Unda MpAgROTEHAA 
HOUTA Sagas: TAAaeR sated sia = ala A faa: 1341 
a fe fate sve sacar gatstamentetcasateitatacneuterntchferenr- 
WHITH Maher AUNisigetedien faatetaat sodas 
hae varaaasadaia at ~ael ade sa walt Magara 1361 AAfaeaadt 
Aaa Gea aM Tape: Talfefary 1301 a wa fe YA: Weereg aaa: Tear: 
THOTIPRUIAROTYA: HAITI HATTA Acar Ves Wa Vela: 1321 
Ha @ ala da vieaqaMaysiag Uparclen wala MerHMMaMget 
faaiitessiaraqTeRnarea: WAN Cale wala aa yahragete aaah 
feat feat fidanaa: way = al WA AaneM WA: eieiqaien areaeaaged: 
Wire fagra a wa Ga danvalad: 13¢1 fryaaeed 
fifama faaa fieteactecaqura daa fayaat fefasteqsnenania aeraqana 
anasaaa wean qewauabrasreeniatdeaand ae aa cue 
waranty waste edd ale Aaa vol steich Wahi da Admit dd dame 
Wa WMeApieanyseccuertemt  wlogtaawarealeparmaqa asta 
farteefertararadractet fanfoanenarardancar Sraenanreetat 
WG IS.1 AA WMIeetaTenRaeomaahdhafieattaraarfeeraran- 


Maes: UI: fratte at sieifarat fagrdia: ene faapfogtatatta 
FRURAG: 121 Bit Va Ga AQUI Waa: TON SUTRA 
fafaaghrdanaksmasgagdt aa aenearcaedt: 13 | 

aa ea Sie GS Fad Tea wen Gat a: Hen Antara a xv! 


wa cghoaa fia gama yeaa fear | 
«eet 8 Hauaosagad Utena eat AMAT IX4! 

Obeisance be to You, denoted by (the mystical syllable) OM, O Lord Narayana (dwelling 
in water), O Vasudeva (the Abode of the universe), the most ancient Person, the supreme 
Person, possessed of infinite glory, supremely auspicious, Supremely blessed, supremely 
merciful, One without a second, the Support of the universe, the undisputed Ruler of all the 
worlds, the universal Lord, the Spouse of Laksmi(the goddess of fortune) ! Youare the same 





Dis. 9] BOOK SIX SL, 


Be Be Br Be Be Bee He He Hr He He He Hr Hr Ke He He Ke Se He Ve Ge Ke Kee He He Ve Ke Ge We He Wee He He He Me Me Ae ee ee He de Ue Me Me Re Ree He te He Re He RE Re eR RO Re PERC Re Re Re Me Bs He Me He We TEE 


as the realization of the Bliss inherent in the Self and revealed of itself in the region of the 
Self when the gate leading to it the shape of the mind is opened consequent on the door of 
ignorance being set aside through the practice of Devotion to the Lord (the religion of the 
Paramahamsas—ascetics of the highest order), which is awakened and realized by 
ascetics and recluses by means of supreme concentration of mind through meditation on 
the Self.(33) Devoid of (any) support, bodiless and transcendent as You are, You create, 
preserve and destroy this qualified universe by Your own Self, undergoing no transformation; 
and not expecting (any) co-operation from us (the deities presiding over the arm and other 
organs of action, the seats of strength etc.) ! The course of this pastime of Yours is really 
something difficult to understand. (34) Moreover, we do not actually know whether, entering 
(the various) bodies (which are products of the three Gunas). You (as a Jiva) helplessly reap 
the good and evil consequences of Your own actions, just as a Devadatta builds a house 
on his earth and experiences joy and sorrow there, or whether, revelling in Your Self and 
given to self-control and with an unruffled consciousness You remain (only) a witness. (35) 
Really speaking, the two alternatives are not incompatible in You, the almighty and absolute 
Lord, possessing countless varieties of excellences and unfathomable greatness, (nay,) 
transcending all phenomena (which are the products of Maya) and (therefore) beyond the 
range of controversies of theorists holding perverse views due to their mind being 
bewildered by (so-called) scriptures full of doubts, enquiries, hypotheses, specious argu- 
ments and sophisms not even touching the fringe of truth. In fact, what predicate is there 
which cannot be conveniently applied to You, who stand placing by Your side (as Your 
handmaid) Your own Maya (which is capable of bringing even the impossible into the region 
of possibility), while both (the aforesaid) alternatives are absent in Your (absolute) 
essence.(36) Just as a piece of rope assumes the shape of a serpent and so on in the eye 
of those who are prepossessed by the idea of snake and the like, so You appear in Your true 
perspective (as Brahma, that is Truth, Consciousness and Bliss combined) to those 
endowed with a balanced (correct) judgment, and what You are not to those of a deluded 
understanding. Again, You are the only truth in all phenomena, the universal Lord, the cause 
of causes (viz., Mahat-tattva etc.), of the entire universe. Your presence is clearly indicated 
by the illuminating power of the intellect, senses and so on (which are products of matter and 
therefore unable to shed any light except when inspired by You), since You are the Inner 
Controller of all the Jivas; (nay,) You are the only entity left over (when everything else has 
been negated by the Sruti as ‘not this’, 'not this' and so on). (87-38) Under such circum- 
stances, then, O Slayer of Madhu, how can these saintly and supreme votaries of Yours— 
who are exclusively devoted to You and look upon You alone as their beloved friend, nay, 
who are adept in achieving their (highest) object—even think of actually giving up the 
constant service of your lotus-feet, on clinging to which further revolution in the whirlpool of 
transmigration ceases. For, due to the never-ceasing (stream of) joy flowing copiously into 
their mind from a (mere) drop of the sweet ocean of Your nectar-like glory, tasted (but) once, 
they are made to forget the small bits of seeming delights of sense, whether (actually) enjoyed 
or heard of (as enjoyed in heaven), their mind finding incessant and excessive delight in (You,) 
the almighty Lord, the Soul of the universe and (therefore) the beloved friend of all living 
beings. (89) O Soul and Abode of (all) the three worlds, O Lord who wield Your power over 
the three worlds and whose glory captivates the mind of (the inhabitants of) the three worlds, 
O Guide of the three worlds ! (to say nothing of gods, Rsis and other beings,) even the Daityas 
(the sons of Diti) and Danavas (the sons of Danu) are Your own glorious manifestations. (Yet,) 
considering that this is not an (opportune) time for their (nefarious) activities (which are called 
for only at the time of universal destruction), You have (in the past), O Wielder of the rod of 
punishment, meted out punishment (to them) according to (the degree of gravity of) their : 
offence, manifesting Yourself through Your own Maya (will-power) in the form of gods (e.g., | 
that of Vamana), human being (such as Sri Rama and Balarama), beasts (suchas the divine | 
Boar), half men and half beasts (such as Nrsimha and Hayagriva) and aquatic creatures 
(such as the divine Fish and Tortoise). In the same way, O Lord! (pray,) get rid of the yonder 





: — 


098 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [Di 
SERRA AAR REG TE TAR AER HER ALOR RE LONE SESSA SPEAR TERE RPE RACER A RRO HHRMA Ege 
ee i 


Vrtra (son of Twasta) too, if You deem fit. (40) (Nay,) be pleased, O sinless one, to cure the 
fever within our heart by your (kind) glances, accompanied with a gracious, artless ang 
charming and refreshing smile, as well as by drops of nectar, in the form of sweet and Polite 
words, cozing from Your mouth, since we, who were (already) Yours, have (now) been 
accepted (by You) as Your own by revealing Your form (before us), and are bent low before 
You, O divine father, nay, grandfather, our heart being bound by the chain of love to Your 
lotus-feet through contemplation on them. (41) Now, as a matter of fact, O Lord, there is no 
particular purpose to be made known by us to You here any more than sparks, etc., (which 
depend for their very existence on fire) can bring illumination to fire (their cause), since Yoy 
divert Yourself with Your divine Maya (creative will)—that is instrumental as it were jn 
evolving, maintaining and destroying the whole universe—and dwell within the heart of al] 
the multitudes of living beings as Brahma andas their Inner Controller and outside as Prakrtj 
(primordial matter). As their material cause and revealer it is You that directly know all the 
Jivas with (due) regard to the peculiarities of their place, time, body and condition. (Nay, ) 
You are the witness of the (course of) thought of all, taintless by nature as the sky, the 
unconditioned transcendent Reality and the embodiment of Sattva unmixed with Rajas and 
Tamas. (42) Therefore, (omniscient as You are,) pray, accomplish Yourself (without 
awaiting our submission) that object of ours, the hankering for which has prompted us to 
seek the shade of Your lotus-feet, the (only) means of relieving the toil of transmigration, 
caused by manifold sins, You being the almighty Lord and supreme Teacher. (43) Hence; 
O Master, do away with the demon Vrtra (son of Twasta), who is devouring (all) the three 
worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) and by whom, O Enchanter of all, our 
glory, missiles and weapons (too) have (already) been swallowed up. (44) Hail to You, the 
Stainless Sri Hari (the Reliever of agonies), of delightful renown, having Your abode in the 
cavity of the heart, and without beginning, the Witness (even of the mind, intellect and so 
on), the embodiment of Bliss*, the wealth of the righteous and the universally approved 
avenue leading the traveller (drudging) on the path of metempsychosis to his home at the 
end (of his journey on that path). (45) 





Sara 
aaeaitedt Wit eet fest: | aaqueMaaevd oe afte: ise! 


Sri Suka went on : Thus extolled, O king (Pariksit) with (great) reverence by the gods 
(who pass through only three stages in life, viz., childhood, adolescence and full manhood, 


and never grow old), Sri Hari was highly gratified to hear the prayer offered to Him and 
addressed them (in the following words). (46) 


ATTA TATA 
Sidise a: Aw Aguensfaeanri sidecdayfa: gat ukesa gar af ive! 
fe ia afa sid aenfa faaeden: | qaeraneata aseft afta ic! 
1 aq HUN: Ha ster Wreadey | cea ated sede ale asia aafeaer: 1¥e | 
ea ftae fae 4 aqvega at fe 1 a ule Virose awed fe firawA: 1401 
Wet, ad Us al aeaarainada! faenaada:an we arad ar faaLi4?! 
a ol ated eacshat ca rene aq at staat ama aaa SMe 142 | 
CASSIS «AMAL Aaleteny | faecal Ge MLAS A ATTA: 143 | 


* The word ‘Krsna’ has been etymologically explained as follows in an old couplet given below :— 


tafe: west uel Fefrardn: | waited Wt we en scatueitaa ii 
The root Krs' implies ‘absolute existence’, while the syllable 'na’ signifies bliss or beatitude. The supreme Reality, which 
is a combination of these (viz., absolute existence and bliss), is thus spoken of as Krsna. 


Dis. 9 ] BOOK SIX 599 


Gr Rr BB BBB BLE BEBE EERE HEBER RR BBA RB ARERR RRR RRR BRR RA RAR RELA RELEASES 
gerd afacitshaat enisiserh crea 1 aaeerqestet facentifatattia: | 
aa qafant gat wast sugfed: 14x 
afer fated qa asitsergqeeme: | Wa: se as at a faa A AAI GY | 
Sit AAMT ASN UA Aiea TEST ASHISEATE: 12 II 

The Lord said : | am pleased, O jewels among the gods, with the sacred text by which 
you have offered prayer to Me and by (repeating and revolving) which consciousness of the 
transcendent nature of the soul as well as devotion to Me will be awakened in (the mind of) 
men. (47) What is there which cannot be easily attained when I am pleased, O great gods ! 
Yet, he, who knows the truth and is solely devoted to Me does not seek anything else than 
Myself. (48) The fool who looks upon the material objects (which are products of the three 
Gunas) as real is not alive to his highest good. (And) if anyone bestows those objcets on the 
individual seeking them, such a one is of the same description (no better than a fool). (49) 
Indeed he who is himself conscious of the highest good (final beatitude) would never tell 
(show) an ignorant person the path of action (worldly activity). Surely a good doctor would 
never give unwholesome food to an ailing man longing for it. (50) Indra, may all be well with 
you; seek ye Dadhyan (more popularly known as Dadhica or Dadhici),the noblest of seers, 
and beg of him without delay (the gift of) his body, which has grown (exceptionally) strong 
through the repetition of Mantras (prayers such as the holy Narayana-Kavaca), religious 
observances and asceticism. (51) Having actually realized (his identity with) Brahma (the 
Absolute), free from (every) tinge (of Maya), he imparted that knowledge to the two 
Aswinikumaras (who are twin brothers-and are the physicians of the gods)—the knowledge 
which is named Aswasira* (because it was imparted by the sage with the head of a horse) 
and which contributed to the immortality (liberation during their very life-time) of the 
aforesaid gods. Dadhici, the son of the sage Atharva, (again) taught to the god I wasta the 
prayer (serving as a protective cover and therefore known as the Narayana-Kavaca), full of 
My essence and incapable of being superseded (by any other Mantra or prayer), which 
Twasta (in his turn).taught to (his son) Viswarupa and which you have received from 
ViSwarUpa. (52-53) Solicited (by you), the sage (who knows the essence of virtue) will part 
with in your favour and (particularly) in favour of (his disciples,) the two ASwinikumaras (your 
physicians) his (own) limbs. Then out of (the bones of) those limbs will be produced a 
thunderbolt (the best of weapons), forget by Viswakarma (the artisan of the gods), by means 
of which and (further) strengthened with My power, (O Indra) you will be able to sever the 
head of Vrtra. (54) When heis slain, you will regain your (past) glory, missiles, weapons and 
riches, and everything will be well with you; for enemies can never destroy those who are 
devoted to Me. (55) 





* Having come to know that the sage Dadhici was well-versed in Brahmavidya (the knowledge relating to the Supreme 
Spirit), the two ASwinikumaras once approached him and sought from him the knowledge of Brahma. The sage, who was then 
engaged in some religious rite, politely dismissed them assuring them that he would impart that knowledge to them on some 
other occasion. No sooner had they left than Indra (the chief of the gods) called on the sage and asked him not to teach 
Brahmavidya to the ASwinikumaras, who were physicians and as such hardly qualified to receive it, and threatened to behead 
the sage in case he insisted on imparting the said knowledge to them. When the Aswinikumaras approached the sage again 
and learnt from him of Indra's threat, they offered to cut off the sage’s head even before and replace it with the head ofa horse, 
and requested him to teach Brahmavidya by the horse's head, so that if Indra actually came and severed the sage's head in 
the course of the latter's discourse they would easily restore his original head. The sage, who prized his word more than his 
head, readily agreed and allowed himself to be beheaded by the heavenly physicians and taught them Brahmavidya by the 


horse's head. 


. 
" 
i 
f 
. 
i 
: 
: 











600 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


AEPRACERTOPSLERLEAAERTERTERSSTERA ERR RTA TNT e Mee Re ReE tee ee ree GOS I 0 
ar tr 


Thus ends the ninth discourse, in Book Six of the great 
and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


HY Sara Sear: 


Discourse X 
An account of the conflict between Indra and Vrira 


yh Sara 
Sana aalesd wtam faaweaa:iugaammaent  artarddad® aft: 1 2 1 
aMwafad  eeaeMdut Ween sare weafea URI e | 
aa genet ga a ania aie dena aeafsstel g:aeseaae: | 3 1 
fisfago samara ws sed: ian seed ad ad femora faa: x | 
Sri Suka began again : Having thus fully instructed Indra, Lord Sri Hari, the Protector 
of the universe, disappeared on that very spot, while the gods (who are noted for their 
unwinking eyes) kept looking on. (1) Solicited by the gods in the aforesaid manner (as 
instructed by the Lord), and (greatly) rejoicing, the magnanimous sage Dadhici (the son of 
Atharva) replied as follows, as though jesting, O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata) :— (2) "O gods, 
have you no idea of the pain that is actually caused to embodied beings at the time of death— 
a pain so hard to bear that it robs them (even) of their consciousness ? (3) The body is the 


dearest object in this life, (particularly) sought after by living beings that are eager to survive. 
Who would have the courage to part with it even for Lord Visnu, should He ask for it ?" (4) 


eaT 7 & 
fee J Wa gest Se Gat YeqePorTa vafgerat Hed yvaRetehsaHo | & | 
aq waa onl A ac Ueeqiafe de a ard Afa ae ade: € | 
The gods replied : Now what is that which is difficult to part with, O (holy) Brahmana, 
for magnanimous souls like you, who are compassionate to (all) living beings and whose 
(noble) deeds are extolled (even) by men of sacred renown? (5) Surely selfish people do not 


realize the difficulty of the donor; if they knowit, they would not ask a gift (of him). Anda donor 
(too) would not say “No”, when capable of granting their request. (6) 


4 a: add qi A yweeled: ive a: fae aed GeENeEH! 9 | 
ASHI AM A Mi Aa: YA ged wera A ale: wate ¢ | 
Uae a: quagetceutfed: | at wastegate sirafa wera 1 < | 
al eae ae una: HOS: | arpa: Wsilhttaae: 1201 


The sage (Dadhici) said : | replied to you (as | have done) only because | wished to 
hear from you about Dharma (righteousness), Here do | cast off this body, which is (so) deal 
to you (coveted by you) and which is sure to leave me (one day). (7) The man who fails to 
earn by means of his transient body, O lords, neither religious merit nor fame through 
kindness to living beings deserves to be pitied even by immobile creatures (trees, plants and 


Dis. 10 ] BOOK SIX 601 


Ge Be Br Re Re Be Be Be Be Re Be Re HH He RA rh 
at SSBB RE BB Be RR BR Be BRR RR BEE Be Be Be BeBe Be Re Re Be he Be Br Be Be Be ER RE REE RE REEL RRE LE EELLAERE 


so on, that exist for others). (8) The everlasting virtue practised by men of sacred renown 
So mee = this that a man himself grieves and réjoices in sympathy with the grief and 
joy of his tellow-beings. (9) Oh, whata pity, Oh, how painful itis thata mortal should not serve 
others with his wealth, sons and other kinsmen and body, which besides being transitory (by 
nature), are not only of no use to him but (really) belong to others. (10) 


Sora 
wa 8 apderafadt CASSIE I Ut aa «Aga «60 aaaStet 1221 
UMM GANG RTI «««- SAMS: | aera: wet Met a Bd aa wa 1e21 


Sri Suka continued : Having thus made up his mind and merging his (individual) self in 
the Lord, the Supreme Reality, the sage Dadhici, the son of Atharva, dropped his body. (11) 
Having controlled his senses, vital airs, mind and intellect, his eyes fixed on the (absolute) 
Truth and (all) fetters (in the form of virtue and sin) broken, he established himself in 
supreme Yoga (perfect identity with Brahma), so that he did not know when the body 
(actually) fell. (12) 


IAA aarqera Pic fasecdoriaa: aftafvefeamt wanestatad: 1231 

adit aT: Rehtisrsttadanad | aa «6 afrreeledt «= eater 1 ex 

Grasso teayeTa: LUATAISTET US Heal SX SarAHA LG! 

da:  -GUUITt «=: | aneTeUT: 1a AgTaMa «eA aT ee 

esc higatharat fagafafa: i vefsckyf:  aredfeicadteatt ie! 

Gl aA wh Wan wa Bariageaqd We ya qaqa: 12! 

vqfa: arenistal faqet matise: igaita: wager fasfafaerqa: 121 

qe 4|6gqaaat «6a oSefddhtecho: | eda cal aan waifa a Agel: 1201 

aaron: Masa: | ites | A STMT 22 I 

ssadamdur: faemer  aarinefa: afttetot: smear: 1221 

ae: uid: we: weaetfiefafteti: | addisarfert wera fags 1231 

a asqed Moa: BTS: AAA: | Ugg Uiacwatdista AMAA: 121 

a 2% sreraadia ume: adhe! fom: fagut eau: asa 1241 

aq aiturreratear «= firftsyegntae: staat gras fakegeias ydad 12a! 
Now, taking up the thunderbolt, forged by Viswakarma (the heavenly artisan) out of the 
bones of the sage Dadhici, and endowed with the Lord's energy, Indra felt very strong. (13) 
Surrounded by all the hosts of gods, he was being extolled by crowds of sages and shone 
On (the back of) Airavata (the king of the elephants), as though delighting (all) the three 
worlds (heaven, earth and the intermediate region). (14) In order to cut down Vrtra, who was 


Surrounded by generals of demon cohorts, he assailed the demon with (great) impetuosity 


and full of wrath, O Pariksit, even as Rudra (the god presiding over destruction) rushes 
against Death (at the time of universal destruction). (15) Thereupon ensued a most fierce 
conflict of the gods with the demons on the bank of the (holy) Narmada (river) at the 
beginning of Treta during the very first round of the four Yugas (of the current Manvantara, 
the Vaivaswata Manvantara). (16) The demons headed by Vrtra, O king (Pariksit), could not 

é ds, armed with the thunderbolt and resplendent 


bear to see Sakra (Indra), the king of the go é pt 
in his native glory on the field of battle and accompanied by the Rudras (the gods presiding 
Adityas (the sons of Aditi), the two Aswinikumaras (the 


OVer destruction), the Vasus, the Ad! 





Oe ee ee eee . 


i! 


602 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 
ee AAA AAR AA AAR RAR AR ARAL ARR ALAA RE REE RRR RRR; tee ee er WW 


celestial physicians), the manes, the gods offire, the Maruts (the wind-gods), the Rbhus, the 
Sadhyas and the Vigwedevas. (17-18) Namuci, Sambara, Anarva, Dwimurdha (who had a 
pair of heads), Rsabha, Ambara, Hayagriva (so-called because he was’endowed with a 
horse's head), Sankusira (lit., spear-headed), Vipracitti, Ayomukha (who was endowed with 
a snout of iron), Puloma, Vrsaparva, Praheti, Heti and Utkala, and (other) Daityas (sons of 
Diti) and Danavas (sons of Danu), Yaksas and Raksasas (ogres)—led by Sumali and Man— 
who numbered several thousand and were adorned with gold ornaments resisted and 
harassed the vanguard of Indra's army, which was difficult to approach even for Death. With 
a lion's roar the furious demons, who were not the least agitated, (virtually) covered the 
generals of the celestial army on all sides with showers of maces, iron bludgeons, arrows, 
barbed darts, Mudgaras (a kind of hammer-like weapon), lances, pikes, axes, swords, 
Sataghnis* ( a cylindrical piece of wood four cubits long and studded with iron spikes), 
Bhusundis (another similar weapon with iron spikes one exceeding the other in length) and 
other weapons and missiles. (19—23) Completely screened all round with volleys of arrows, 
each of which got stuck into the shaft of another, they (the celestial generals) could not be 
seen like luminaries hidden by clouds in the sky. (24) Torn in thousands of pieces (even) in 
the air by the gods, who were skilled archers, those volleys of missiles and weapons surely 
did not reach (touch) the celestial troops at all. (25) Their stock of missiles and weapons 
being depleted, they now showered mountainpeaks, trees and stones on the celestial host 
and the gods split them as before. (26) 


Wad wad farm wereagka gam: | 
catalase adie ear, 1219 | 
aq saa savaq fanrn: gat: at eam ed: | 
FOIROL GM Wed Ba: Wal waldt Galata: 1221 
q waa faat fier eran  sdagaut: | 
vera = fara i AR SEIT: 128 | 
PSM wet wad: Yt aw wal 
Vlad set as aA ut waa dau fase adn: i301 
aera 8st 86adheaddeart 06 are i TT: I 
@ fasfat aq gem wader A Ueq 1321 
Mita Yaa we ada: sfaimar aaa wae eal | 
Cla GAMA A ae Wy wl AM qa aA quia aw132I 
a dadfee ye gut ae sede fag: | 
Heat anna fastaire. Fea ASM: 133 | 
ga AMEMad AE USE Gea WEA SSA Savhl AM <ariseara: 1201 
Finding the aforesaid warriors of Indra secure and unhurt by their volleys of weapons 
and missiles and unscathed even by the trees, stones and peaks of mountains of every 
description (hurled by them), the demons led by Vrtra were filled with dismay. (27) All the 


efforts repeatedly made by the demons (the sons of Diti) against the gods, to whom the all- 
blissful Lord was favourably disposed, proved entirely infructuous even as the maledictory 








* Sridhara Swami in his well-known commentary on Srimad Bhagavata quotes the following couplet from a lexicon in 
order to show that a Sataghni and a Bhusundi are almost similar in appearance:— 


Wade a aqeeM cheavenefaa | yyvet adel cheavearEAT | 


Dis. 11 ] BOOK SIX 603 


Br Br Br Br Be Be Br By Re Br We Re Be eH ty 
Py ROR BRB BR BB BEBE BE Be BRR Rb BeBe Be Be BR ARE EAA RAE RB AEE AAR RAIA ATBE 


and harsh words employed by the vile against exalted souls fail to provoke them. (28) 
Finding their efforts fruitless, the aforesaid demons, who cherished no devotion to Sri Hari 
and had their pride crushed in battle, nay, who had been robbed of their energy (by their 
enemies), resorted to (the expedient of) fleeing away (from the battle-field) deserting their 
leader (Vrtra) in the very Initial stages of the conflict. (29) Seeing those Asuras—who had 
(till then) followed his lead—fleeing away, and (further) observing his ranks (too) broken and 
run away through intense fear, the valiant and self-possessed Vrtra heartily laughed and 
spoke as follows. (30) That heroic personage made the following speech, which was not only 
appropriate to the occasion but thrilling to the brave—"Hullo Vipraciti, Namuci, Puloma, 
Maya, Anarva and Sambara, (just) listen to me. (31) This death (whichis so abhorrent to you) 
is sure to befall everyone that is born, wherever one may be; and no means (whatsoever) 
of avoiding it in this world (of matter) has been devised (by the creator). If, therefore, (an 
abode in) heaven (hereafter) and fame (in this world) could be had from it, who as a matter 
of fact would not actually court such a desirable death ? (32) The following two modes of 
death are approved of in the scriptures and do not easily fall to one's lot. viz., (i) that he who 
is devoted to the practice of Yoga should, after controlling his vital airs and senses, cast off 
his body through deep concentration of mind on Brahma (the Absolute) and (ii) that, placed 
in the forefront of a battle, a man should give up the ghost on the battle-field, taking care not 
to turn his back on the enemy." (33) 


Thus ends the tenth discourse entitled "An account of the conflict between Indra (the 
chief of the gods) and the demon Vrtra," in Book Six of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


ISIE SIS 


BI NeHlaantSeATa: 


Discourse XI 
Vrtra's teaching to Indra 
My SAA 
qa wa stadt ah da: Wqeaae: Aare FaARM: TTA FT! 8 | 


fersitetarott GAT: | OTRO: HITT, |Z 
STATA deg saagrida: lar frarsrar ter fsiceiegqarat & 1 3 | 
fe a voftinigafaia: gedt ad: 1 af eicae: core tad: Ger ¥ | 
afe a: sed stat ait at aeol ee | He fred A AF Aq aT eye | 4 | 
gti « + AAI d sense, and intent on flight 
Sri Suk nt on : Frantic with fear and robbed of (all) goo ant Or 
the demons ters no heed at all to the advice of their chief, who was thus preaching virtue to 
them, O king (Pariksit) ! (1) Roused to indignation and enraged to see the demon host being 
: m7 ‘liat hitwere masterless—by the gods (who pass through only 


iqht—as thou 
Shattered and putto flight—as thoug nce and full manhood and never grow old, and) 


three in li iz., childhood, adolesce 
to Nish oe eee appeared propitious, Vrtra (the enemy of Indra), the foremost of the 


ff by his (own) might, O Pariksit, and 
dem at heart). Warding the gods o . ‘ GUS 

“eae ae acon ee addressed the following words to them:—(2-3) What will be gained 
by you ihrcugt these fugitives—who are no better than the excreta of their mother—being 








604 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 1 


Be BeBe Be Re RAB Be Be Be Be BT Be Be Re Be Be BER Re BB Be BBB AEE BB BEBE Be Be A Br BEAT Br Br Be Br Hr Sr Gr Hr Hr Hr Hr Br Br Gr Br Br Br Hr Hr BeBe Bee HB Br Br Br hr tr Hr hr he oy, 
S80 a wwsssggQ“vwvww[_vvF—CCC a eee Akt Y 


struck from behind ? Indeed the slaughter of the terror-stricken is neither praiseworthy nor 
conducive to heavenly enjoyment for those who account themselves as brave. (4) If you are 
keen about fighting or if there is courage in your heart, O vile creatures, and (again) if there 
is no craving (in your heart) for sensuous enjoyments, stand but for a moment before me". (5) 


Wd WU Hat tea ager fq SMe Waesnont a4 ote feataa: 1 & | 
v1 fam: wa gaiaenem aifagdida yat advert em: t 

We 20st Gt sPrtfesetet «2 WU gad: | 

T maaqedayes stat ae at yqoemfaedeire: tc | 

faslat od aenisemafia: «9 aarasfisad )=—- ere | 

faaq aad deael wae att wm seat < | 

a ssa: pfadt yet dat vesaté veatafacnn: | 

Ta Pee sacl ya aed ad Ags 1201 

tad qamafayst fagfeiatsts:  piesnedt aan 

sara «=a: «= Pest CGH TTA: 1221 

a aaa fasvredd ween wa: A Wel aera | 

SASHA Pagal a aAaalelsaaeA 122 

a oad Jaseaqara fa anad wee facies 

SR deh RI: «= e—(isSTR——s HSIN 12.3 

Thus threatening the host of gods, his enemies, by his (words as well as by his gigantic) 
figure, and full of rage, Vrtra, who was possessed of vast strength, roared in such a way that 
people fainted (to hear the sound). (6) Rendered unconscious by that (terrible) yell of Vrtra, all 
the gods actually dropped on the ground just as they would when struck with lightning. (7) Taking 
up his spear and shaking the earth by his strength, Vrtra (whose ardent passion for the pastime 
of warfare could not be easily repressed) trod down under his feet the troops of the gods—(that 
were) lying unconscious with their eyes closed—even as a lordly elephant would trample down 
in its mad fury a bed of lotuses. (8) Indra (the wielder of the thunderbolt) was seized with great | 
indignation to see him and hurled a huge mace at his enemy, who was (now) rushing towards | 
him. The demon (however) sportfully caught that most formidable weapon withhis lefthand even 
as itapproached him. (9) Roaring in fury, the said enemy of Indra, who was possessed of terrible 
prowess, struck on the head with that mace the elephant (Airavata) that bore the mighty Indra 
on its back. All those present on the battle-field admired this feat of his, O Pariksit ! (10) Smitten 
with the mace hurled by Vrtra even like a mountain struct with lightning and much afflicted, 
Airavata along with Indra (mounted on its back) retreated to a distance of twenty-eight cubits, 
reeling and vomiting blood, its mouth broken. (11) That noble soul (Vrtra) did not aim the mace 
for a second time at Indra, who felt dejected in mind and whose elephant was stunned (with the 
blow). (Meanwhile,) O king of kings, Indra, whose wounded elephant was rid of its pain by the 
(very) touch of his hand, that shed drops of nectar, stood (once more) before Vrtra. (12) Seeing 
the aforesaid Indra (his own enemy and) the slayer of his (elder) brother (Vigwarupa), standing 
(before him) armed with the thunderbolt and seeking a (single) combat with him, O king of kings, 
Vrtra was filled with grief and infatuation as he recollected that cruel and sinful deed of his 
adversary, and spoke laughing (as follows) : (13) 
aA Sara 





pis. 11 ] BOOK SIX 605 
eb AE BBR R ASE B LEBEL S SEB BE EBB BAER BREED BREEDER REREAD SEABED DDB AE BSE ESET 


a vssenmfedt  faneiikame ai  difaaert 
feera wya Rrreqsaq uatftarneor: erie: 1241 
eoicaaitifitehedt ai wentor gears welt! 
Paw aepolatiacenapate aaa tt eT: 12E | 
aasy a ae ie A gece: yet Aa! 
ATTA STOTT, PantayemRioncdsi 1201 
aa et A gfeaa dk wt smeta fr adel 
cargo «= tates «= feet Se Oe: «Ss RT RI 
aa aa fee at a: fea aki deme 
a datas a nea ad elfen souneia ares eel 
Tau adda Wh aie edie ao afi: | 
wa wa owe fagataat ad etfdsra: sitio: 1201 
ae 8 ama wt ass 8 8©6agdureaconefard | 
gaara ledtaraaralt aH qrahaafageten: 1221 


Gat fHoardat wart a: aaa fefa sat car 
a wa aq 3 san snide: afeelat aaa: 1221 
aa fiierarafaarrreratataterd Gear Uh | 


aa STH wracsae a gewdsfaranireanisa: 1231 


Vrtra said : Luckily enough (for me) you, who slew a Brahmana, your (own) preceptor and 
my brother (all in the person of Viswarupa), have firmly stood before me as my adversary. How 
glad am | that through you, O most wicked one, when your stone-like heart has been pierced 
through before long by my trident, | shall have discharged my debt (to my brother) today. (14) 
You ruthlessly lopped off with a sword the heads of my innocent brother—who besides being 
a Brahmana and your preceptor, had realized the Self and reposing (full) confidence in you, was 
(duly) engaged in a sacrifice (on your behalf), (even) as one aspiring to (an abode in) heaven 
would sever the head of an animal to be sacrificed. (15) When your body has been torn asunder 
by my trident, vultures will feast (before long) on you—forsaken as you are by shame, grace, 
compassion and glory and fit to be censured (even) by Raksasas (who devour human beings) 
because of your sinful deeds—since you will get no fire (to burn you). (16) Nay, | shall indeed 
Propitiate the god Bhairava and others (the leaders of ghosts) with their retinue through (the 
blood of) those other foolish gods who, following (the lead of) your cruel self, have raised their 
missiles to strike me on this field of battle and whose neck will be (presently) pierced through with 
my sharpened trident. (17) If, on the other hand, O valiant Indra, you actually succeedin crushing 
my army and severing my (own) head with your thunderbolt in this encounter, | shall in that case 
offer my body as a (propitiatory) oblation to birds and beasts (such as vultures and jackals) and } 
(thus) freed from all debts (of Karma), attain to the dust of feet (destiny or abode) of enlightened . 
Souls (Narada and others). (18) O ruler of gods, wherefore do you not hurl your unfailing . 
thunderbolt at me, your enemy, stationed before you? (Pray) do not entertain any misgiving (in 
your mind). (Rest assured that) the thunderbolt will not prove ineffectual as your mace or as an 








606 | SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Distt 


BERR RRR RRR RRR RRR RRR RRR RH Be Be He BM HY HH Br Me AY AY A BT Rr Be Be We We We Ke We We Pe Mr Mr Fe Be Ke We We Kr Ve Hr Wr Hr BeBe Re Re Be We Hew, 
Sa LL ST 


entreaty seeking its fulfilment from a miser. (19) Surely this thunderbolt of yours, O Indra, has 
been whetted by the energy of SriHarias well as by the asceticism of the sage Dadhici. Prompted 
by Lord Visnu, getrid of your enemy (myself) with the selfsame weapon; (for) victory, fortune and 
virtues lean to that side alone on which stands Sri Hari. (20) Concentrating my mind on the lotus- 
feet of Lord Sankarsana (even) as He has instructed me, and with the cords of attachmentto the 
pleasures of sense cut asunder by the force of your thunderbolt, and having (thus) cast off the 
body, | shall attain to the destiny of a sage given to contemplation. (21 ) The Lord does not of 
course bestow on His own people, exclusively devoted to Him, the riches that are available in 
heaven (the higher worlds), on earth or in the subterranean regions, and from which follow (as 
a matter of course) hatred, fear, mental anguish, arrogance, discord, suffering and toil. (22) Our 
Master (on the other hand), O Indra, frustrates the efforts of His servant for the attainment of the 
three objects of human pursuit (viz., religious merit, worldly riches and sensuous enjoyment). 
From such frustration is to be inferred the grace of the Lord, which is the lot of (only) those who 
have nothing (to call their own) and is difficult to attain for others. (23) 


a RW daa Werdecdaqae wan wa: 
Ta: aaa «UN aT I] HTT: 12% 
ql Weg a a usa a ada a wofioe 
1 amfadgrid a ana a faa are iu 
Sean SAC: «AA MTC aa: «eM: | 
fa faa afad fascon waster feed arLiR&! 
Waele «|= AR (GI: 32S emf: | 
AAAI SSIs e gach leat aq aa TATA 1 29 | 
Sa AAEM AM USS Seda We ASAIN AAHEaSeAT: 1221 
(Turning mentally towards the Lord,) May I, O Hari, be born again (after death) as a 
servant of those devotees who have solely taken refuge in Your (lotus) feet. Let my mind 
ponder and tongue celebrate the excellences of the Lord of my life (Yourself) and let my body 
do Your service (alone). (24) O Storehouse of all blessedness and grace ! without You | 
crave neither the abode of Dhruva (which is placed above Indra's paradise) nor even the 
realm of Brahma (the highest heaven) nor the sovereignty of the entire globe nor the lordship 
of the subterranean regions nor the (superhuman) powers (Anima and so on) attained 
through Yoga nor Liberation (freedom from rebirth). (25) Even as unfledged birds (left behind 
in their nest) are eager to see the mother bird, young calves tormented with hunger (and kept 
away from the mother cow) seek the milk (of its udders) and a beioved wife, depressed in 
spirits (due to desolation) longs to see her beloved husband, absent from home, my mind, 
O lotus-eyed one, is keen to behold You. (26) Let there be my friendship with the devotees 
of the Lord of excellent renown, revolving as | do in the whirligig of transmigration due to 


my own deeds. And let him whose mind is attached through Your Maya (deluding potency), 
to his body, offspring, wife and home, O Lord, have no friendship with me. (27) 


Thus ends the eleventh discourse entitled "Vrtra's teaching to Indra," 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagava ta-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


FIPS SEE mm 





Dis. 12 ] BOOK SIX 607 


Pr Br Br Be Br Br Be 
eA ARAL ALE AEA AA AAA TARR REAR ELLER EERE SERRE SESS TS 


BID *ISeanseara: 


Discourse XIl 
The demon Vrtra slain 
FAGEATA 

wa) 0 6 fereasCiteeTEC eC iat (ss eT: 

We Wed gst am need Mersey 2 | 

aeit Girdifrenshtsreartaez ae ALATA: | 

facat westa faa amt eas umf sar wei? 

GQ sd de faasa aelenafatien eMaansndiaga: | 

am adt wauodufea wi a aaron! 3 | 

feanae: ual ga Wet sae  Wlaawt 

wit AAS SANTA aa a SATA: 1X | 

qae Arete ad, QRNIARURaga ET: | 

aye, Ueeddee «Often taht «| fase & 

sa A ad wy facia weerehafent ga: | 

qaé gl RW aman wf waa a fagemie:1 6! 

qed pata wa: aeha A A WIM! 

farten rea herrea heeritart aa gael qed GATT | 9 | 
lel: Wet waa waa faaan aati fesn sa frat agi: A Hie se HUT CI 
3st: Gel AG wWUMAAd YaNa Dilan wal eqaM Add Fst! @ | 
aq aeqdl ant am aanal ya:1 vd wm aaadigdonin fats at: 1201 
qey: osepfteknaren «ahaa: | perennial a faa aaquerd 1221 
stfagnaaranr AAAS | Ue: Botta yatta Wad aha a: Sa 1221 
ag: oft: aifitedare: Gera a: | data fe depres aarfrestictaetan: 1231 
Aca dararanstaasteraeta | GA: MI Fag: ANA FAsitfadareada4r 1 ee | 
aa wea sf seddtiet WO: | aa alam at aq 4 a aed 1241 
usa wt fila ae Gauges qi send sate da ororisieitar 12a 


STO eset Set aut sya aAledida: | SA A WaasyaA TANS Asta: 1219 | 

The sage (Sri Suka) resumed : Thus desiring, O king (Panksit), to drop his body on the field 
of battle and accounting death preferable to victory, Vitra seized his trident and rushed at Indra 
(the ruler of the gods) even as the demon Kaitabha attacked Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person) 
On (the) water (that flooded the entire universe during the final dissolution). (1) Then whirling his 
trident, whose prongs were formidable like the flames of the fire that breaks out at the time of 
universal destruction, and hurling it with great force at the mighty Indra (the lord of paradise), 
the valiant Vrtra (the chief of the demons) roared andangrily exclaimed: * You are killed, Owicked 
One !" (2) Not (at all) perturbed to see the trident—dazzling as a planet ora meteor—darting 
through the air with a whirling motion, Indra (the wielder of the thunderbolt) cut it down, as well 











608 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 12 


Be Be Re Re Re Ree Re eRe Be Re ER RET RY A Be BER RE BeBe Re BeBe Be Re BL eB Re Be Re Ae Ae Be A Hr BY Ar Be Be Br Br Kr Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr Wr Hr Hr Sr Gr Kr Fr Be Gr Hr Hr Hr Hr Mr Hr Ber We Sr Br Be Hr Hr oe wy 
eels see rFer0e— a ef 


as his arm, roundandathickas the body of Vasuki (the king of serpents) with his thunderbolt, which 
hada hundredjoints. (3) With one of his arms (thus) lopped off, and full of rage, (the demon) Vrtra 
approached Indra, who still held his thunderbolt, and smote him as well as Airavata (the celestia 
elephant) in the jaws with his iron club and (lo !) the thunderbolt dropped down from Indra's 
hand.(4) (Both) the gods and the demons as well as the hosts of Caranas (celestial bards) and 
Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystical powers from their very birth) admired that 
most marvellous feat of Vrtra and (at the same time) cried again and again ‘Alack ! Alack !!' to 
see the critical plight of Indra (who is invoked by many). (5) Much ashamed (at his discomfiture), 
Indra did not pick up again in the presence of his foe the thunderbolt slipped from his hand. To 
him Vrtra (now) said, "Taking up your thunderbolt (once more), O Indra, kill your enemy (in my 
person); this is not the time for despondency. (6) Nowhere does victory invariably woo the 
bellicose armed with weapons, but only on particular occasions, since they are all subject to their 
destiny except the Lord (the eternal Person), the all-knowing Cause, the one Controller of 
creation, preservation and dissolution (of the universe). (7) That Lord alone (in the form of Time, 
the propeller of all) is responsible for (their) victory and defeat; for it is subject to His control that 
(all) these worlds along with their guardian deities (Brahma and others) helplessly carry on their 
activity like birds caught in a net. (8) Not recognizing the Lord (Time) as the (real) Cause in the 
shape of the potency of the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well as the organs of action), 
the power of the mind and bodily strength, life, immortality (final beatitude) and death as well, man 
looks upon the gross body as the cause (of victory etc.). (9) Just as a wooden puppet or even 
as a mechanical toy-deer is subject to the control of the showman or the individual winding up 
the toy, likewise know (all) living beings, O Indra, as subject to the control of God. (10) Without 
His help (inspiration) the Jiva (individual soul), Prakrti (primordial matter), Mahat-tattva (the 
principle of cosmic intelligence), the ego, the five elements, the (ten) Indriyas and the mind fail 
to create, maintain and dissolve the universe. (11) He who is ignorant of this (fact) regards 
his own incapable (dependent) self as capable (of doing everything independently). (Really 
speaking, ) itis He who evolves beings through other beings (their parents) and devours them 
Himself through (carnivorous) beings (such as a tiger). (12) Whatever blessings in the form of 
(long) life, affluence, fame and power are coveted by a man are obtained by him at the time 
appointed for the same as surely as their contraries (in the shape of death, poverty, infamy and 
SO On), even though he may be unwilling to have them. (13) Therefore, one should remain 
balanced in joy and sorrow (severally) proceeding from fame and disrepute, victory and defeat 
and even so from life and death. (14) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas are the (three) modes of Prakrti 
(Matter) but not the attributes of the Self. He who recognizes the Self to be a (mere) witness of 
these is notbound (by them). (15) Look atme, O Indra, exerting to the best of my power with intent 
fo take your life, though (already) vanquished in battle and having my weapon (trident) and arm 
cut down (by you). (16) This warfare is (after all nothing but) a game of chance, in which life (itself) 
is staked, arrows are thrown as dice and the animals etc., carrying the warriors are the gaming- 
boards. It is never known here (till the last) whose lot is victory and whose, defeat." (17) 
Sa 


Sa Gadd: Aa TeietergsTad| WeitaH: Teas Walaa: 1221 


_ Sri Suka continued : On hearing the guileless speech of Vrtra, Indra welcomed it. 
Picking up his thunderbolt and feeling no wonder (at his foe's extraordinary presence of mind 
and charitable disposition), he laughed heartily and replied to him (as follows). (18) 


Sx SA 
Sel aaa fagista ga a Tiniean | sa: Pateratssand Gee STAT 12° 1 





Dis. 12] BOOK SIX 609 
se SABRES SES SESE R HSER SRN SER BARRA BR RRR RRR ER RA RA RRR AAR THLE EE 


qanaeaat aA awed water ae fagraat wa weqEed Wd: 120! 

wird Weisd aq wise armea wala arr gat ofa: 122! 

aa Mesias 6a fa: ster@at 1 fatectsqaattelt far ate: Tardenlech: 1221 
Indra said : Oh, you have (really) achieved your object, O demon (chief), blessed as you 
are with such a (catholic, discerning, resolute and devout) mind (even at this critical moment), 
and devoted with all your being to the Lord (the Ruler of the universe), your (very) Self and (true) 
Friend ! (19) You have actually reached the end of the (insurmountable) Maya of Lord Visnu— 
which deludes people—in that, having shed the demoniac disposition, you have attained to 
the level of an exalted soul. (20) It is really a great wonder that, though Rajasika by 
temperament, you have conceived such an unflinching devotion to Lord Vasudeva, who is 
Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas) personified ! (21) What use can he have for the 


shallow ditch-water (in the shape of heavenly and other trivial enjoyments) who sports in an 
ocean of nectar, blessed as he is with devotion to the almighty Sri Hari, the Bestower of final 


beatitude? (22) - 
ARIA SATA 
gia qatar enifiaraar «qu aged )«6 Aeldilaifesaet «= qemu 1231 
sifaeq Une qa: ~ arentaaniten: isa oifeute at ame afte 12x 
ad qe uke at a ammunqifase gre eal aan aaddur 124i 
chaigenryena at = whealsar: | fsaaeil Gen iat: Ge WEI AON Ba: 1261 
Fa ed Wat cat fert wAiawemikaa Sfeeleauhtear 121 
ery: alone wea ataraerera snfacecar PRL 1c! 
fife aeatta vesat fsita cel aaa A OAATee «aha ~Gealet 129 | 
Teron vert werd sa fai gaye amet aNd: qu: | 
al Hetata ffauonsypa: AAs: 1301 
frittiisag¢snt A WaRet Wa: | negeeeae! armed 71381 
Aira aauepfat Fema aefie fay: isaed fae: azatfifeyefratstar 1321 
amg 4 dee: «= I RTT: I 
ada «2s aaaetUry at Taree amea 1331 
qa wa «eva farqtedfagi:  aneaftagr: | 
aA Seaasara adel pana 13% 1 
qa SSSR RAaeeA USA «=| AeA || AAT 1341 
sft sieeerrad FS URAC Seda GSH FAA AMA STeaMSEATA: 122 | 
Sti Suka went on: Thus talking to each other with a view to ascertaining (the true nature of) 
Dharma (righteousness), Indra (the chief of the gods) and the demon Vrtra, who were both 
endowed with extraordinary prowess and were (great) leaders of warriors, fought on. (23) Whirling 
his terrible bludgeon made of black (wrought) iron with his left hand, Vrtra, the chastiser of his 
foes, hurled it at Indra, O noble Pariksit! (24) That (mighty) god (Indra), however, synchronously 
cut down with his thunderbolt—which had a hundred joints—the bludgeon as well as the hand 


of Vrtra that resembled the trunk of an elephant. (25) With both (his) arms cutasunder at the very 
root, and streaming blood ( form the shoulders), the demon (Vrtra) shone like a mountain struck 








610 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


[ Dis. 
Re BeBe RB Re Re RR Be BE BR RB Re Re RR BB BB BR Be AEA Br Bee BATA BH BY BY Br Br Hr Ae Br MY eee nee eee eT eee 


by Indra (with his thunderbolt) and dropped from the air with both its wings chopped off. (26) The 
demon, who was possessed of inordinate strength and extraordinary prowess and whose 
gigantic form was exceedingly tall, (now) stretched his lower jaw to the ground and extended the 
upper one to heaven; as though devouring (all) the three worlds (heaven, earth and the 
intervening space) with his mouth, deep as the sky, tongue fearful as the serpent's and teeth 
fierce as Death, nay, shaking mountains with (great) violence and pounding the earth under his 
feet like a huge mountain walking about, he went up to Indra (who was armed with his 
thunderbolt) and swallowed him with Airavata (that carried him on its back) even as a python 
would swallow an elephant. Seeing him devoured by Vrtra, the gods along with the lords of 
creation (Brahma and others) and eminent sages were seized with despair and exclaimed, "Ah, 
what a pity !" (27—30) Though swallowed by Vrtra (the chief of the demons), and reaching his 
stomach, Indra did not die, protected as he was by Lord Narayana (the Supreme Person in the 
form of the armour-like Narayana-Kavaca) as well as by mystical powers and the powers of 
conjuration. (31) Ripping up his belly with his thunderbolt, and coming out (in this way), the 
powertul Indra (the slayer of the demon Bala) with (great) vigour lopped off the enemy's head 
like the top of a mountain. (32) Though revolving with a quick speed, and Cutting on all sides, the 

thunderbolt (of Indra) felled the neck of Vrtra in as many (three hundred and sixty) days as are 

taken by the northward and southward marches of (the sun and other) heavenly bodies, at the 

time appointed for the death of the demon. (33) At that time drums sounded with a loud noise 

and the Gandharvas and Siddhas along with hosts of eminent sages joyously showered flowers 

on him, glorifying him with sacred hymns celebrating the prowess of the slayer of Vrtra.(34) 

Issuing forth from the body of Vrtra in the form of an effulgence, O Pariksit (a chastiser of foes), 

the soul of Vrtra entered and merged into the Lord (who is beyond all the material worlds, while 

all the people (present there) looked on (with wonder). (35) 


Thus ends the twelfth discourse entitled "Vrtra slain," in Book Six of 
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


PISS mes 


SID WARNS: 


Discourse XIll 
Indra’s Victory 


Mh SATA 
qA ed Aa ole fet aot ye | ated Mua Gel face frsahea: |e | 
catifagqyaa cat eam: a ahs ata «6 welslsreaedd: | 2 | 


Sri Suka began again : Vrira having (thus) been slain, (all) the three worlds with their 
guardian deities, excepting, of course, Indra, O munificent Pariksit, were immediately rid of 
anxiety and felt gratified at heart. (1) The gods and sages, manes and spirits, the demons 
and the attendants of the gods (Gandharvas and others) returned to their (respective) 
realms of their own accord without taking leave of (Indra) and then Brahma (the creator), 
Siva, Indra and other (great) gods (too) dispersed. (2) 





BOOK SIX 611 


is 13 Sr Sr Be Rr Be Be Be Be Be Ke Be Mr Sr 
Dis. 13 1 erst tera tt tort tet teh e wtf feet TEED EE ff BABAR BAAD Bt 8B EER 


ssendadd ostaftrenfr st gai dare, atest tar RES Halstad | 2 | 


The king (Pariksit) said : | long to hear (from you). O (holy) sage, the cause of Indra's 
unhappiness. Why should there be agony to Indra (the chief of the gods) from something 
as a result of which the (other) gods felt gratified ? (3) 

Sy SATA 
qafamadiam: wa ear: weldfa: | ageraretard aAeq we geese! ¥ | 

Sri Suka replied : Frightened with the prowess of the demon Vrtra all the gods along 
with the sages implored Indra to slay him. He, however, did not feel inclined to do so, afraid 
as he was Of killing a Brahmana. (4) 

sx 3sdid 


SATA farecadiga| farmaaiehadacat «ah CA eeT G I 
Indra said : The sin caused by the slaughter of Viswaripa has (since) been graciously 
shared by women, the earth, water and the trees. (But) how shall I (be able to) atone for (the 
sin proceeding from) the slaughter of Vrtra? (5) 


MY SAI 
TaN a Tene Testenge | aie wz A waAA A ST A: 1 & | 
eet ee Tae SBI arreot ea lease age! © | 
Setet faget Wel Alqelssarderar | Mle: Geman aly Been Hilda |< 
aaa Tee MEATS | 
cay wit area a feea fe waoefazeie | 


Sri Suka continued : On hearing this the sages replied to the mighty Indra as follows:— 
“We shall get you to propitiate the Lord by means of a horse-sacrifice and all will be well with 
you. (Pray) too not be afraid. (6) Having worshipped Lord Narayana, the Supreme Spirit, the 
Inner Controller and Ruler of the universe, through a horse-sacrifice you will be absolved even 
of the sin proceeding from the extermination of the (whole) world. (7) Through the (very) 
utterance of His Name the murderer of a Brahmana, the slaughterer of a cow, the slayer of 
one's father, mother or preceptor and any other sinner, (nay,) one who eats the flesh of a dog 
and even aman of sinful birth are purified (at once). (8) Propitiating Him with reverence through 
the great sacrifice, ASwamedha, which will be performed by us, you will not be touched by sin 
even after killing the (entire) mobile and immobile creation including the Brahmana race, much 
less by the sin that may follow from the subjugation of an evil-doer (like Vrtra)." (9) 


MI SAA 

wT 8 86aestet «= faicamenisgn| wee «oad afeeeae qareaftrt igo! 
qa: Weed a Preicatgariaad | Stasi area WT Gaara AY WOM: 1221 
T cigar cusetta stoi i sre auaigt aaegaqent eet 
feet ufed cakes frsia wo dre | adi APeaury 123 1 
Ta Tet fea: dat: weet fearad i wnat fest aot wfast qa ameiext 

a MAA Sh lod damealveat alcettaed: | 

aul weenefadsa: a fara agama fanterie! 





612 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 18 


PERERA Re BRR Re RR PER RRR RE RRR RE RER RER RE RB ER RE BE REH H MT BY BTBEBB He eT RB He BEBE He BE BE He Be BB He BY Be Be Ae Br Be Br BH BY Be He hr oe oe py 
SE EE 
aatcauTIch wea: Bawa faa TaeTAATa: 

: 1 Haha 
a AMeyAAS aA estate 12a 
adil Tel Tarn ASA aaniealea: | 
uae feta adel 9 aAaudiad fase ie 


Sri Suka went on : Thus urged by the Brahmanas, Indra killed Vrtra (his enemy). On 
his being (thus) slain, the sin of having killed a Brahmana came upon Indra. (10) Due to 
(the consciousness of) that sin Indra suffered (untold) agony and no peace of mind 
returned to him (even for a moment ). Even (fortitude and other) virtues fail to bring relief 
to him who, while endowed with a sense of shame, has incurred obloquy. (11) He saw the 
aforesaid sin running after him in human form, resembling that of apariah woman suffering 
from consumption, clad in blood-stained clothes, her limbs trembling due to old age, and 
throwing about her grey hair, crying "Stop ! Stop !!" and befouling (the air of) the road with 
her breaths stinking like (rotten) fish. (12-13) Indra (who is possessed of a thousand eyes 
located all over his body), O Pariksit (a ruler of the people), ranged through the sky and 
(then) in all directions and, (finally) betaking himself to the north-east, O king, quickly entered 
the Manasa lake. (14) Pondering within (himself) the means of absolution from the sin of 
having slain a Brahmana and getting no subsistence, because he remained under water 
and had the god of fire (who could not obviously enter water” ) for his purveyor (agency 
conveying sacrificial offerings) , Indra lived unperceived (by Brahmahatya) in the fibres of 
a lotus-stalk (in the Manasa lake) for a thousand years. (15) Till then (the famous king) 
Nahusa (ofthe mortal world)—who had acquired the capacity to rule over Swarga by virtue 
of (his) worship, asceticism and mystical powers—ruled over (acted as the regent of) the 
third heaven? (the celestial region). His intellect (however) having been blinded through 
arrogance caused by opulence and power, he was cast (through an ingenious device) into 
a sub-human species (the serpent race) by Saci (the virtuous spouse of Indra, whom he 
claimed as his wife). (16) Called by the invocation of the Brahmanas (sages), Indra—whose 
sin had (in the meantime) been neutralized through meditation on Sri Hari (the Upholder of 





* Afamous commentator of Srimad Bhagavata, however, points out that the god of fire does enter water when carrying 
oblations to Varuna ( the god of water residing in water), so that it was not impossible for him to enter the Manasa lake and 
purvey food to Indra. The Manasa lake, however being closely guarded by the attendants of Sri Rudra, he could not easily 
enter it without disclosing the secret of Indra's hiding there. 


7 SWarga (Indra’s paradise) is called the third heaven inasmuch as itis the third in order of the seven upper spheres 
of the universe from the earth onwards, the terrestrial sphere (which has also been declared to be a place of enjoyment 
of the fruit of one’s merits, with the exception of Bharatavarsa, which is pre-eminently a place for action—Karmabhami— 
vide V. xvii. Il). 

+ Having ascended the throne of Indra, Nahusa—who was attracted by the extraordinary charms of the former's spouse, 
Saci, claimed her as his legitimate wife and invited her accordingly to live with him. Saci, who was the wedded wife of Indra 
and was, therefore, exclusively devoted to him, naturally disdained his invitation and sought the advice of the sage Brhaspati 
(Indra‘s preceptor and family priest, who had since returned and resumed his Office) how to elude the grasp of Nahusa, whom 
she could not openly defy because of her forlorn condition. The sagacious Brhaspati, who naturally sympathized with the 
virtuous lady advised her that she should offer to meet Nahusa provided he should visit herina palanquin borne by Brahmana 
sages. Nahusa, who was blinded with passion, readily agreed and commanded Agastya and other sages to carry him ina 
palanquin to Saci's palace. In his eagerness to see the celestial lady, he goaded the bearers to proceed apace, and even 
touched the venerable sage Agastya with his foot saying "Move on, move on (a4, a4). Enraged at this insolent behaviour on 
the partof the arrogant monarch, the sage pronounced a curse agaist him that he should falldown and be rebomin the serpent 

race. The execration uttered by the sage could not be otherwise and the king fell down at once from heaven and was 
transformed into a python and eventually redeemed in the following Dwapara age by the virtuous king Yudhisthira. 








Dis. 13 ] BOOK SIX oe 


EBB BAC BCA BE PEBBLE BE BERR BEB BEB BBB BE BAC BERTH BEB BCRE BRE BBE BCA IE BAER AE BACB ABABA SABA ABAD ELAS. 
truth)-returned after that to heaven; and the sin (of having killed a Brahmana)-that had been 
deprived of its force by Sri Rudra (the deity presiding over the north-east)—could not assail 
him, protected (as he was) by Goddess Laksmi (the divine Consort of Lord Visnu, dwelling in 
the bed of lotuses in the Manasa lake). (17) 


qd ad wedaisda wader wundiameadeasp: Gane  s12C! 
31a Wea adeanarah | saat «= aesot «6faad «=«stelaticitt: 129! 
aa aipan wart aaa yaidiaedta yea dee ga AAA RO! 
a afmea acter famanma oo aidfafas: | 
Sprleterat Wea GUO WerTa fagaqara: 1221 
3 Tereaaareaararat Wale ctelqerqentdar | 
Wate «8 Medau «8606esotel «= fara ede: 1221 
werent del aM: yarga audit uaduitfaa 
rq we Fraser fut werd aassqai23! 
oft atertad ARM GRAS Seda TEP Salas AM AAeaMSeAMa: 1231 
Brahmana sages (now) approached him, O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata), and duly 
consecrated him, they say, fora horse-sacrifice intended to propitiate Sri Hari (the Supreme 
Person). (18) Now, while the Supreme Person, who embodies in Himself all the divinities, 
was being worshipped by the mighty Indra in the course of the (aforesaid) horse-sacrifice 
elaborately performed through the instrumentality of sages who were (great) expositors of 
the Vedas, even that huge mass of sin in the shape of the slaughter of the demon Vrtra (son 
of the god Twasta), O king, was actually reduced to nothingness by that very sacrifice just 
as the hoar-frost is melted by the sun. (19-20) By propitiating the most ancient Person, the 
Deity presiding over sacrifices, through the (said) horse-sacrifice—which was being 
elaborately performed according to the scriptural ordinance through the instrumentality of 
Marici and other sages—the aforesaid Indra was completely rid of his sins and became 
great (once more). (21) This great narrative is (decidedly) instrumental in washing off all 
one's sins and conducive to the growth of Devotion, replete as it is with the praises of the 
Lord (whose holy feet enable one to ford the vast ocean of metempsychosis), containing an 
account of His (great) devotee (Vrtra) as well as of the absolution and decisive victory of the 
mighty Indra, nicknamed as Marutvan. (22) Therefore, the wise should always recite or hear 
(at least) on every festival this story relating to Indra, which beings wealth, fame and 
longevity, is a means of ridding one of all sinful propensities, and a source of (all) blessings 
and helps one to conquer one's enemies. (23) 


Thus ends the thirteenth discourse entitled “The victory of Indra” 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 








614 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Disha 


PARA AAA LALA AA ALL AR ARAL LAR GRRE BH ERE GER HE H BE BERE HE BEBE e eRe HBe Be Bee Bee Be Be Re Be Be Be eH Pe Sr hy oe g, 


BA Adams: 


Discourse XIV 
The Lament of Citraketu 


Weigand 
TRAM A GS WM: ARTE wait perareie get Ala: 1 et 
tan WSs aA Medea A TALUTIUSTTETT 1 
Tit: ween: ulate weal dst & ered Aa A ape: 13 1 
Ta oyaaaast sea feeai aaa aeeg afaqea faeaia x | 
aan  faget ART: | qgeu: sane alfegia wert & | 
qa @ we uM: adetHuaad: | set qenla: HO sid AA seat | & | 
3 a: Uae Yared slags Wia: uted wat aserandaaci © | 
Pariksit submitted : How did (such an) unflinching devotion to the almighty Narayana 
appear in the heart of the sinful Vrtra, whose nature, O holy Brahmana, was predominated 
by Rajas and Tamas? (1) Devotion to the feet of Lord Visnu (the Bestower of Liberation) 
does not ordinarily develop in the heart of (even) gods, whose intellect is (generally) pure, 
and sages, whose mindis untainted by sin. (2) Living beings in this universe are as numerous 
(innumerable) as there are particles of dust. Of them, only a few human creature and other 
(higher) beings, as a matter of fact, practise virtue. (3) Of them (again) seekers of liberation 
are ordinarily only few, O jewel among the Brahmanas ! And among thousands of those 
seeking release scarce one is completely rid of attachment (to his home etc.) and attains 
success (in the shape of Self-Realization). (4) Even among tens of millions of those who 
have been rid of identification with the body etc., and even realized the Self, he whose mind 
is perfectly serene (entirely free from the craving for sense-gratification) and solely devoted 
to (the feet of) Lord Narayana is most difficult to find. (5) How, then, did the sinful Vrtra, the 
tormentor of all the worlds, who gratified by his valour on the battle-field (even) Indra (the 
thousand-eyed lord of paradise), remain so steadfast in (his) devotion to the Lord (the 
Attractor of all) in the midst of a fierce combat ? Great is our doubt in this matter and so is 
our eagerness to hear about it, O Master. (6-7) 
Yd sald 
Uattsa UIA Wa alatafur: | ara steerer wha aalsqat | ¢ | 
Suta continued : The glorious Suka (the son of Badarayana, more popularly known as 


Vedavyasa) welcomed the relevant enquiry of the devout king Pariksit, when he heardit, and 
then made the following reply. (8) 


Mp SAA 
sUygatem wUsitatterafd aan ad  gUATaaeaeraa |e | 
aise udu: wea 4 77 | farce hit warat serie, HAeTWEl 120 1 
qa waaean Aeenitt senvea aramensnts zat a Sa arg Bahr 1221 
Ruler aa rsrA feel ael Srarteatar: Lea WW: adisra asa 122! 
a da ae: al afeent ameter: iadsme wdaayaq sifidaa: 1231 





Dis. 14 BOOK SIX RS 


Oils. gcaeeanenenenssunnneonensnsssenersonanesSanuunneanrenneeReenaeeneSNeseeseeeS® 
qeaeral (MeN | arangfa: | Cl qea oes IRs 
q wire fataceerndonfet: | area aatfed: 12! 
nearest steed «Ss flat ioe «| BT ATMAeNsal 126 | 


Sri Suka said : Hear attentively, O king, the following legend as heard (by me) from the 
mouth of (my father,) the sage Vedavyasa (who was born in an island), as well as from the 
sages Narada and Devala. (9) In the Surasena country (the tract lying about the city of 
Mathura), so the tradition goes, there was a king, called by the name of Citraketu, O Pariksit, 
who ruled over the entire globe and to whom the earth yielded everything sought after (by 
him). (10) He hada crore wives; but, though capable of procreation, the emperor gotno issue 
by (any of) them. (11) Anxiety now laid hold of Citraketu, who, though (fully) endowed with 
beauty, generosity, youth, noble lineage, learning, (universal) sovereignty, imperial fortune 
and all other virtues, was (yet) the husband of barren ladies. (12) All his riches, fair-eyed 
queens and (even the sovereignty of) this earth did not prove a source of delight to that ruler 
of the entire globe. (13) Ranging through these worlds, however, the glorious sage Angira 
on one occasion came to his house by chance. (14) Having honoured him with due 
ceremony by rising to greet him and offering him articles of worship etc., the emperor sat with 
a collected mind near the sage, who was now comfortably seated, having been (fully) 
entertained as a guest. (15) The great sage (Angira). O emperor, showed every courtesy 
and consideration in return to Citraketu, who sat close to him on the (bare) ground, bent low 
with modesty, and, calling his attention (to him), spoke the following words. (16) 


aify asad wit sepdiat aensse: | ae sepfaetg: gar usnia agate: 1201 
Sa Naty frera sa sige Ue AM Neat arcatfedrera: 1221 : 
ST ANT: TSTATA Ya: AUAISA APA: LUT AVE YT seis agrafda: 1291 
Tae «= ga = SAI lem: Ven Aasla Ua alesndfsat: 1201 
SIH: Wad AR Ud: Md Va all SAAsHelns al faa Was TAA 1221 
wa facieodt wer fag afaria a: | seealeddissae seemed «A122 1 


Angira said : Is everything well with your person as well as with your Prakrtis (the 
constituent elements of a state, viz., the high priest, the chief minister, the territories, i.e., the 
people, the fortresses, the treasury, the police and army—that enforce law and order—and 
the allies ) and are you enjoying a sound health—you as well as your Prakrtis ? (Even) as 
a Jiva (the embodied soul) is protected by the seven material sheaths (viz., Mahattattva or 
the principle of cosmic intelligence, the ego and the five subtle elements), so the king too 
is protected by the (aforesaid) seven constituent elements. (17) A king can enjoy the 
blessings of sovereignty by actually placing himself under the control of his Prakrtis; (and) 
the Prakrtis are likewise enriched by the king (by following his will and carrying out his 
commands), O ruler of men. (18) Are your wives, subjects, ministers, servants, people 
following particular trades, counsellors, citizens and inhabitants of the other parts (of your 
State), tributary chiefs and offspring obedient to your will ? (19) All these (unquestionably) 
follow the will of the man whose mind is under his control. (Nay,) all the worlds along with 
their guardian deities dutifully offer tribute to him. (20) (It seems to me that) your mind is not 
pleased either with others or with your own self. (For) | find your face discoloured with 
anxiety, and (thereby) conclude that you have not attained the object of your desire. (21) 
Subjected thus, O Pariksit, to various presumptions by the sage, even though the latter knew 
Everything (by intuition), Citraketu, who was full of longing fora son, and was bent low with 








616 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Disn4 


BeBe Pr Re Be BeBe Re Be Ke Be Be LE Be Br Re Be BeBe Be Bee BeBe Be RE Re BAT Ae Re ree Br Br Be Be Re Br Br Br Be Mr Hr By Me Wr Ge Wr He Kr Kr Me Gr He Gr Kr Ke Ke Ke Hr Ke We Wr Kr Ke Wr = ERIE 


modesty, thereupon replied to the sage (as follows). (22) 


ae fe a fafed adtamantats: i attr erent afera: arity 1231 
qa ged sat sade fara sad faguent <alfaqcaqaqar ix 
wieder seat: anda: |a Ada Ai aryccnlataanay 12& | 
dd: Ue HEIs Ya: We Wd Aa: 1 aM AA Ge Seta aq fase a: 1261 


Citraketu submitted : O worshipful sage, what is there without or (even) within (in the 
mind of) embodied beings, which is not known to Yogis (like you) whose sins have been 
wiped out through asceticism, spiritual enlightenment and deep concentration of mind ? (23) 
Yet, prompted by your command. | should speak out, O holy Brahmana, the thought (which 
is foremost) in my mind to you, who ask me about it even though you know it. (24) The 
sovereignty of the entire globe and the power and affluence attending it—which are worthy 
of being coveted even by the guardians of the spheres—bring no delight to me, issueless 
as | am, just as other things do not rejoice him who longs for food and drink under pressure 
of hunger and thirst. (25) Therefore, (be pleased to ) protect me, O highly blessed one, and 
do that for us whereby we may be able with the help of a son to get out of the dark abyss 
of hell (the lot of those who die issueless) which has (all but) been reached by us along with 
our forefathers, and which is so difficult to cross over. (26) 

ANH Sad 


saad: A Was HUSA: Ud: 1 safaal as ae aENAasia fay: 1291 
SIST ASI A AM Uat Afeston aA aNd i aA Healaa agitfessaere fer: 1201 
Bae Fat We Afadetare: | wetnweaqeiaa  wmelgd Fat irei 
aa deemed  faradkeraqim adefiddt apfamar i301 
wen stifet md: agua galgu:iaqd zara = wha 1321 


sri Suka continued : Implored thus, that glorious, merciful and mighty son of Brahma 
got a special oblation prepared for being offered to the god Twasta, and propitiated the said 
god with the same. (27) The (holy) Brahmana further gave the remainder of the sacrificial 
offering to the queen known by the name of Krtadyuti, who was the eldest and the foremost 
(in other respects too) of all the king's spouses, O Pariksit (a descendant of Bharata) ! (28) 
The sage Angira (Brahma's son) then said to Citraketu (a ruler of men), "O king! ason, who 
will be a source of (both) joy and grief to you, will be born to you !" and left. (29) Merely by 
eating the remainder of that sacrificial oblation even Krtadyuti (who was barren) conceived 
a child through Citraketu just as the goddess Krttika (the deity presiding over the constellation 
of that name) conceived a son through the god of fire. (80) The embryo in the womb of that 
lady, which owed its existence to king Citraketu (the ruler of the SUrasenate rritory) gradually 
‘developed from day to day, (even) as the moon (the lord of the stars), O king (Pariksit), waxes 
during the bright fortnight. (31) 


AQ Ale Big PAN: PAM! Ta BAR! Yaat ut weisz! 
eS Ws HANA Ed: Alesana: | araferarssferat fas: sarcarara sdeHe 133 | 
aan feud Wd ararenaonhs o | WAM ears Male Sarde Fe_1 3X | 
aad armada asi ga ce ae ATES Pa WET: 1341 
PoMsA Wieser fig: | aa faa Head at Aelsaaea 1361 





Dili 14), sesesenssaecesensiecssiensas] OS ee 

Sod a Sel Wea Sa: bp: AUST Setrenasai sua, 139 | 
MT MR sweats dade Ga ae creadsaed 136! 

a: Wie Masai saa saa WSU WIse! 
frst faa ort Ceara asi: aueifetdifaa fara iso! 
adit at Yaa: wifes: ufteeiar aiitevt memati aren ateia eset: 1x8 
Wa Wea Bem: GMM iUgisamdadat fagal aay 1s?! 
fagaasada: farar aTeureaada: | Tz gq: pana eet qafa ofa iat 
are Tel! Ga Ud aera Atte aera We xv! 

wa det geqund adifeitigqamar a wa sf apiqalerixal 
a WANA BI ARG fsa «86 earetoagfa iv 


Now, when the time (of delivery came, a son was duly born, causing supreme delight to 
(all) the inhabitants of the Sdrasena territory, who heard of it. (32) The king, who felt (much) 
delighted (at the news), took his bath and, (thus) purified, he adorned himself with 
ornaments. Then, getting the Brahmanas to pronounce benedictions (on the babe), he 
caused the rite called Jatakarma (the ceremony of touching a new-born babe's tongue thrice 
with ghee after appropriate prayers) to be performed (for the purification of the child). (33) 
Tothe Brahmanas he gifted gold and silver, clothes and ornaments, and villages, horses and 
elephants and sixty million cows. (34) Like a rain-cloud sending down showers according 
to the will of the people, the generous king (Citraketu) gratified the desire of other men (as 
well) by making gifts calculated to bring riches, glory and longevity to the babe. (35) The 
affection of the father, the royal sage (Citraketu), for his son, who had been got after great 
hardship, constantly grew from day to day like the love of a pauper for his hard-earned 
money. (36) The attachment of the mother to her son, however, grew to an excessive 
degree, caused as it was by infatuation; while agony in the shape of longing for a son 
appeared in the heart of the co-wives of queen Krtadyuti. (37) Even as Citraketu fondled the 
babe everyday, no such type of excessive fondness appeared in his heart for his other wives 
as he developed for the one who was blessed with a son. (38) Reproaching themselves 
through jealousy, they felt agonized (in their heart) due to the grief caused by issuelessness 
and the indifference shown to them by the king (their husband). (39) Fie upon the accursed 
woman without a child, (who is) not esteemed at home by her husband and is insulted like 
a maid-servant by her co-wives blessed with good children. (40) What agony can be the lot 
of maid-servants (who are) constantly honoured because of their service rendered to the 
master ? We wretched women (however) are (no better than) the maid-servant of a maid- 
servant (worse even than a maid-servant). (41) In this way there sprang up (a feeling of) bitter 
hatred in the heart of those queens whose life was neglected by the king and who were fully 
burning with jealousy at the fortune of their co-wife in the shape of a son. (42) The cruel- 
hearted ladies, who had lost their good sense through deep malice and were full of 
resentment towards the king, administered poison to the babe. (43) Queen Krtadyuti, who 
had no idea of the grievous misdeed of her co-wives, thought on looking at it that the babe 
was asleep, and went aboutin the palace. (44) Perceiving (however) that the babe had been 
sleeping too long, the wise queen commanded the nurse who suckled the child in the 
following words: "Bring me the babe, O good woman !" (45) When (however) she went near 
the babe lying in bed, and found that the pupils of its eyes had turned upwards and that life, 
the senses and other faculties and the soul (too) had quitted it, she cried "I am finished !" 
and dropped on the ground. (46) 


. [564] B. M. 22— 





“<= 


618 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis: 14 


PRR AAA AAA L AA ELAR AAA AR AAA A BE BRK RE RR EBB EHR RR BER RR Re Re Rr deo, 
Se eeeaeaaaeETsoaae*Y J rere kf 


qareisseud «Wt Wt Wet: HMM sat | 
Sfasad Ust wawaissamtifdch cael aie eal Ad YA Iv! 
wad wat uURag wa wale fawefenteerat ive 
qa quad wat as ads era wera 
arta | deteteade:faarensa | leh SRG: HATA: ISR 1 
get yd Uefa fee: sam Fae we 
eater war wa  faafeddtsaranfafestda: iyo! 
Wid wet a was yea fears | 
ai wa atacand fegmust A wih AAT 14e 1 
ufa fiteneqeid dal qd a ae Yate 
SH Us Sd gat adl eam faoem fee 142! 
eed 0 pgeaited «= fterdt §«=—|_ aemtarerfergit: 1 
fantd car fares: ai wea fet gta Wa i43! 


Hearing at that time the most painful cry of the nurse, who was violently beating her 
breast too with both hands, the queen aickly entered into the presence of her child and 
found her infant son a victim of sudden death. (47) Due to excessive grief she fainted 
and fell on the ground, her hair flung about and garments thrown out of order. (48) 
Hearing the wail, the inmates of the royal gynaeceum, both men and women, 
thereupon came (to the spot) and, sharing the queen's grief and, therefore, much 
distressed, fell to weeping; (nay), even the queens who had perpetrated the crime 
shed crocodile tears. (49) Hearing that his son had died, though the cause of his death 
was (still) unknown, the king lost his vision through grief intensified beyond measure 
by uninterrupted love. Followed by his ministers and other people and surrounded by 
the Brahmanas (priests), he (too) came stumbling and falling on the way and, sighing 
deeply, dropped unconscious near the feet of the dead child, his hair dishevelled and, 
clothes thrown about in disorder; and, his throat choked due to obstruction caused by 
tears, he could not utter a word. (50-51) Seeing her husband overwhelmed with 
excessive grief and the infant son, her only progeny, dead, the virtuous queen then 
wailed in various ways, (thereby) enhancing the heart-ache of the people as well as of 
the ministers and others (present there). (52) Bathing her breasts—painted with 
saffron and sandal paste—with the drops of her tears mixed with collyrium and throwing 
about her hair with the flowers dropping from them, she mourned (the death of) her child 
like a female osprey in loud and diverse tones (as follows) :— (53) 





ae 46 faeneaadia «6 otfeet «= aeeratapanfeaiaa | 
Usqsiaeata i TC(tiCf =a: 2S: IYI 
a fe magice Fase: wife  aaissarencfe: | 
a: Gert fiseiggt wa am afi faaafe uu 
a dd Tela a At SUI ah faces fot aa senaaT | 
FARA VaMee Gq art A ae aA amis 
skis ad a ga feral aqeneammeata qared afaede | 


3 619 
Dis. 14] BOOK SIX ce nannnaneeeee 


SBR BARBS BRIERE BRIE LB SB AER ABARAT ARAL ACR AEB BE BERT BAAE BAER ALE IASI SBD T 
Geist MwA Ua VarLAe Yess EH a Ya RK A: AH 149! 
Té wet dat wager a wef feacdtaummaet | 
fe at wdisearaanadete Aidsqura a ona cen Freed 1421 


"Alas, O creator, you are extremely foolish in that you act contrary to (the interests 
of) your own Creation. Oh, the death of a youngster while an elder is (still) living points 
(unmistakably) to this. If (however) you are (just) the reverse (a wise fellow doing all this 
designedly), you are our constant enemy (and no benefactor). (54) If (it is urged that) 
there is no (strict) regularity in this world in the matter of death and birth of embodied 
beings, then let everything happen according to their Karma (independently of you). (It 
is, however, strange that) you are cutting asunder (by wresting babes from the hands 
of their parents) this cord of affection, which was produced by yourself for the growth of 
your creation ! (55) (Addressing her dead child,) and you, dear child, ought not to forsake 
me, a wretched and helpless woman; (O) look at your father, burning with grief. With you 
(as our pilot) we could easily cross the dark region of hell, which is difficult to cross for 
the issueless. (Please) do not go far in the company of cruel Death. (56) Arise, darling! 
These infant playmates of yours, O prince, are calling you to romp freely (with them). You 
have slept long and must be seized with hunger. (Therefore,) eat something, suck my 
breasts and take away the grief of us (all), your near and dear ones. (57) Having lost (all) 
good fortune, | could not (get to) behold (when! came by your side to see you) your lotus- 
like countenance with its innocent smile and cheerful glances. Or, taken by the cruel 
Death, have you gone to the other world, whence you are not going to return ? (FO) | 
no longer hear your sweet words." (58) 

Sh SaTa 
fasortt «oud uifafa fanfaem: 1 faachadat adl amanvet ele Z14el 
waifdeant: dl  Waeieedqad: | ee¢: Bt au ar: wdurdieddag ico! 
WG meant AAAs aa AA AINA Ae: 12! 
sft SiterTad AS USM Gledal Wha faandaoma AA Adaaseara: 121 

Sri Suka resumed : Along with the queen, (who was) mourning her departed son 
through such varied laments, Emperor Citraketu (too) wailed at the top of his voice, 
extremely agonized as he was. (59) While the couple were (thus) wailing, all those who were 
devoted to him, men as well as women, wept and everything was lifeless (as it were). (60) 


Knowing the king to have lost (all) consciousness due to his having given way to despair, 
and without a guide the sage named Angira appeared (at the scene) along with Narada. (61) 


Thus ends the fourteenth discourse entitled “The lament of Citraketu, " 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


CII SNEN ISI OD 








620 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis.15 


BeBe Re Re Re Re RR Re EER RR Re RR RR ER RE RR RR Re PERE RE ERE AEB BE BE BY BH AEB BE Be BY Br Hr Ay BeBe He Be Hr Hr He Be Re Hr Sr Br Hr Hr Sr Hr Br Hr Hr Fr BeBe Bt Hr Hr hr tr tra, 


BY UBS SLA: 


Discourse XV 
Citraketu consoled 


shtas sara 

saatastara Ufa «= ae Sienna To Steet Tefenhy: 1k 
AIS MI Wa WIR Wa GAGA | aA a HAA: YS Nerina: wa! 2 | 
aM waka Watha alae alee: | ded fagerd aM aed aes: 1 2 1 
am ag a wat vaha a ward Aiwa yay YT atfeaierea i x 1 
ai aaa a aa qeanese: | waged ward Nears AT: 1 & I 
aad was: Bada sent: | segsadacaash aNSaAT | & 
afer Cem ereeisfistad i disrea GT hs Gael Ba ANA: 1 
cecletasnnsaatacdchspd: Ot | sifterkafaurnsa aan aah caiead: 1 ¢ | 


Sri Suka began again: Enlightening, by means of wise utterances, king Citraketu, who was 
lying by the side of the dead babe like a dead man, overwhelmed as he was with grief, the sages 
Angira and Narada spoke (as follows):—(1) “In what relation did the boy whom you are lamenting 
(just now), O king of kings, stand to you in a previous birth, what is he to you at present and what 
will he be to you hereafter ? Again, what were you to him in a former incarnation, what are you 
at present and what will you be hereafter ? (2) Just as stands part (from one another) and come 
together by the current of a stream, so are embodied beings brought together and parted by 
Time. (3) Just as seeds do spring up from (other) seeds (in some cases), and do not spring up 
(in other cases), so do living beings prompted by the Lord's Maya evolve from (other) living beings 
(in some cases) and do not (in other cases). (4) You and we and all these mobile and immobile 
creatures belonging to the present time do not (really) exist even now (just) as we did not before 
birth and shall not be after death, O Citraketu ! (5) It is God (the Lord of created beings) who, 
though unborn (and imperishable) and (absolutely) unconcerned, creates, protects and destroys 
living beings (sportfully) as a child through (other) beings evolved by Himself and (therefore) not 
independent. (6) The body of one embodied being (in the shape ofason), Oking, is evolved from 
the body of another embodied being (in the shape of the mother) united with the body of a third 
embodied being (in the shape of the father), justas one seed springs up from another seed: while 
the soul inhabiting all these bodies is eternal like God (the only Reality). (7) The aforesaid 
distinction of body and soul has existed from eternity and has been conceived through 
ignorance even as the distinction of the generic property and the individuality of a thing 
assumed as inhering in the thing itself (although the two are interdependent and cannot 
therefore be really distinguished).” (8) 

Sh Sara 


_ Uararanterat ts 6 fastendiesttkeih: | sgea oorftr «aaonfineeraaured | @ | 
Sri Suka continued : Thus consoled by the words of the (holy) Brahmanas (Angira and 


Narada), king Chitraketu wiped his face, withered through mental anguish (caused by his 
son's death) with his hand and spoke (as follows).(9) 
UeHara 


al gat area Hest a aeaaM sata Ao Bae | ATT 1g01 





pis. 15] BOOK SIX 621 
sb PARR ISAS SR ES SSIS STR SRILA BSR SRR AER AR ARABS AEB BELA SAEED IISA EEE 


aa Cet BM ae wate: | eet anaagiat ateneiarafeiga: 12° 
part ARE wRWiyfsa eacisfa: | sara sal urhosaisa Mata: 122! 
afast war wa: after seat: | ater agar siqenvdedeissefer: 123 | 
treat oad aah: womefe: ifdef ate af: usferneden 12% 
UIT: BAT: Bet wae: WA wt ou faaenafa wreeda: 124! 
qengat area qefia: sya anf ume aida silane 


The king said : Who are you, rich in wisdom and the most adored of the adorable, that 
have come here, disguised in the form of ascetics absolutely unconcerned with the world ? (10) 
Indeed Brahmanas (lit., those identified with Brahma), who are beloved of the Lord, go about 
the earth at will, disguised as mad men, for admonishing sensually-minded people like 
me.(11) Sanatkumara, Narada, Rbhu, Angira, Devala, Asita, Apantaratama, Vyasa, 
Markandeya and Gautama, Vasistha, the glorious ParaSurama, Kapila, Suka (son of 
Badarayana), Durvasa and Yajfavalkya, Jatikarnya and Aruni, Romasa, Cyavana, 
Dattatreya, Asuri with Patanjali, the seer Vedasira, the sage Bodhya, Pancasira, 
Hiranyanabha, Kausalya, Srutadeva, and Rtadhwaja—these and other lords of Siddhas 
(enlightened souls) range (over the earth) with the object of imparting wisdom (to qualified 
souls). (12—15) Therefore, you two are the masters of my stupid self, a sensual brute. 
(Pray,) hold aloft the lamp of wisdom to me, plunged in blinding darkness (in the shape of 


ignorance). (16) 
SIRT SATA 
a6 A Game gaeseaie Flw ead: Waa wranya: 1 
sa al weiea ua anfa get smeenqaa TRIGEMINAL 122 1 
aqera Mad: «eae «=i anevat «6a §«=—_ ATi tfequeldt 1291 
da a wa wa cafe year: | arama aA Ga acide io! 
AT «ofA «aS Madey wa eT Wet wen fafeetaefarae: 1291 
qeceasy fasnget  weafayda: | Fel Wed ae HRM YAMA: TEs: 122! 
ads yaad  aeearevarfdel: | TeaaToeT: MIATA: 123 | 
ear faa A qed Hataen: | adifeatadt Areaiiol AqaIsHad 12% 1 
ava so fe «6@fear tal seiafmarae: | afer fafaeraareadmacheeled: 1241 
TA We uta fagea ulead: isa Aarsifasmst wsiaegrmifaar 12! 

The sage Angira said : | am (the same) Angira, who blessed you with a son when you 
longed for one, O king ! (And) here is the divine sage Narada, son of Brahma (the creator) 
himself. (17) Knowing you, a devotee of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), plunged in (asea 
of) despondency—difficult to get through—due to grief caused by the loss of your son, 
though not fit to be drowned in it, we have come down here to shower our grace on you, O 
Citraketu ! (For) a votary of the Brahmanas and a devotee of the Lord does not deserve to 
be despondent. (18-19) | was going to impart the highest wisdom to you even then when | 
visited your house (for the first time). Coming to know of your insistence on having something 
else (however), | conferred on you (the boon of) a son alone. (20) Now the agony of those 
blessed with a sonis being directly experienced by you. Even soa wife, house, riches, power 


and prosperity of various kinds, sound and the other objects of sense, the fleeting glories 
of sovereignty, lands, kingdom, army, treasury, dependants and ministers and friends and 








622 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA is. 16 


AREKAAAALKAKKHKKHAAOKHNKKNHLNARVRAAKHHAKAHK HLH HAL KNAA AKL A HB HB He HB Kr Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr Hr Kr Br By Hy Hr By Br Hr ey Hr Sr RRR BR Re Rt trey 
— On ST 


relations—all these, O ruler of the Surasena territory, are sources of grief, infatuation, fear 
and affliction. (Nay,) they are (of a momentary nature) like an imaginary city seen in the sk 
and are of the nature of (similar in character to) a dream, illusion, and fancy. (21—23) They 
are (merely) conceptual in that they are perceived without reality and disappear (the very 
next moment). (If it is urged that the acquisitions mentioned above are rewards of 
meritorious acts done in a previous life and not merely conceptual), the various actions (too) 
proceed from the mind of a man thinking of such material possessions under the force of 
tendencies of action (acquired in former existences). (24) As a matter of fact, this body 
(alone)—consisting of the gross elements, the senses of perception and the organs of 
action—has been spoken of (by the kKnowers of truth) as causing afflictions and agonies of 
various kinds to the embodied soul who regards it as his own self. (25) Therefore, 
investigating with a composed mind the true nature of the Self, give up faith in the abiding 
reality of the objective world (implying duality) and resort to quietism. (26) 


AR sold 


Wi waaeee wiles Waal AAI at ake VatAle SBI AAT WAAR 
aaeqenaga ats ga wale watta feqa faq| 
Tedederi aed soda ut afeagufa ec 
Sfa stead AS URS Gledial Gee Fareed AA GSeRMSeATA: 12.41 

Narada said : Having been purified (through a bath and other purificatory rites after 
disposing of the dead body), receive from me the following sacred text (quoted in xvi. 18—25) 
as an abode of the highest blessing. By repeating and fixing your thought on it you will be 
able to behold Lord Sankarsana (only) after seven nights. (27) By resorting to the soles of 
His feet, O king of kings, devotees belonging to the (remotest) past—Lord Siva (the 
Destroyer of the universe) and others—got rid of the illusion of this world (implying duality) 


and forthwith attained to (oneness with) His unsurpassed, nay, unequalled greatness, and 
you too will attain before long the same supreme result. (28) 


Thus ends the fifteenth discourse entitled "Citraketu consoled", 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


ZIM Breanseara: 


Discourse XVI 
Citraketu realizes (his oneness with) the Supreme Spirit 
MI SAA 
AA cee Us Aa AM ata elaret weiss 2 | 
Sri Suka began again : After that, O Pariksit, Narada (the celestial sage) showed (by 


his Yogic power) to the sorrowing kinsmen (the ghost of) the departed prince (in an aerial 


body with which the soul is clothed when departing from the physical body and travelling to 
_ the other world), and spoke thus as the tradition goes. (1) 


Ng sold | 
Said. Waa WK at Aidt fiat a Al Geel area: Ber MeHaa YarL! 2 | 





pis. 16 ] BOOK SIx 623 


1 SSE SR SEERA ERE ERRATA EEA ARRAN EAA SE 

moat wutlaga aera: deca: | Fees sien feasafafas Frat! 2 | 

Narada said : O embodied soul, may you be blessed. (Just) look at your father and 
mother. (Your) kinsmen and relations (too) are deeply agonized with grief caused by 
(separation from) you. (2) Entering your body (again), and surrounded by your kinsmen, 
enjoy the luxuries provided by your (royal) father, for the rest of your life (which has been 
apparently cut short by your untimely death), and ascend the imperial throne (when your 
father is no more). (3) 
HY SaTq 

aaa wa Rt oamisuaqi adiiutermor reafeeqarta x | 

aaa era aree: lad wa fe wader vata sen faa: 1 & | 

am ae wat tod aqea:iudeha ata viet ae ada | 

Aone wat wet aad qi aadea fF wart una aaea fei! 

w aft sie: a fet Prega: | aeetueaa daca fe qa adi ¢ | 


wa aise: Yan wl wales: wew i srarmmranifasaran wat wy:1 eI 
a genic: wigan: a: wis ati wr: adfeat ser duit Woreleat: 1201 
Wed stent f Wor a ate 3 frame sadam: UMaaMAL: 12 I 


The soul replied : In what (particular) incarnation were these people (the souls of 
Citraketu and his numerous queens) parents to me, who have been revolving by force of 
Karma (destiny) through the species of gods, lower animals and human beings .? (4) 
Indeed by turns (during different incarnations) all people actually come to be relatives and 
kinsmen, adversaries and mediators, friends and neutrals and even bitter enemies in 
relation to one another. (5) (Even) as gold and other commodities pass from one place to 
another among (different) men, so does an embodied soul pass through (different) wombs 
and (different) procreants. (6) The relation with men (even of an) animals (cow etc.) yet 
living (not torn away by death) is indeed perceived to be temporary (and not abiding). (And) 
the feeling of mineness with respect to (such) a being really continues only so long as there 
exists a relation with it. (7) Similarly a Jiva that has found its way into a (particular) womb 
(and thereby entered into the relation of a son with another embodied soul that has 
begotten or given birth to it) is (really) unrelated with any inasmuch as it is eternal 
(birthless) and free from the consciousness of being a son etc. Itis only solong asitis seen 
related to another (as a son) that the other Jiva (that begot or gave birth to it) can claim 
it as its own (and not after that relation has ceased). (8) (Being essentially the same as 
Brahma), the Jiva is everlasting, free from decay and unmanifest (free from birth etc.). It 
is the ground of all (body, mind and so on) and self-illuminating. Being all-powerful, Jit 
manifests itself in the form of the universe by means of the Gunas (Sattva, etc.) of its own 
Maya (Prakrti). (9) Indeed none is very dear and none unwelcome, none is akin and none 
alien to it. On the other hand, it is the one (dispassionate) witness of the varied minds of 
friends as well as of foes (those who do a good orill turn to him). (10) In fact, the Self earns 
neither virtue nor sin nor does it enjoy the fruit of actions (in the shape of joy and sorrow) 
and remains (altogether) unconcerned as it were. For it is the witness of both causes and 


effects and (altogether) independent. (11) 
Sy Sara 
sad ud sal wider a dal! afer qa: ach fercisssetetgort 122! 


ui den a cerngs etittctneateaste land came enarse 


ee ee eee Sonam Cerne rer ene eS 
i. =. Pe PR ie aT ae 





> 


624 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis F 
We RR Re RE RR ERR RR RRR RR RR RR RR RRR RR RE RET RE Re Ree He Re Me Be He Me RE Be He Be Be MT Be HY We Be Be Be Br Ke He He Sr Ke Hr Hr Be Wr wr tiemtresaten 6 S 
re 


fda Widal Fildes Ghealfaa: frat: | das ae Wenrrswaiary 123 | 
SIS AlSARAA  AGSASATA: | AHSATAT cesarean | 
AAA HERA ATA FETAL | BY | 
a sa wiaaqgien farehdiesiinte: | Teretpartacenrd: auustiea fee: 124) 
aifesn fated are paquasiotna: aa | Aa TU ATaTeraeT 126 | 
a aS woe ma wade swarane: wit faemtamarr ziew! 
so ae wad areca infel seateg AA: AANA AF 1RC1 
wal fasiaarara WaAMagda | STANT ITT Prartetgea 129 1 
MAMA edge qa: | gate «= ed MT fara 1201 
aaa «aC CATS AS | STATA: ANSeTA: ACHAT: 121 
afte aase fasaafa wedi gaafya genfaert a sero aa: 1221 
at waht a facade: srdies fact camadadiseaey 1231 
Serra ierant sat meat feta: Teantta pag | 
qaraql | lefreraTe TU TAF 1 
HUG HPSAlAe eta UIT UA UTA ATT 12h | 


Sri Suka continued : Having spoken thus, the spirit (of the departed prince) 
disappeared; and, struck with wonder, those kinsmen of his then gave up mourning (for him), 
cutting asunder their ties of affection. (12) After cremating the body (of the dead child) and 
performing the rites appropriate to the occasion, the kinsmen (of the prince) set aside their 
affection, which is so difficult to get rid of and which is a source of grief, infatuation, fear and 
agony. (13) Remembering the words of the sage Angira (which opened their eyes) the 
queens that had brought about the death of the child (by poisoning it) and had lost their 
splendour due to (the sin of) child-murder, felt (much) ashamed and performed penance on 
the bank of the (holy) Yamuna in that city (Mathura) by way of atonement for infanticide, as 
prescribed by the Brahmanas, O great king (Pariksit). (14) Having thus realized the Self 
through the words of the sages (Angira and Narada), Emperor Citraketu rose from the 
deceptive well of metempsychosis even as an elephant (lit., that which drinks with two 
organs, viz., the mouth and the proboscis) would from the mire of a lack. (15) Having 
performed his ablutions in the water of) the (holy) Yamuna with due ceremony and gone 
through other sacred rites accomplished with water, and with his senses entirely subdued, 
he bowed in silence at the feet of the two (celebrated) sons of Brahma (the creator). (16) 
Then the divine sage Narada joyously taught, it is said, the following prayer to that devotee 
(Citraketu), who had resorted to him (for protection) and had fully controlled his mind:—(17) 
"Hail to You, the divine Vasudeva (presiding over the intellect and) denoted by the mystical 
syllable OM, and obeisance to You as Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Sankarsana (presiding 
over reason, the mind and ego respectively). We contemplate on You (in all these four 
manifestations). (18) Hail to You, who are absolute consciousness and an embodiment of 
supreme bliss, who revelin Your own Self and are (perfectly) tranquiland whose eye is (ever) 
turned away from duality (who look upon everything as non-different from Yourself). (19) Hail 
to You, who have kept aloof by the very realization of Your, blissful character (all) 
disturbances (in the shape of likes and dislikes) caused by Your Maya (deluding potency)! 





MILE 1 


625 

BOOK SIX ese 
DIS. 16 et O84 RCH 8 8 RR AEE A BEE BB BRE EBRD ERE BEREREBERE ECAC DEAE RB BEATRICE IE 

r body. (20) 


mighty Controller of the senses, having the cosmos for You 
Hail to You, the mignty g Pit Batcans 
h (as well 


May He protect us—He, who is absolute Consciousness without any name 
lies beyond the cause and the effect, and who shines all by Himself when speec 
as the other Indriyas) along with the mind has withdrawn, failing to reach (comprehend) 
Him. (21) Hail to You, the selfsame Brahma, in which this universe stays and (finally) gets 
merged (at the time of universal dissolution) and from which it evolves (at the time of 
creation) and that pervades all even as earth pervades all earthen vessels. (22) bow to 
that (transcendent Reality) which the organs of action fail to reach (through their active 
power) and the mind, intellect and the senses of perception fail to comprehend (by their 
cognitive faculty), and which extends (both) within and without like ether. (23) The body, 
Indriyas (Senses of perception and organs of action), vital airs, mind and intellect—these are 
stirred into activity only when charged with a ray of the (aforesaid all-conscious) Spirit (viz., 
during the waking and dream states alone) and not at other times (during deep sleep, 
unconsciousness etc., when they are not so charged), even as iron which is not fully heated 
cannot burn. (How, then, can they reach or comprehend that which is the source of their 
activity ?) And it is Brahma alone that acquires the name of 'subject' (the conscious Self) 
during the waking and other states (Hence there is no question even of the Jiva's knowing 
the supreme Brahma). (24) Hail to Lord Sankarsana (the Supreme Person), denoted by 
(the mystical syllable) OM and possessed of supreme might, the Spouse of Goddess 
Mahalaksmi (who embodies in Herself the highest glory and fortune) ! Hail to You, O 
supreme Ruler of the universe, whose lotus-like feet are fondly and softly kneaded by all 
the hosts of principal devotees with-the lotus-buds of their hands. (25) 
Mh SaTaq 
waa «soa «feet ane: | darafeRal Aieh aA SRY WA 12E1 
fared feat at amt aresnitai araera «= aaenstat: + Aantfed: 1201 
wag Ped fae emda fared a otssfted qa: 12c1 
ae: cpicaaretttidergrartia: | STA | aR ANAT AUT renAL 1281 
TOTTCH TI Raritaraa Uptlentleharnfeansury | 
TeAdeAett di aa  fagamues: sx 1301 
dea eared ich eae: MSA: HUONSAAA: | 


ee Frere Wa-saatteladat TTS Mead aS 133 | 

Sri Suka went on : Having taught the aforesaid prayer to that devotee (Citraketu), who 
had Sought his protection, the (celestial) sage Narada returned with the sage Angira, O king 
(Pariksit), to the abode of Brahma (the Self-born); while Emperor Citraketu duly repeated that 
prayer taught by Narada for seven days (consecutively) with perfect concentration of mind, 
subsisting on (mere) water. (26-27) And then at the expiry of seven nights the aforesaid king 
attained the permanent lordship of the Vidyadharas (the artists of heaven) by virtue of the 
prayer being (still) repeated (by him). (28) After that, in a few days, the course of his mind 
having been (fully) the illumined through (the repetition of) the same prayer, Citraketu betook 
himself to the (holy) feet of Lord Sesa (the serpent-god), the adored (even) of the gods. (29) 











626 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


er ersacenbbeaseseuieaactawssesensanieendeso e160 
nt Ht Hr 


He saw the Lord in a form white as a lotus fibre, clad in blue and adorned with a brilliant 
diadem, armlets, girdle and wristlets, marked witha cheerful countenance and reddish eyes 
and surrounded by rings of Siddheswaras (the chief among those who have attaineq 
perfection). (30) All his sins having been wiped out by the (very) sight of the Lord, and his 
mind clear and rid of all impurities, Citraketu silently approached the most ancient Person 
with intensified devotion; and with tears of love in his eyes and hair standing on end, he 
bowed to Him. (31) Repeatedly wetting the support under the lotus-feet of the illustrious Lord 
with his tear-drops of love, and all utterance having been hindered by (an outburst of) love, 
he was notat all able for a long time to extol Him properly in a loud voice. (32) Then, having 
composed his mind by dint of reason and restrained the outgoing tendency of all his senses, 
he recovered his faculty of Speech and addressed in the following words that Preceptor of 
the universe, whose (divine) Body stands described in scriptures (such as the Pafcaratra) 
treating of Devotion. (33) 


FaAhqeara 
asa faa: aaafafe: arafasiam farafsrstac | 
famarasta oa wsamamet a  siealsfiHeu: 13x! 
aa =—s-_: fasta: GG Wet wWiecateiasadt | 
Poa set SATATETA Wat waa Gera 134 1 
UMA Uae aera Fafa: | 
Meads a Gat a Ya aAcardmess 13e1 
fererrtchaee ferenqa: aafrderporaRsae: | 
wa Uda ched: Agecifentlefiteterad: 13191 
qaratiers «Sat eC (sdf TT HOA 3C1 
ama wat 4 wa tehd an asain | 
MANA ATO TUTORS TSM 132 
haahia dal Waal aes Wad  exiqaqae 
Rist af Wa sem aqureadscanta ixol 
fasanitt aa qo wueafa an adit a ae 
fant that a: fee: | atfereriage: Ive | 
o at foo: feard: wu air 
eset 4«da 280: 3S eritsat i Ctgoeed: v2 
4 citer adem war gftfed 9 arradt end: | 
Rerereracncretay aera aquread warat: 1¥3 | 


qeaRM aged dae HUTA Taft isu 





: 627 
Dis. 16] BOOK SIX seo aa 


CRAREREEAE AEE LAE ALLELE AAA A AERA AAA EEE ERE EEE ES SN  ——— 
faletatat ARC (iC (&$ssC TIT ATAT SAREraRa | 
fegat UT: feafea afadha § Wella: ISI 
THETA wad TAs ieaateaane | 
grafaarenda Haha fuer UHEaTa 1S9 | 
aa meq faves: gaa a afeanag fara senha | 
yauss ata aa ff adt aml wnads aaa isc! 


Citraketu said : O unconquerable Lord, You stand conquered by the righteous, 
that have subdued their self and are possessed of an unruffled mind; and they too 
are conquered by (none else than) You—You, who bestow Your very Self on those 
that adore You in a disinterested spirit, exceedingly compassionate as You are. (34) 
The evolution, maintenance and dissolution etc., of the universe, O Lord, are, as a 
matter of fact, a (mere) sport on Your part. (And) the creators of the universe 
(Brahma and the other lords of creation) are (so many) parts of the Cosmic Being 
(who is only a part manifestation of Yours); yet in vain do they try to outshine one 
another due to the consciousness of their being an independent lord. (35) You exist 
before (the appearance of) the atom (the minutest cause) and at the end (after the 
dissolution) of the infinite universe (the final product) and likewise pervade the 
intermediate stages (too); while You are without beginning, middle or end. That 
which is constant at the beginning as well as at the end of phenomenal existences 
is constant in the middle too. (36) This egg-shaped universe—which further resem- 
bles a bud inasmuch as it is enveloped, they say, by seven sheaths in the shape of 
earth etc., each outer sheath being ten times thicker than the one enclosed by it—is 
swimming within You like an atom alongwith countless millions of (other similar) eggs. ! 
Hence You are (spoken of as) infinite. (37) They are (really) brutes in human form, who | 
in their thirst for the pleasures of sense worship the gods (who represent so many 
sparks of Your infinite glory) but not You, the Supreme. The blessings enjoyed by them 
(as gifts from those gods), O Lord, perish (as a matter of course) after (the end of) 
those gods even as the blessings enjoyed by the dependants of a royal house 
(automatically) come to an end after (the extinction of) that house. (38) Entreaties 
made to You—who are possessed of a body which is all consciousness and not a 
product of the three Gunas—even for the pleasures of sense, O Supreme Lord, do not 
make for rebirth any more than fried seeds put forth shoots; for pairs of opposites 
(such as likes and dislikes, which lead to rebirth) proceed (only) from the (three) Gunas. 
(While You are entirely free from them and therefore people adoring You even with an 
interested motive gradually get rid of the three Gunas). (39) (Such being the value of 
adoring You even for the attainment of sensuous enjoyments,) You surpass all (confer 
an incomparable boon on Your devotees) on such occasions, O unconquerable 
Lord, when You preach the flawless Bhagavata Dharma (the easy means of attaining 
to the Lord as taught by the Lord Himself), which even sages (like the great Sanatkumara 
Ever) revelling in the Self and having nothing to call their own resort to for (the attainment 
Of) loving Devotion to the Lord (which transcends all the four objects of human pursuit 
including Liberation and is therefore known as the fifth object—Pancama Purusartha).(40) 
Differential notions such as 'I'and ‘You’, 'mine' and ‘Yours’ do not disturb (the mind of) men 
treading on this path, as they do in the case of (those following) other cults (such as the 
Cult of rituals). (Besides,) a ritual act which is performed by one having a differential 
outlook is ideed impure (because characterized by likes and dislikes), yields a perishable 








628 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Dis. 
LQKAELKLKAKKVALLKAAALANLKHHNKLKNAMVWAKACHKLKHBAHAHLKAAHAAHNHAN LH LK HD A HH Ke HK HK Hr Hr Hr Hr Hy Hr Hr Hr HY Sr Wr Hr BY Br Hr eS 
EEE eos re aaa aa aaa ttt f 


fruit and is fraught with sin (in the shape of violence etc.). (41) What good can be expecteg 
either to oneself or to another and what object can be gained through a ritual which is 
harmful to one's own self as well as to others? On the other hand, pain is inflicted on Yoy* 
through self-mortification and sin is also incurred (as well as Your displeasure) through 
persecution of another. (42) Your point of view (viz., that people should achieve the object 
of their life through devotion to You), with which as a matter of fact You preached the cult 
of Devotion—the cult which is exclusively followed by the worthy who regard the 
multitudes of living beings, both mobile and immobile, as their very self—is never 
belied.(48) It is not at all impossible, O Lord, that all the sins of men should be wiped out 
by Your (very) sight, when (it is known that) even an outcaste is freed from (the bondage 
of) birth and death by hearing Your name (only) once. (44) Therefore, O Lord, we now have 
(all) the impurities of (our) heart (in the shape of sins and evil proclivities) wiped off by Your 
(very) sight. How could that which was predicted by the divine sage (Narada) Your 
(celebrated) devotee, be otherwise? (45) All that is done by the people in this world, O 
infinite Lord, is known to You, the Soul of the universe. There is nothing in particular to be 
revealed to You, the Supreme Preceptor, just as there is nothing to be shown to the sun by 
fire-flies. (46) Hail to You, the almighty God, the Controller of the creation, maintenance 
and dissolution of the universe, the purest of the pure, whose true nature cannot easily be 
understood by the sensually-minded strivers due to their notion of difference. (47) The 
creators of the universe (Brahma and the other lords of creation) are active (only) when 
You (the Cosmic Person) are active (inspire them with activity); the senses of perception 
are able to perceive their objects (only) when You (their Controller) are disposed to 
perceive (the objective world); (and) the terrestrial globe appears on one of Your heads 
like a mustard seed. Obeisance be to You, that (celebrated) Lord with a thousand 


heads.(48) 
Meh Jaa 
Gear Warartraeaaaed | fanaa wMaasahd hese ise 


Sri Suka went on: Duly extolled in this way and (highly) pleased, Lord Ananta spoke (as 
follows) to the said Citraketu, the chief of the Vidyadharas, O Pariksit (a scion of Kuru). (49) 


MTA AAT 
TARE «A Sed «= AAR! Gfeista dat ws faa asiara A 140! 
Me aA Ady yet waded: | ect Wt Ha AANA aad aque 
Olen fata wile aie add sua a Aa ang ala wars Hari&2! 
am Wie: yeat fad agafa ara smamaeese aa wy sferd: 143! 
TW wend sawn are: 1 aarti fagra dase ot Stuy! 
at Se: Ges: wm Aceaealigqa a ffl wal amemaaale AIG! 
sua Od: «Fa: $= searosfdateen: | srafa cafaiiela aeat wel dd Ue IG | 
aatesit «Get dad 9 faanie:idd: dan wet aera aasfr: 1401 
* The Lord says in Srimad Bhagavadgita :— 
aad: We yoda: | Ai Pada aq fasueaar 
(XVII. 6) 


“Men who emaciate the elements constituting their body as well as Me, the Supreme Spirit, dwelling in their heart-—know 
these senseless people as having a demoniac disposition.” 





Dis. 16 ] BOOK SIX pace 
Sr Be BASSES BLA SAREE BRE BEB EAE BEAR RES SBR ERI RAAB LASIBSE SEE TE 


osede UT at aafegmesran| snes at A Gaga A Hera 14S 
wea aRget dt: wefardaqiasd aerteat ageafartenta: 148! 
qa genta galt wadt fra: | adshahronte:aea aA Ga Also! 
wa faada geen gon feaneran. stems uf gaat waranty 1&8 | 
qeamiabarin: Gt asai wAfaqaaas! Aaa: eat wad 12! 
Urata Aqaatrargquraeea: | ware: date Hal aendlenesta 163 | 
ares IS aa angela maa faeafa ex! 


The Lord said : You have fully achieved your purpose through the instruction which 
was given to you by the sages Narada and Angira about (the means of propitiating) Me 
and the prayer (taught by Narada) as well as by My sight. (50) In fact, all created beings 
are (the same as) I; nay, | am the Self (the Inner Controller) as well the Creator of (all) living 
beings. The Veda (which, as the Word of God, is identified with the Supreme) and the 
transcendent Reality (revealed by the same) both are My eternal bodies. (51) A man 
should recognize his own self as extending through (pervading) the (whole objective) 
universe (as the subject) and the universe as comprised in his own self (as the object of 
his experience). Nay, he should regard both (his own self as well as the universe) as 
pervaded by Me (the Prime Cause) and even so both as conceived in Me. (52) (Just) as 
aman dreams himself as fast asleep and (also) perceives (in another dream forming part 
of the first dream) the world (in the form of mountains, forests and so on existing 
elsewhere) within himself and (again), on waking from the (second) dream, visualizes 
himself as lying (on a bed) in a part of a room (realizes himself as awake while still 
dreaming), (even) so, realizing awakeness and the other states of the mind (which is an 
adjunct of the Jiva) as mere products of the Maya (deluding potency) of the (Supreme) Self, 
(one should fix one's mind on the Supreme Spirit, the witness of these states. (53-54) Know 
Me to be that transcendental Reality, the (real) Self (of a Jiva), identified with which an 
embodied soul, (that is) fast asleep, is conscious of its deep sleep at that time as well as 
of the supersensuous gratification (enjoyed by it). (55) The consciousness that runs 
through (the state of) deep sleep as well as through awakeness and continues (even) 
beyond the two in the case of the Jiva (embodied soul) that is aware of both is (no other 
than) that transcendent Brahma (the Absolute). (56) If the aforesaid Brahma—which is My 
own essence—is forgotten by the Jiva, It comes to be viewed as different from the self; and 
from this (differentiation) follows the (circuit of) mundane existence of the soul, which consists 
in passing from one body to another and undergoing one death after another. (57) He who fails 
to realize his own essential nature (even) after attaining here (birth in) the human 
Species—where one can hope to acquire (both) knowledge (of the Self, based on the 
Scriptures) and wisdom (direct knowledge of the Self)—can get no peace of mind 
anywhere. (58) Remembering the hardship (involved) in (all) worldly endeavour and the 
contrary results following from such endeavour, and even so (bearing in mind) the 
fearlessness consequent on the withdrawal from worldly activity, a wise man 
should cease from (all) volition in regard to such activity. (59) A husband and wife 
(generally) undertake activities for (the attainment of) happiness and for freedom from 
Suffering. From such activities (however) ensues neither cessation of suffering nor 
attainment of happiness. (60) Thus perceiving the contrary results met with by men who 
think themselves clever, and realizing the subtle nature of the Self—which transcends the 
three states of the mind (the state of awakeness, the dream state and the state of deep 
Sleep)— nay, rid of (the craving for) the pleasures of sense, both of this world and of the next, 
through one's faculty of discrimination, and contented with one's knowledge and wisdom, 


SFO aT ee HFS he ES Ore ee ~=* - = 
tes ee —_ 








630 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis.'47 


QAR RARE ALLA BAH HA BH EH HH BY Br Br Hr Br He Br Ke He Br Wr Hr Br By Hr Kr Hr Hr Br Sr Hr Hr Sr Sr Hr Hr Sr Hr Hr ee 


one should cultivate devotion to Me. (61-62) To realize the oneness of the Supreme Spirit 
and the individual soul—that is the sole interest deserving to be known by every (possible) 
means by men whose intellect’has acquired acuteness through concentration. (63) 
Carefully bearing in mind and acting up to this exhortation of mine with reverence, © 
Citraketu, you will soon acquire (true) knowledge and wisdom and attain perfection. (64) 


My Sara 
sta Tae «fac ST gE: IURaaeTe fae aderdde aft: 1g 4) 
sf SaMad AS URS Seca Wea far: Waseas A SSziseaa: 126 | 
$ri Suka continued : Having reassured Citraketu in this way, Lord Sri Hari, who is not 


only the Preceptor of the world but the soul of the universe (too), disappeared from that place 
while he stood looking on. (65) 


Thus ends the sixteenth discourse entitled "Citraketu realizes the Supreme Spirit", 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


= ~ 5 
PET ESAS AP SAY 


AA UAsaseaa: 


Discourse XVII 
Citraketu cursed (by Goddess Parvati) 


NYP SAT 
Adgrdedstaeta pat fest an: | faenentsachasrenc MAA: 1 2 1 
a ai ama eddtoraa: | Yaar Aaah yfrfa: fae: | 2 1 
Horace saUitgy arregeatakes ita | faeeneifnicay «after 3 
Ted a faa fasjeda sreadi fife aeat meq utd fager: | x | 
Miexagiad cat aga ydalel sart ten: soa Teralaeteras | 4 | 


Sri suka began again: Having made obeisance to the quarter in which Lord Ananta 
had disappeared, Citraketu, the Vidyadhara (chief), went about flying in the air. (1) 
Panegyrized by sages, Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystical powers from 
their very birth) and Caranas (celestial bards), and getting Vidyadhara women to sing 
praises of Lord Sri Hari, that eminent Yogi (ever united with the Lord) sported for ten 
thousand million years in the valleys of Mount Sumeru (the chief of the principal mountains 
of the terrestrial globe)—where one realizes (as a matter of course) the various objects of 
one's desire—his (physical) strength and organic power not (at all) diminished (through 
these long ages). (2-3) On one occasion, while flying in a resplendent aerial car bestowed 
on him by Lord Visnu, he beheld Lord Siva (who dwells on Mount Kailasa) surrounded by 
siddhas and Caranas, having folded in His arm His divine spouse (Goddess Parvati), 


seated on His lap, in an assembly of sages: Going near them, Citraketu laughed loudly and 
spoke (as follows) within the hearing of the goddess. (4-5) 


we alee: Mare Sel BIOTA! Stet Her: BTA a fret afar & 





Dis. 17] BOOK SIX 631 


AAPL ELL LLL LE LRA RR HR RA HH G8 Ge eRe BeBe RRR REAR BRERA RE ERE REBEL BE BELLA BELA IES 


HETERET ATA meaneaatt: | age fas at est: Hepat AAT 1 9 | 

weet: Meta fat wit faust near faut acta fei ¢ | 
Citraketu said : Here sits Lord Siva (the Preceptor of the universe) Himself, the chief 
figure in this assembly, engaged in expounding (the essence of) righteousness to (all) 
embodied beings, yet actually embracing His Consort in open assembly ! (6) Wearing 
matted locks and practising severe austerities, nay, the (recognized) head of assemblies of 
Brahmavadis (expositors of the Vedas) He sits hugging a woman shamelessly as an 
uncultured person ! (7) Even rustics ordinarily embrace a woman only in seclusion, while 
this (great) god, who has undertaken solemn religious vows, is clasping His Spouse in an 


open assembly ! (8) 
Ah SAA 
wear ma | eeTeifa quit aya wal BN Aaya: |< | 
gudgtiags gam agai easse tat gsr fistarenitaas 120 


Sri Suka went on: Even on hearing these (critical) remarks, Lord Siva, whose mind is 
too deep to be fathomed, heartily laughed, O Pariksit, and kept quiet; and so did the worthies 
present in the assembly and devoted to Him. (9) While Citraketu, who was ignorant of Lord 
Siva's greatness, was thus uttering much that was unbecoming of Him, Goddess Parvati 
spoke in (great) anger to that impudent Vidyadhara, who (apparently) regarded himself as 
one that had subdued one's self. (10) 

Wagqara 


st feng oth Bel ea: 3y: | safe geri Adsmt a faseieet 
tT a am fees ureft saga wren: | 
a a gan: afaet vas a at fiterefaafdt ecriee 
Waa oH WTS Agog aq | 
a: eaey: uy ait sana yseet fe cusa: 1231 
areata aAqvarleneraaadary | Aaa: Keel: ATTA: TUT 1 LX 
aa: ulead afar ate eal ade yet neat a al os fefeaaq ieul 
Goddess Parvati said : Is this fellow the (only) lord now ruling over the world and 
wielding the rod of punishment and competent to treat with disrespect wicked and 
shameless people like us ? (11) Surely neither Brahma (the lotus-born creator) nor the sons 
of Brahma—Bhrgu, Narada and so on—nor indeed the sage Sanatkumara, Lord Kapila and 
Swayambhuva Manu know (the essence of) righteousness; for they do not prohibit Lord Siva 
(the Destroyer of the universe) from violating (the principles of) righteousness. (12) This 
fellow surely deserves to be punished inasmuch as he, a vile Ksatriya, is impudent enough 
to insult (great) sages (assembled here) and teach Lord Siva (the Preceptor of the universe) 
Himself, whose lotus-feet are worthy of being contemplated on by the aforementioned, nay, 
who is the most auspicious of the auspicious. (13) This self-conceited and arrogant fellow 
is not fit to resort to the soles of feet of Lord Visnu, the very act of approaching which is 
esteemed by the virtuous. (14) Hence be reborn in the demoniac species—a most wicked 
Species—O evil-minded one, so that you may not perpetrate again in this world, such 
Offence against the exalted souls my son. (15) 


Ah SAA 
Wi xpiahddarreaed  aiseeama adi Yat anor dT 1k 1 











632 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 17 


eRe Re Re Pe Re Re eRe Ree RR ER ER RE RE BER REP RR RE BE RE Re BEB Be Re BeBe Be Be Be Br He Bee Hr Re Br Hr Br Br Hr Rr He Hr Hr Hr Br Sr Sr Br Kr Hr Hr Br BeBe Re He Be Hr Be We Be He Hr er er ey y, 


Sri Suka resumed: Thus subjected to an execration, the said Citraketu alighted from 
his aerial car and propitiated the noble lady (Goddess Parvati) with his head bent low (in the 
following words), O Pariksit (a scion of Bharata). (16) 


che 8 woedisafenfad i eadala ack yeas fe Ta ariel 
aah WiaSsdaMalfed: | WA FES A g:G A Yeh Uda Uae 1221 
Saran a want cdl I ae Sal: leat AAAS SIH Wa a 1ee1 
TOA Ud H: BWI: Hl AWE: | ch: Sl Ah: Hl aT fo TE SGA AT 120 | 
Uh: sl Wa Wasa | US ae a Mel ST Te SG a Prene: 1221 
A qa mise: sda a waite at za aw @:! 
aq daa fren qa 2A UW: FA Wa UW: iz 
ama doffaat wt gaa guna fener 
aa wad a yeast: wikot Waddsamcad 1231 
AY Walead A wl aramtena wala i aaa stale AA aca Ula 1e~i 


Citraketu said : | accept Your imprecation (as a welcome and loving gift from You), with 
my palms joined together O Mother! For whatever is pronounced by divinities with reference 
to a mortal is undoubtedly that which was predestined for him. (17) Deluded by ignorance 
and revolving in this whirligig of mundane existence, an embodied soul experiences joy and 
sorrow everywhere at every time. (18) Neither oneself nor anyone else is responsible for 
(one's) joy and sorrow. A fool alone holds himself as well as another responsible for them. (19) 
In this world of matter (which is a product of the three Gunas or modes of Prakrti) what 
distinction is there between an imprecation and a blessing, heaven and hell or even joy and 
sorrow ? (20) The one Lord brings forth living beings by His own Maya (creative will) and 
(further) ordains their bondage and liberation as well as their happiness and misery, though 
free from bondage (Himself). (21) To Him, whois alike to all and free from attachment, none 
is dear or hateful, none is a kinsman or relation, and none is His own or alien. He has no love 
for pleasure; how (then) can there be anger (in Him)? (22) Yet action, which (is either virtuous 
or sinful and) flows from His energy (in the form of Maya) conduces to the joy and sorrow, 
welfare and injury, bondage and liberation, birth and death and the circuit of worldly life of 
embodied souls. (23) Hence | do not propitiate You with a view to being rid of Your 
imprecation, O noble lady. (Only be pleased to) forgive what You consider as unjustly said 
by me (even though it was uttered in a purely good spirit), O virtuous lady ! (24) 


Sora 
gia ower «fife «= feerchatieen i am wfaana usadi: Bradleal: 1241 
aie Ta tel Valiant catcatet unamt a saa Ize | 


Sri Suka resumed: Having thus appeased Lord Siva and Goddess Parvati (who have 
their abode on Mount Kailasa), O Pariksit (a chastiser of foes), Citraketu went his way by 
his aerial car, while the aforesaid (divine) Couple looked on wondering. (25) Thereupon 
Lord Rudra spoke as follows to His Spouse (Goddess Parvati) within the hearing of the 
gods and sages, demons and Siddhas, as well as of His attendants. (26) 


Mex SAT 
qeaele waren agen: | Arete FATA HVS ARIAT 1219 | 





pis. 17] Be Be eRe BERRA RR HR BPH he cs BOOK SIX 633 | 
2B RRR SAS RRA A SR AES HAAR ESS AAAS ELA EIT 
anraurant: dad aA HABA fasata | eanicertaragta araefafata: 1221 
afeat | ete  eerienctear ae aU yfickr ants wa 7 1Re 
sfadega: Yet wite sami ques fia «fac: 1301 
area 9 wtata wy gedt TT Weaeradiatont Ae wise saa: 132! 
we faist 4 garam a3 seu qa: ata: | 
fart wefan | aaa getter: 1821 
a oented ta: crise: wa: oish at 1 seanreyarai aa sya srat aft: 1331 
qa «ada Femniisichd: Bais: | ada aaee ae We Aareqatra: 13x! 
cera faera: ered: Geeg vay | WEgery TTR Uhh 14 


Sri Rudra said : You have seen (with your own eyes), O fair one, the glory of the high- 
souled servants of servants of Lord Sri Hari of marvellous deeds, who are free from craving 
(of every kind). (27) All those (who are devoted to Lord Narayana have no fear from any quarter 
whatsoever for they find the same use (no use) for heaven, for final beatitude and even for 
the infernal regions (perceiving as they do the same Reality pervading everywhere). (28) 
It is (only) through the deluding potency of God that souls are invested with a body and it 
is due to their connection with a body that pairs of opposites such as joy and sorrow, life and 
death, execration and benediction are experienced by embodied souls. (29) The notion of 
desirability and otherwise (with reference to pleasure and pain etc.), too is really the outcome 
of a man's ignorance (and therefore illusory) just like the distinction of pleasurable and 
painful experiences etc., with reference to one's own self (in a dream), and has been 
precisely conceived as the notion of a snake etc., with reference to a wreath of flowers. (30) 
There is no object in this world worth resorting to in particular for men cherishing devotion 
to Lord Vasudeva and equipped with the strength of wisdom and dispassion. (31) Neither 
myself nor Brahma (the creator), nor the sages Sanatkumara and Narada, nor even the 
(other) sages (Bhrgu, Angira and so on) begotten by Brahma nor the rulers of gods (Indra, 
Yama and others) know His intention. Much less can those accounting themselves 
independent lords (of the universe), though mere parts of His partial manifestations, know 
His (true) nature. (32) None indeed is dear and none hateful to Him; none is His own and 
none alien to Him either. Being the very Self of all living beings, Sri Hari is the beloved of all 
creatures. (33) And this highly blessed Citraketu is His beloved servant, looking on all with 
the same eye and tranquil (by nature); and indeed | too am a devotee of the immortal Lord (and 
hence did not feel perturbed by his behaviour at all). (84) Therefore, you should have no wonder 
in regard to (the behaviour of those) high-souled men who are devotees of Lord Visnu (the 
Supreme Person) and tranquil (by nature) and who view all with the same eye. (35) 


Sele SATA 
sft spar amad: fraetaRrrise aya ard Ue eet ferraferetat 1381 
sft smmadt em: siequeds: qat ways WAT TaUT 139 | 
33 wapéixort adi attire: qa gafafeeadt  arafemratiga: 1321 
UR adam am a ufgef i qrergenmds BROT | Tae: 1391 
sfrerafing oo qua | ferwchtterers: | rere fore At TeNfaTeA Ivo | 
A Wdatdeea sega avad: usd! stead ER Beat A alt aat aay xe 
aft SfeeITae Here URS Stecrat TEeHY Farchg MA ATA TACAISEATA: 18181 








634 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 18 


Co ieeasuaussaassasseensnxacusenusenvsecsssausanuesserstesserssesssssraenesbeaee © 


S$ri Suka went on: On hearing this speech of Lord Siva, Goddess Uma (Parvati), Oking 
(Pariksit), was freed from astonishment and felt pacified in mind. (36) Though fully capable 
of pronouncing a counter-curse, Citraketu (a devotee of the Lord) accepted the curse of the 
divine lady with reverence. Such (ideal non-violence) is the characteristic of a pious soul. (37) 
Hurled into the demoniac species, he sprang up from the sacred fire, called Daksinagni, of 
the god Twasta and became known as Vitra, (still) endowed with spiritual knowledge and 
wisdom. (38) | have thus told you all that you inquired of me, viz., the cause of Vrtra's birth 
as a demon and what accounted for his devotion to the Lord. (39) By listening to this sacred 
episode of the high-souled Citraketu, revealing the glory of the votaries of Lord Visnu, one 
is completely rid of (the) bondage (of mundane existence). (40) Rising (early) in the morning, 
he who recites this episode with reverence, remaining silent (refraining from all other talk) 
and remembering Sri Hari (all the time), attains the supreme goal. (41) 


Thus ends the seventeenth discourse entitled "Citraketu cursea", 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SAP T IT SS 
IIE i SS 


SIATSTeaN Seale: 


Discourse XVIII 
An account of the birth of the Maruts (the forty-nine wind-gods) 
Myh SavaI 

"erg ut afaq: alfa aref war afer ual ara aqui nemreri 2 | 

fafeina orale afar fay sya sie a ame! Hai saa Aaa! 2 | 

ad: he: fadtatet Went Aaa | aa salted: §=gUaTaaqeHar! 3 | 

Sa Weed faa Baad: | adit aaurerdtaea Bid WI: Ga: | ¥ | 

aciiesy Agari aritnlevahns |e afass faarasuraeaet | & | 

Ya: fafa: pat ade: afet gaqitaat faa santas foo orem «& | 

WeSraMns Bed AM Uh A: A aye oa ddl Migh sy: 1 | 

SPA ea TTA AAUOT: | Salt Ocal Geel ee GMa: |S | 

sepdtquretation HRA gid: | Usteeeseal aa aAladax #12 1 
Sri Suka began again : Prsni, the spouse of Savita (the fifth of the twelve sons of Aditi, 
the progeny of the first four—viz., Vivaswan, Aryama, Pisa and Twasta—having already 
been dealt with in the foregoing discourses), brought forth (three daughters,) Savitri (the 
deity presiding over the holy Gayatri-Mantra), Vyahrti (the deity presiding over the three 
mystical syllables, Bhuh, Bhuvah and Swah prefixed to the said Gayatri-Mantra while 
repeating it and severally denoting the three worlds—earth, the intermediate region and 
heaven) and Trayi (the deity presiding over the rituals, the subject-matter of the three 
Vedas—Rogveda, Yajurveda and Samaveda) and (nine sons, viz.,) Agnihotra (the deity 


___ presiding over the act of offering oblations into the sacred fire), Pasu (the deity presiding over 
animal sacrifices), Soma (the deity presiding over a Soma sacrifice), Caturmasya (the deity - 











pis. 18 ] BOOK SIX 635 
BARES SS RR ARR RRR BR ARR RR ARR Re BERRA EARLE AERERE 
residing over the three sacrifices of the same name performed at the beginning of the three 
seasons Of four months each) and the five deities presiding over the five great daily sacrifices 
enjoined on every householder of the three twice-born classes (viz., Devayajna, Rsiyajna, 
Pitryajna, Manusyayajfia and Bhitayajfia)* (And) Siddhi, the spousé“6f Bhaga (the sixth 
son of Aditi), dear Pariksit, bore (three sons,) Mahima, Vibhu and Prabhu anda beautiful and 
virtuous daughter, Asisa (by name). (1-2) The (four) wives of Dhata (the seventh son of 
Aditi)—Kuhu (the deity Presiding over the last night of a dark fortnight), Sinivall (the deity 
presiding over the fourteenth night of a dark fortnight), Raka (the deity presiding over the last 
night of a bright fortnight) and Anumati (the deity presiding over the fourteenth night of a 
bright fortnight) severally gave birth to (four sons) Sayam (the deity presiding over dusk), 
Darsa (the deity presiding over the last day of a dark fortnight), Pratah (the deity presiding 
over the morning) and Purnamasa (the deity presiding over the last day of a bright fortnight). 
(3) Vidhata (the next or eighth son of Aditi) begot through (his wife) Kriya the (five) deities 
presiding over the sacred fires bearing the name of Purisya. (And) the spouse of Varuna (the 
god of water and the ninth son of Aditi) was Carsani, of whom was reborn the sage Bhrgu 
(a mind-born son of Brahma). (4) And the great Yogi Valmiki (another son of Varuna and the 
celebrated author of the Ramayana) sprang up, it is said, from an ant-hill (Valmika); while 
the sages Agastya and Vasistha (the sons of the sage Pulastya and Brahma respectively) 
were reborn as the sons of the gods Mitra (the tenth son of Aditi) and Varuna, who discharged 
in a jar their vital fluid, that had escaped in the presence of (the celestial nymph) Urvasi. The 
god Mitra (further) begot through (his spouse) Rewati (three sons, viz.,) Utsarga, Arista and 
Pippala. (5-6) Indra, the lord of paradise (and the eleventh son of Aditi), procreated through 
(his wife) Saci (the daughter of the demon Puloma) three sons, O dear Pariksit—Jayanta, 
Rsabha and Midhwan, (who constituted) the third: this is what we have heard. (7) From (the 
loins of) Lord Upendra (the twelfth and youngest son of Aditi, who took colossal strides in 
order to measure three paces of land promised to Him by the demon king Bali and) who 
(originally) assumed the form of the divine Dwarf by His (own) Maya (creative will), through 
His spouse Kirti, sprang up (a son) Brhacchloka (by name); and from (the loins of) the 
latter sprang up Saubhaga and other sons. (8) We shall recount later on (in Book VIII) the 
distinguished achievements, excellences and deeds of valour of that high-souled son of 
the sage Kasyapa and (also) how He actually descended (on the meterial plane) through 
Aditi. (9) 
BY Hee aM aida Ai aa Arad: sin selel afera Aigo 


faeida aad  saenaatedti fewanfrqain fewenas: aitfiat ice 
froceahriatal wae aati sere ada amt Gea Ade: Tarr kz! 
Wed wrse Be Neda sl accra fete a ug fastacsrett 1231 
‘friscea sigan faadsqmidgea aitulalga weed dd: 1ext 
see aatiafatga arnfafieams aisteaa afraet tet arerfatieae: 19% 1 
sage watat arent Merde feted = Aeliccoretentaaion: 126 | 
TUR «= URI ASMA Tega: HRelaa: Vaca 191 
amt ancea filet SA AMS aa ATA Per ya: 1ec1 
Wed 2 fed: Tal : Id STAI: He Ata FAUT AAA 128 I 
| now (proceed to) tell you about the scions of the sage Kasyapa by Diti, among whom was 


* A detailed account of these sacrifices has already been given in the foot-note below V. xxvi. 18. 











636 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 18 


AQAAAAAAALAALALALAAANAHKAAAAAAAAAKANAA LALLA ALAHN HAA AH AH Ke Ke KH BH Br Me Hr He Be Hr Ge Hr Hr Hr He Hr Sr Br He Hr Br Hr Hr Hr Br Hr Br Br kr Br Br kr ey fire, 


born the illustrious devotee of the Lord, Prahrada, and even so Bali (Prahrada's granq- 
son).(10) Diti (at first) had only two sons, adored by the Daityas and the Danavas (alike), who 
have (already) been spoken of under the name of Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa (in Book 
IIl).(11) Hiranyakasipu's wife, Kayadhu by name, who was a daughter of Jambha by Danuand 
had been given away by the former (to Hirnayakasipu), gave birth to four sons—Samhrada, 
in the first instance, and (then in order) Anuhrada, Hrada and Prahrada as well. Their sister, 
Simhika by name, got from (her husband, the demon) Vipracitti (a son named) Rahu, whose 
head, even while he was drinking nectar (disguised as a god in the assembly of the gods), 
Sti Hari lopped off with His discus (vide VIII. ix. 24-25). Krti, the wife of Sarhhrada 
(HiranyakaSipu's eldest son) bore through him (ason named) Paficajana. (12—14) Dhamani, 
the wife of Hrada (Hiranyakasipu's third son) brought forth (two sons) Vatapi and Ilwala. It was 
llwalawho cooked (his brother) Vatapi (in the form of a ram) for the sake of his (honoured guest, 
(the celebrated sage) Agastya. (15) Baskala and Mahisa were the two sons of Anuhrada 
(Hiranyakasipu's second son ) by (his wife) Surmya; while Virocana was the son of Prahrada, 
and Bali was the son of Virocana by (his wife) Devi. (16) From (the loins of) Bali through (his 
wife) ASanaya (the deity presiding over hunger), were born a hundred sons, the eldest of whom 
was Bana. The glory of Bali, which deserves to be celebrated in beautiful verse, will be 
recounted only hereafter (in Book Vill). (17) Having propitiated Lord Siva (who has His abode 
on Mount Kailasa), the demon Bana attained the first place among His attendants. As the 
guardian of his capital, the Lord actually stays near him even today. (18) (Besides 
HiranyakasSipu and Hiranyaksa) Diti had forty-nine more sons, (known as) the Maruts (wind- 
gods). They all remained issueless and were converted into his own class (godhood) by 
Indra (the ruler of the gods). (19) 


aa a sat mandala ati sau sifaa: aed fH aaa aad fe a: 1201 

sa sed segs fe wa weiukeea weet canrenqda ie 
The king (Pariksit) said : Having rid them of their demoniac disposition, which was innate 
to them, O (my) preceptor, how were they converted into godhood by Indra? What good offices 
did they render to him (which prompted him to bring about this change in them)? (20) Even 


these seers, O (holy) Brahmana, are keen to know this truth along with me. Therefore, be 
pleased, O worshipful sage, to explain this to us. (21) 


Yd sara 
GIFEU RIC | a aertaturdat PrReraredacanstad | 
: aus «AMY «OAM OTe «6a. deta: 1221 
Sita continued : Having heard this reverent, brief and (yet) significant inquiry of king 
Pariksit (who had been protected by Lord Visnu Himself in the form of Sri Krsna), and 


welcoming it with a heart full of joy, the omniscient and well-known sage Suka (the son of 


Badarayana, more popularly known as Vedavyasa), spoke (as follows), O Saunaka (who 
stand vowed to a long course of sacrifices) ! (22) 


NYP SAA 
ecg $ feft: eatin fae i aaa attend sae welfare 123 | 
eq 2 Wqedrsarmycar| sifgaget ut mafia wa WaT 12s! 
Parramatta Al Wd depd ware fe ae frat aa: 1241 
ATTA dete Faqasada: | Nesta sae WaeM Wat fe AIzE! 








~— 


pis. 18 ] BOOK SIX 637 


BRR GER He Re RR 
gr br br BBB BC SCHL SEER RR RBBB Be BER BEBE BeBe BEAT BeBe BERR AERA BEBE BE BEBE AACR ARERR RARER READE 


sa TT UiTeaTH a | BETTI ya | eA AT NR 
vee Ua IRM TAtaeaia: | oat ae wasn Oferarargataut: 1221 
w ial setyat fagria lager | stefan feersht 3 afer fe arferfer 12¢ 1 
famieterayTst  yraet asa: | Raat ash weal gar gat afdted 1Z01 
wa VANRNA We aa: feet see uit eines a1set 


Sri Suka resumed : Diti, whose sons (Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa) had been slain 
by Lord Visnu, the Ally of Indra (the chief of the gods), and who was (consequently) burning 
with rage kindled by grief, pondered as below -—(23) "When shall | have an undisturbed 
sleep, having brought about the death of the voluptuous cruel, hard-hearted and sinful Indra 
(who has been instrumental in causing the death of his own half-brothers) ? (24) He who 
seeks to hurt (other) beings for the sake of his (own) body—which, though (once) designated 
as a king (ultimately, when dead) goes by the name of (is transformed into) worms (if buried 
and thus consumed by worms), or that of excrement (if exposed and devoured by 
carnivorous beings such as dogs and jackals, vultures and crows), or that of ashes (in 
cremated)—is he alive to his (higest) interests ? (Certainly not). For damnation (invariably) 
follows from such hostility to (other) beings. (25) (Therefore) let me devise some means 
whereby a son may be born to me, that may quell the pride of the aforesaid Indra, who looks 
upon this (perishable) body as everlasting and whose mind knows no restraint." (26) With 
this idea (uppermost in her mind) she constantly pleased her husband (the sage KaSyapa) 
through (personal) service, affection, humility and self-control. (27) Knowing as she did the 
heart of her husband, she captivated his mind, O Pariksit, by her supreme devotion, 
charming and sweet words winsome smiles and sidelong glances. (28) Thus infatuated by 
that clever lady, and powerless (against her womanish charms), the sage, though learned, 
said, "All right! (Your wish shall be granted.)" Such stupefaction of men by a woman (through 
her devoted conduct) indeed is not to be wondered at. (29) Finding men (absolutely) 
unattached at the dawn of creation, Brahma (the lord of created beings) converted one half 
of his body into the fair sex, who robbed men of their judgment. (30) Waited upon in this way, 
O dear son (Pariksit) ! by that lady (Diti), the glorious sage Kasyapa felt highly pleased; and, 
welcoming her, he laughingly spoke (as follows). (31) 

P2L4 SATA 


ato06am0CO amare: Maetsenarad | fern adit asia &: HM se ArT: 1321 
ufta fe anit tad UA Bai ama: Paya araca: fora: uit: 1331 
@ wa  dantheatrectaenfead: | gad wa Ger: Gita aireayR 12y 1 
aes ATs: SHASHAM: FABM | Aeris OATATAM AT 13% | 
sé waanhint we desea afd iad aed ered Weoury 131 


KaSyapa said : Ask (of me) a boon of your choice, O beautiful one; | am pleased with 
you, O irreproachable lady. When the husband is fully pleased, what desire of a woman 
remains unattainable here as well as hereafter ? (32) The husband alone has been declared 
to be the supreme Deity for women. Although (as a matter of fact,) Lord Vasudeva, the 
Consort of Sri (the goddess of beauly and prosperity), dwelling In (presiding over) the mind 
Of all created beings, is the supreme Deity, it is the said Lord alone who is worshipped by 
MEn in the guise of (various) divinities diversely conceived under (different) names (Indra 
8nd so on) and forms (wielding a thunderbolt and other distinctive weapons); and it is He 
(again) who is worshipped by women as appearing in the form of their husband. (33-34) 








638 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 18 


BeBe Be Re Ree Re RRR RRR LAL RRR BRB BEBE BEBE EBB RL RE BE Be Be BE BTR BE BE RRC BT HE Re BEA BY He He Be BY HH Hr Br HTH BeBe Br Bt Br Bt HW tr treo, 


_- Hence, women devoted to their husband and desirous of blessedness, O fair one, worship 





their husband as (an image) of God, the Soul of the universe, with undivided loyalty. (35) 
Therefore, devoutly worshipped by you, O blessed one, with such God-consciousness, | 
shall forthwith accomplish your desired object, which is something very difficult to attain for 
unchaste women. (36) 

fefreara 


aa af A we wisest qisme yap G4 A arial gat get 
Diti replied : If you would confer on me the boon of my choice, O holy one, I—who have 
lost my sons—seek (of you) an immortal son capable of slaying Indra, who caused both of 
my sons (Hiranyakasipu and Hiranyaksa) to be slain (by Lord Visnu). (37) 


frerat dect «fast fanat: adaertiamt seri: qaema A aque: 1321 
aa SRST «alfeaE Aa ela: PAT: aie Ate Ya 1381 
aishienisqaden: wuratte alfa: | fire at acraedt wre ace waft: vot 
sraied aa dus sauIqai eed AEM “lot at dq cisayixel 
4 fe mister: alors aiferererar| oft Ut wat at ae aaa Tse 
ofa deniift aaa WaT Nadiad Alea cats ataqTencad 1%3 | 
sft dere warm: edad | sare fafa afta ste a fortes Ise 
Hearing her prayer, the Brahmana sage (KaSyapa) became sad and fell a repenting. (He 
said to himself,) "Alas | a very great sin has overtaken me today. (38) Oh, given up to the 
gratification on my senses, |, a wretched fellow—whose mind has been caught in the grip 
of the Lord's Maya (deluding potency) in the form of woman today—shall surely fall into (the 
abyss of) hell. (39) What fault is there of the woman, who has (but) followed her own nature 
in this matter ? But fie upon me, ignorant that | am alas ! of my own (real) interests, as (is 
clear from the fact that) | have not been able to conquer my mind. (40) The face of women 
is blooming like the autumnal lotus and their speech is nectar (itself) to the ears, while their 
heart is (cruel) as the blade of a razor. Who can know their ways ? (41) None is truly beloved 
of women; who have their mind (thought) fixed on the object of their own desire. To serve 
their (own) end they murder or cause to be murdered their own husband, son and 
brother.(42) My plighted word, that I shall confer (on her) the boon of her choice, should not 
prove untrue; and Indra too does not deserve death. Under such circumstances the 
expedient that | have hit upon is (quite) in the fitness of things". (43) Pondering thus, the 
glorious Sage Kasyapa (the son of Marici), O Pariksit (the delight of the Kurus), spoke a bit 
angrily, condemning himself at the same time. (44) 


ARLAY SAA 
Get wad wR geet eaerda:i daa aaa gat eanfserfa ixul 
KasSyapa said : A son will be born to you. O blessed one, who will slay Indra if you will 
duly observe this vowfor a year, but who will prove to bea friend of the gods if itis not propertly 


observed. (45) 
fefeara 


aaa ad aerate aati af Aah ae fafa a ad Aha a aq Ive! 


Diti replied : | shall (certainly) observe the vow, O holy Brahmana ! (Kindly) tell me (all) 
that has to be done by me and all that is prohibited during the period of this vow, and also 
that which (though not obligatory) may not violate the vow (if done). (46) 





_w— 


Dis. 18 Br 8TH HRB BHO Hr BOOK SIX 639 
BB RGR RRR RR LRT RR RAE LAER BR RRA REBAR RALLIES 


ALA Salva 
1 eget 4 wad attiafseaeiain a WRIA 19 | 
aTey ea HET A Wada ash: 1a aetareaara: ast a faerat safes wc! 
‘fee alee a aft queen ysidleqaar eS fudegiimat au: 1¥e! 
Tesrpaioet waa ymyeisn | sahladadaearddiar atest 140 | 
areata | AT aaferent: 1 afta aramereat ar a a Gea: 1421 


aidan: —-Ufaiei een SoaaM | Gaensler Brera 1&2 | 


Aa Gea aMdaagaa areafa Veet seme Alea Ta: 14x 

KaSyapa Said : A woman observing this vow must not injure (much less kill any one of) 
the multitudes of living beings nor curse any one nor should she tell a lie. She must not pare 
her nails or cut the hair on her person nor should she touch that which is impure. (47) She must 
not bathe in water (by diving into it) nor should she lose her temper nor talk with wicked people. 
She must not wear a cloth that has not been (duly) washed (after being used) nor a garland 
that has (already) been worn on her person. (48) She must not eat the leavings of what has 
been eaten by someone nor the food offered to Goddess Candika (Bhadrakall) nor (again) that 
which contains meat nor that fetched by a Sddra nor that which has been seen by a woman 
inher menstruation : nor again should she drink water with the hollow of her joined palms. (49) 
She must not stir out (of her house) with the remants of food sticking in her mouth (without 
rinsing her mouth after eating something), nor without washing her hands and feet nor at dusk 
nor with dishevelled hair nor with her person unadorned and unwrapped (with an outer 
covering) nor with her speech uncontrolled. (50) She must not retire with her feet unwashed 
nor in an impure state nor with wet feet nor with her head towards the north or the west nor 
inthe same bed with others nor bare-bodied nor again in the morning and evening. (51) Putting 
on a pair of clothes that have been (duly) washed, ever pure and decked with all auspicious 
Ornaments, she should worship before breakfast the cow, the Brahmanas, Goddess Sri (the 
deity presiding over beauty and prosperity) and (the immortal) Lord Visnu. (52) She should 
also worship women whose husbands are living, with garlands, sandal-paste, offerings of food 
and ornaments and, offering worship to her husband, should wait upon him and contemplate 
on him as having entered her womb (in the form of his vital energy). (53) If you observe this 
vow, (known as) the Purnsavana (yielding a son), whichis ofa years duration, without violating 
it, € son will be born to you, who will be able to slay Indra. (54) 


aefahena fedt Us Aa: ered WATE Ad Alet eee GT 1Gh! 
TEs 26 MSC I en «fafa | aeterenfet: 145 | 
faci yaa: HOTA U | TAMISIT Ale HI SATS 149 | 
Wq aa Adal Adlass, Shera | Sey: Uaemthstelt Wea WMHla: 14d 
Wersgthess 9 ACAI etaa | farat dist Wd: Beh: Sa A Vaifesd flags 1491 
Use OI q GRAaTaoeT adenfatar | sraparietnreta: qym fafemifeat 1901 
weet dential «6 amneea: fea: wifes sat arte ahr a2 
Gnd wa mW aR SARI Sad Adtech AT ei AM GA: 121 
& qqq: eda: aa weed zis frarafa fas wet qedea 1631 








—— 


640 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 18 


ERRKAKLKLKAAK AHA LAKAKAAAKHAKLALAALALKLANLNKH ALAN LANA K ANH BH He Br He Be HAs Hr Hr Hr Hr Sr Gr He Hr Be Hr Hr Br Hr Ke Gr Ke Br He Be Ke Ke He Hr Fe ky Sc By er 
Se te ee eee Eee EE eee kh ee_rlee f 


Tw SS Wad Hel wafsere alfa: | SAME, Ue AeAt TUL I ext 

a WAR feast: sifaraqeuar agen piesaguon sharetor ger war 141 

anlesissieges gest ait araamidaat feet fee aegieia: rec 

Gite Ustad = Aedstaq! ale Adela a akon aaa: Hat: ie 

fflaeera sia HNO I ssur Aled «cat | cdqerafPadr ec 

VIE Adee alae! sata ATAA SATA | GS | 

Ue: Usiedd: UA: GA Aatad HM ale a fafed GA Aa He AT Aa iol 
Expressing her willingness (to undertake the vow) in the words "Very well’, the strong-willed 
Diti, O Pariksit, then concieved the seed of KaSyapa and she also duly undertook the (sacred) 
vow. (55) Having come to know the intention of his mother's sister (Diti), O respectful king, the 
clever Indra waited upon Diti, who was living in a hermitage (as a hermitess), through (personal) 
service (of every kind). (56) He fetched everyday from the woods at the proper time flowers, fruits 
roots, small pieces of wood for the sacrificial fire and blades of (the sacred) Kusa grass as well 
as (sacred) leaves and sprouts, earth and water. (57) Keen to discover a slip in the observance 
on the part of Diti, who had been duly adhering to the vow, O Pariksit, the croocked Indra 
continued to serve her like a hunter disguised as a game (to remove its suspicion). (58) Though 
intent upon detecting some fault in her observance, O ruler of the earth, Indra did not find any; 
he was now filled with grave anxiety as to how his welfare could be ensured in that life. (59) One 
day, however, she fell asleep (even) at dusk with remnants of food still in her mouth and without 
either rinsing her mouth or washing her feet, enfeebled as she was by her (austere) observance 
and deluded by (an adverse) fate. (60) Finding that weak point, Indra, the master of Yoga (mystic 
powers), entered by dint of (his) Yogic power the uterus of Diti, wno had been robbed of her 
consciousness by sleep. (61) By means of his thunderbolt he cut the embryo, brilliant as gold, 
into seven. Addressing the crying embryo (as though with affection) in the words " Do not cry !" 
he further cut those pieces each into seven. (62) (Even) while being rent (by Indra), O Pariksit, 
they all submitted to him with joined palms, "Why do you seek to get rid of us, O Indra ? We are 
Maruts (the wind-gods), your (own) half-brothers !" (63) "Do not be afraid; you are (all) brothers to 
me !"—so did Kausika (Indra) reply to the (aforesaid seven) groups of the Maruts, his (future) 
attendants exclusively attached to him. (64) By the grace of Lord Visnu (the Abode of Goddess 
Sri, the deity presiding over beauty and prosperity), the embryo in the womb of Diti could not be 
killed, though cut into numerous (forty-nine) pieces by the thunderbolt (of Indra), any more than 
you (O Pariksit) were killed by the missile discharged by ASwatthama (the son of Drona). (65) 
Worshipping Lord Visnu (the most ancient Person) only once, a man attains a status similar 
to the Lord's; whereas (in the present case) Sri Hari was worshipped by Diti for alittle less 
than a year (so that the miracle that happened in the aforesaid case should cause no 
wonder at all). (66) (Taken) together with Indra (their friend and leader), these Maruts 
(wind-gods) came to be (known as) fifty gods. The stigma (of demonhood) attaching to 
them because of their mother was wiped off and they were converted into gods (entitled 
toa draught of nectar) by Indra. (67) On waking up, the worshipful Diti, who (having now 
worshipped Sri Hari for close upon a year) had acquired a disposition absolutely free from 
reproach, saw the babes, brilliant as fire accompanied by Indra, and felt highly gratified. 
(68) Then she said to Indra, “Dear son ! desirous of obtaining a son that might prove a 
source of terror to the sons of Aditi (you and your brothers), | observed this vow, which 
is most difficult to undertake.(69) But, while (only) one son was coveted (by me), how did 
these forty-nine babes come to be born? Tell me the truth, if known to you; but don't utter 

a falsehood.” (70) 





is. 19 
Die gatenansenanenssensesssnsensensns Ooo. vsnnennensenneennennannnnnnnannn es 
Sx So 

ara SE STAAL TAT A TAS RTT | CeUrmistse winded wifad 192! 

pat a ai Tt Se Ae HAE: last Uchenat qaun: aaa Alfa Atay 1192 | 

aeraass 86 dlemeafaq Ta | Femeagsien: fag: careraiguit 193 | 

amet Ta Ss Seat raf: 1a g terata at a erefepatent: Gat: 19¥1 

sae ea TT STAAL | Gl GUite WUT FI: WATALSH SHA AL 119% | 

deg WA chit onfeee adtafe) amquéfir aiaed fever weit qatar: 105 

Indra replied : Mother, having come to know of your vow, | sought your presence and, 

having discovered your fault, cut the child in your womb, bent as | was on achieving my 
(selfish) end and lost to all Sense of righteousness. (71) The embryo was cut by me in seven 
and there appeared seven children. They too were cut each in seven; yet they would not 
die.(72) Seeing that great miracle, | at last concluded that it must be some incidental reward 
of the worship of Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person). (73) They alone are declared as clever 
in accomplishing their object, who while engaged in propitiating the Lord are (entirely) free 
from desires and do not aspire even to attain final beatitude (as a reward for their 
worship).(74) Having propitiated the Lord, the ruler of the universe, who is not only the Self 
of us all but who bestows His very Self on His devotees, what wise man would ask of Him 
the pleasures of sense, which could be had even in hell ? (75) Therefore, may you be pleased 
toforgive, O mother, this act of wickedness on my part, foolish as | am, O highly noble lady! Thank 
God ! the child in your womb has risen to life (as it were) after death. (76) 


AYP SAA 
Sata:  Wewled Wall Aes: Ge at azar wma fed sy: 199! 
Wi a adarend ani a ufgeiage ved wa fe ya: meat a 1c! 
Sta Sead AS URS Gears TSH AVG ATATSTERSEATA: 12k 
Sri Suka went on : Permitted by Diti, who was pleased with his sincerity, the powerful 


Indra bowed to her and left for the third heaven along with the Maruts (wind-gods). (77) In 
this way | have told you all that you enquired of me, viz., the story of the auspicious birth of 


the Maruts. What more shall | speak to you about ? (78) 


Thus ends the eighteenth discourse entitled “An account of the birth of the Maruts, 
in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


= eet oe 
DSSS 


31NchIAa an Seale: 


Discourse XIX 
e of observing the sacred vow of Pumsavana 


aan wath cer aegreo At faey: seileit 1 g | 
| wish to know the procedure of observing the (sacred) vow 
n mentioned by you, O holy one, and by which Lord Visnu 


The procedur 


The king (Pariksit) said : 
of Purhsavana, which has just bee 
IS (easily) propitiated. (1) 





oo” 


642 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Dis. 
VAHAAAEAAAALAANLAAAALNAAARHNLKAAKNKLKAHAKNANAHNHKA KHANH ANLKHHHAHE aware ese 1 9 


MP FATA 
a ariet avast aitedaqatiomaa adhe 9 areeniitenrriaa: 1 2 1 
faa Hed SH AUT I ee Use Ae aeimgarat | 
GAs sarstad Bat TE | 2 | 
315 2 fara golem aaisg ainetayfamddt qa: amore x | 
aa a HUT Ye Aer Aleta | Be sat WO: aelenctsh Ta TY: 1 & 
famfa owed 9 « neqeamenti iter A AeA Sleeaiaisg TI I 


Sri Suka replied : A wife should start observing this vow, which is calculated to grant 

all one's desires, from the very first day of the bright fortnight of (the month of) Margasirsa 
with the permission of her husband. (2) Having listened to the story of the birth of the Maruts 
(the forty-nine wind-gods) and (duly) consulted the Brahmanas, she should after cleaning 
her teeth and finishing her bath cover herself with a pair of white pieces of cloth and adorn 
herself (with ornaments). She should (then) worship the Lord along with His (divine Consort) 
Sri (the goddess of beauty and prosperity) before her breakfast (and pray:) (3) “Whatever 
You already have is enough for You, (absolutely) unconcerned as You are, O Lord whose 
desire is (ever) sated ! My obeisance be to You, the Lord of Mahalaksmi (who embodies in | 
Herself the highest glory and fortune) ! Hail to You, the Abode of all mystic powers ! (4) You | 
are fully endowed with compassion, fortune, glory, majesty, virility and all other excellences, 
O Lord; You are therefore the almighty Ruler. (5) O (divine) Consort of Lord Visnu, O 
Embodiment of marvellous powers, possessing as You do the characteristics of the 
Supreme Person, may You be pleased with me, O highly blessed one. (My) obeisance be 
to You, O Mother of the universe !" (6) 


3% aMl wad aeEea AelqMaa vetfayfaaaa ae aetfayfafictie- 
WR seateedan 8 6fawitareareiuenqasitanarsidiafayeurrel- 
GAQIe aE Iais AAlled Sete 19 
ela: ate d Waar areata: 
3 wat Wad emes velfayfaaqd warefaic i 

fa fasj a arcatset suaautivaen wun adkecadame: |e | 

URPIe Adal alat Wart ad: wistqdRad 1Qol 
“Hail to Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), denoted by the mystical syllable OM and 
possessed of the highest glory, the Spouse of Goddess Mahalaksm!! Let me offer worship 
to You along with Your highest potencies (Goddess Laksmi and others) !" While repeating 
this sacred text the worshipper should offer everyday to Lord Visnu with aconcentrated mind 
(loving) invocation, water to wash His hands and feet and rinse His mouth and water for His 
bath, a pair of pieces of linen to cover His Body, a sacred thread and ornaments, sandal- 
paste, flowers, burning incense, light, food and other articles of worship. (7) Out of the food 
left after being offered to the Lord one should pour twelve oblations into the sacred fire‘while 
repeating the following prayer:—"Hail to Lord Visnu (the Supreme Person), denoted by the 
mystical syllable OM, the Spouse of Goddess Mahalaksmi! | offer this oblation to Him'!!" (8) 
One should duly worship with devotion everyday Goddess Sri and (Her Consort) Lord Visnu, 
both of whom are disposed to confer boons (on Their devotees) and yield one's desired 
blessings in an abundant degree, if one is desirous of having all kinds of fortune. (9) (Nay,) 


one should fall prostrate on the ground with a mind humble through devotion, repeat the 
aforementioned sacred text ten times and (then) utter the following hymn:—(10) 





— = 


643°. 


BOOK SIX Gr br Be Bt Be Be Be RB REBAR 


Dis. 19] as BeBe eRe Ge Be Be Be He HRY Ke BeBe RRR REY BRE Be RR RRL Rr Rr Be Re Ke HR Hr Br Be Be Be Be Ge Be Kr Ge He BL BE HTH or Br Br 


gat q fave fay ama: aot omisa f sepia: Gem Araretingreal 1221 

qa Ha: Maka yes: wid adag sla faa Hoya |e2! 

queer et aeret qiyrsaia fe adattaten sit: asa | 
ATA Wet NAAKAATISA: 123 | 

am dat etme act aieati aa a sdaeelh Gd Aa Tellers: 12%! 


"You are the Sovereigns of the universe as well as the ultimate cause of the world. (And) 
She (Mahalaksml) is undoubtedly the unmanifest Prakrti (primordial matter), as well as the 
deluding potency, (so) difficult to overcome. (11) You (O Lord) are no other than the 
Supreme Person, the very Controller of Prakrti. You embody all sacrificial performances; 
while She is an embodiment of faith (that inspires and sustains all human endeavours to 
carry on such sacrificial activities). While She is (worldly) activity, You are the enjoyer of its 
fruit. (12) This goddess is the manifestation of the (three) Gunas (in the form of the universe); 
while You are the Time-Spirit (that prompts the three Gunas to manifest themselves in this 
way) as well as the Cosmic Person (who enjoys the Gunas so manifested). (Again,) You are 
the Soul of all embodied beings; while Goddess Sri represents their body, the senses and 
the inner sense. (Nay,) the almighty goddess represents the various names and forms 
(constituting the universe); while You are their illuminator and ground. (13) (Just) as You 
are the supreme Rulers of (all) the three worlds, conferring boons on Your devotees, so let 
my lofty aspirations prove true, O Lord of excellent renown." (14) 


sania oa osifardt fir ae! afa-arafuact SrasSaM AAA 124 | 
dd: Wala aor sakes aaa! agifesnana Gaara 12 | 
ult WU Ua Mae Aeqeaddar! fradedeudad Saale: wa ufa: | 
faxyare Aaatitr dea saaaa A Ie! 
pated aaaewaniy | uceat palereiat ufatad aarfea: 1221 
fautsiate fara faead mas! fom faa dhadt: auratus: | 
stdcetenaan ea Prana: 1291 
se ads Asse aferaferaa: | stererenfagqeeasl «Ader aa 1201 
Ga ysifaiar Aa, sleet ea dhearalaatenedt 9 aiiie aise 1221 
aris we qurael ydaqiuadd weds we atten 
WHAMaard geatatedt: Ufa: 1221 
oTfare: Rrrenssera fest: Stet: Aa: | Tena Rat wae ySitt qeagqar 1231 
AAA: Hea AAA: TE AIH: | eed et: Mt We Tater 1 ex! 
Having thus extolled Lord Visnu (the Abode of Si, the goddess of beauty and prosperity), 
the Bestower of boons (on His devotees), along with Goddess Sri, and after removing the 
food (served before Them) and offering Them water to rinse their mouth, one should 


(continue to) worship Them (by offering betel leaves etc.). (15) Then with a mind humble 
through devotion one should extol Him by means ofa hymn and, after smelling the remnants 


of the offerings, should duly worship Sri Hari once more. (16) The woman should serve her 
husband too with supreme devotion, offering him his beloved objects and accounting him 
the Supreme Person (Himself); while the loving husband should personally assist in all the 
duties of his wife, high and low (alike). (17) A thing done by even one (member) of a married 
couple is conducive to the benefit of both. (Therefore,) in the event of the wife being unfit (due 


to illness or menstruation etc.) the husband should do (all) this with a concentrated mind. (18) 








644 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Dis. 
aaa nsalanaaansateauseanuewssebeeecewteennswenssaeees oo 


A man observing this vow sacred to Lord Visnu should not break it under any circumstance 
whatsoever. (Thus) observing (strict) discipline, one should worship everyday with devotion 
the Brahmanas as well as women whose husbands are (still) living by offering them wreaths 
of flowers, sandal-paste, (articles of) cooked food and ornaments, and should (also) worship 
the Deity (Lord Visnu). (19) Having requested the Deity (as devoutly as He had been 
invoked) to retire to His (divine) Abode one should eat what was offered to Him, after feeding 
in the first instance one's preceptor and others, for the purification of one's mind as well as 
for the gratification of all one's desires. (20) After spending a year of twelve months (an year 
other than an intercalary year) according to this (aforementioned) process of worship, a 
pious wife should observe a faston the last day of (the month of) Kartika (the day immediately 
preceding the bright half of Margasirsa). (21) Having bathed at sunrise on the following day 
and worshipped Lord Visnu (the Enchanter of all) as before, the husband alone should 
pour into the sacred fire twelve oblations of rice boiled in milk and mixed with clarified 
butter according to the procedure laid down for a Pakayajnha (a veriety of sacrificial 
performances mentioned in the Grhya-Sutras). (22) Receiving with his head bent low the 
benedictions duly pronounced by the Brahmanas, (highly) pleased with him, and devoutly 
greeting them with bowed head, he should silently take his meal with their permission 
along with his kinsmen after feeding his preceptor in the first instance. He should (then) 
give to his wife the remnant of the sacrificial offering, which ensures a good progeny and 
the height of good fortune. (23-24) 


Uda  fafsag¢d  fadndiiteadt axa ge 
at aden ota alert frat ost sfauft oat Jaq 
ea a fact aaa at adh edienicaet wit! 
yarn «Silage Ea OT TATTLE 
face faen fae fae a simmerdifaancacet | 
Uadoawea a Hvar : faqeaa Ary 1 219 | 
Cs: wast BAM aaa eyR sles | 
Ws Usted wa ge feadd afafed vedic 
WS GSA AAahfaaSeara: 129 | 


Gk: 30 Aad 


Duly observing this vow, sacred to the Lord, a man attains his coveted object during his 
(very) lifetime; while a wife, undertaking it, should secure good fortune, affluence, progeny, 
the longevity of her husband, glory and a (comfortable) house. (25) Nay, a maid should 
secure a match endowed with all good characteristics, while a widow should attain final 
beatitude after being rid of (all) sins. A woman who has lost her issue should get long-lived 
progeny; a woman who, though owning a large property, is highly ill-fated is blessed with 
good fortune; and an ugly-looking girl is endowed with exquisite beauty. He who is suffering 
from a malady is rid of his acute illness andis blessed with a sound body and healthy Indriyas. . 





_ 


Dis. 19 ] BOOK SIX 645 


ARBRE ALLL LLL EAR LLL LES ARLE RRL R PRADA ELLA RELA LAA EADS SS 
Nay, there ensues the eternal gratification of the souls of the departed ancestors as well as 
of the tutelary deities of the man who recites this discourse on the occasion of auspicious 
undertaking (such as a sacrificial performance and Sraddha). (26-27) (Nay,) pleased with 
him, the fire-god, Goddess Sri (the divine Consort of Lord Visnu) as well as Lord Sri Hari 
(Himself) confer on him all the objects of his desire at the end of a sacrificial performance. 
O king (Pariksit), the highly sacred story of the birth of the Maruts (the wind-gods) as well 
as of the very sacred vow observed by Diti has (hereby) been related to you. (28) 


Thus ends the nineteenth discourse entitled "The procedure of observing the vow of 
Pumsavana detailed;, in Book Six of the great and glorious Bhagavata- 
Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita, 
composed by the (divine) sage Vedavyasa and 
consisting of eighteen thousand Slokas. 











Aa: thee: 
ZIT WAIANSeATA: 


Srimad Bhagavata Mahapurana 


Book Seven 


Discourse | 


A dialogue between Narada and Yudhisthira : the story of Jaya and Vijaya 
UoHNaTa 

aa: Ba: Aes WAM War Baal sss we tamaeitfgrat aes g | 

a gerd: qe: aMatha:staarea: iva faget alana fei 21 

Sq A: Aaa ARTs sit | aaa: Quelidetcaiaedterd | 3 | 
The king (Pariksit) submitted : How did the Lord, who is alike to everyone and is the 
beloved friend of (all) created beings, kill the demons (the sons of Diti) for the sake of Indra 
like a partial being, O holy one? (1) Indeed He who is the very embodiment of highest bliss 
could not have any (selfish) end to be served by the hosts of gods and in no case could He 
who is untainted by the Gunas (modes of Prakrti) actually have any specific grudge against, 
much less fear of, the demons. (2) In this way, O exceptionally blessed one, a grave doubt 


has arisen in our mind with regard to the excellences of Lord Narayana, which you should 
kindly resolve. (3) 


ARIA SAA 
ag oY wt  rahtemiae umaameed wnaahnaeia x 
Tat 86 OR uarfaftsixariafts: | tear Hera qaa Hafael et: Ha! & 
Frfonsta gistiserhl war Seat: Ut: | aaRornfasa aeaeaed Ad: | & 
Gea WIA sit Neier FON: 1a AN ATU, sia sors Ua all © 
Wale ¢ Uae cash Weisdi| aaa aenaifa demeraqunswt | ¢ 
SiictieRaad Agia  fataed | feces afecar maaisad: | @- 





Dis. 1 ] BOOK SEVEN 647 


pete BRB SBC BEY RTA BER BBB BLS BEB BB BACH BBD ee Be De BE fe Be fe BP eB Be BR REE BCE DE AERC AE AEBE 





val fAga: We sie: Wl WG: Gade ya eae | 
aa 8 6ofaferg «= ittqiiee: «9 afermorearn «Ss Se 1201 
mle Ud ede sms sergeat awa Adhd | 
a4 WwW wat ae sha aa aritefadeaad: | 
qatar Uist weer sfroieesra: 1221 
stidiaed:  ydfafaera: ator ister verndt wer gesdscnaaaa 1221 
eel Held Ue Waa NeeHdtianed wala arest fey: 1231 
diet Geet Us aogqd: smdtiuses faaqat aaal Avaahe 12x 
Sri Suka replied : Well have you asked, O great king (Pariksit), a question relating to 
the wonderful and most sacred story of Sri Hari, whichis replete with the glory of His devotees 
(like Prahrada), nay, which goes to intensify one's devotion to the Lord and which is sung 
by sages like Narada. Bowing to (my father,) the sage Krsna Dwaipayana (Vedavyasa), | 
shall (accordingly) narrate the story of Sri Hari. (4-5) Though really transcending Prakrti and 
(therefore) beyond the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), unborn and devoid of (a material) 
form, the Lord assumed the role of a chastiSer in relation to those deserving punishment by 
presiding over the Gunas of His own Maya (Prakrti). (6) Sattva (harmony), Rajas (activity) 
and Tamas (inertia) are the adjuncts of Prakrti (Matter) and not of the Spirit. Their decline or 
growth, O king (Pariksit), is not simultaneous as a matter of fact. (7) Conforming to the spirit 
of the times, He fosters the gods and the Rsis (sages) when (the quality of) Sattva is in the 
ascendant,the Asuras (demons) when (the quality of) Rajas is predominant, and the 
Yaksas (a class of demigods) and the Raksasas (ogres) when (the quality of) Tamas 
preponderates.(8) Like fire and other elements (which, though undifferentiated, appear as 
differentiated through diverse media), the Lord (though one) appears endowed with various 
forms (in the shape of the numberless Jiva); yet He is not distinguished from the psychophysical 
organism (occupied by Him). It is only the discerning that are eventually able to realize the 
Self dwelling in their own heart after carefully investigating it. (9) When intending to create 
bodies (as a means of enjoyment) for the Jiva (the individual soul), the aforesaid Supreme 
evolves(the element of) Rajas as a distinct entity (out of the chaos hitherto prevailing) by His 
own Maya (creative energy). (Nay,) keen to sport in the midst of (all) these heterogeneous 
bodies, the omnipotent Lord evolves the Sattvaguna and when about to retire (from His 
sportful activities), He fosters the element of Tamas. (10) The Lord, who is the infallible 
Creator (of the universe) in conjunction with Prakrti and Purusa (the grounds of creation), O 
ruler among men, brings forth the running Time, which stands as the support (an assistant) 
of Prakrti and Purusa. Now that which goes by the name of Time, O Pariksit, fosters the 
element of Sattva (at the dawn of creation); hence the Lord too, who enjoys an extensive 
fame, fosters as it were the host of gods as their friend and exterminates their enemies, the 
Asuras, dominated as they are by Rajas and Tamas. (11) To illustrate this very fact (of the 
Lord being entirely free from hatred etc.) alegend was lovingly narrated in the past by Narada 
(the celestial sage) to the inquiring Emperor Yudhisthira (in whose eye whom no enemy was 
ever born) during his great sacrificial performance (of Rajasuya), O Pariksit ! (12) On seeing 
the most wonderful absorption of Sigupala (the ruler of the kingdom of Cedi) into (the divine 
person of) Lord Sri Krsna (Son of Vasudeva) in the course of the great sacrificial performance 
called Rajasuya, the celebrated king Yudhisthira (son of Pandu) asked the celestial sage 
(Narada)—seated there—with a wondering mind the following question in the presence of 
(other) sages, who were (all) listening. (13-14) 





648 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA __- Dis. 4 


[ 

PARRA REAL AAA LA LAA ELAR LASALLE L AE ASABE TEASE ILS SSSR SELES REAR Re Bey 
TAS STAT 

sa | te gMeThaaTAf argea out ma ooifaserea fafew: 1eu 
Uieq¢em: dd we ad wlismafran aat fastemfe urfaa: ee 
SqaISdd: UT Bea HOMTAUNTI ae Mire adaeias aie: 101 
sadness «| Agel aera | frat 3 stat fr@rat ret faferrger: 1221 
eu dea wa gamemmfiueaat determi 9 wadtaqwemt 12° 
We wea A qhedinhiita aeiisgdagit Wait ANU 10} 


Yudhisthira said : The absorption into Sri Krsna (son of Vasudeva), the supreme 
Reality—which could not be easily attained even by those exclusively devoted to Him— 
of Sisupala (the ruler of the kingdom of Cedi), His bitter enemy—Oh, this was indeed most 
wondertul. (15) We all as a matter of fact wish to know (the reason of) this, O sage; (for we 
know that) king Vena (the father of Prthu) was (all but) hurled into hell by the Brahmanas 
due to his blaspheming the Lord. (16) The sinful Sisupala (the son of Damaghosa), as well 
as the evil-minded Dantavaktra, had a grudge against Sri Krsna (the Protector of cows) 
ever since he (SiSupala) began to lisp till now (when he was slain by Him). (17) (Patches 
of) white leprosy (leucoderma) did not appear on their tongue even as they blasphemed 
more than once Sri Krsna (the all—pervading Lord), who is (no other than) the supreme 
and imperishable Brahma (the Absolute); nor did they enter the blinding darkness (of 
hell).(18) How. did they attain absorption directly into the aforesaid Lord, whose reality 
cannot be easily grasped, while all the people (assembled on the spot) stood looking 
on?(19) My mind is wavering on this point even as the flame of a light is unsteady under 
the action of wind; (for) this was (something) most wonderful. Omniscient as you are, kindly 
tell me the cause of it. (20) 

MWyh Sava 


Waeted sievd ARel waa: | qe: We AAMT Yoaaiedae: HA: 122! 
Sri Suka went on : The divine sage Narada was pleased to hear this question of king 


Yudhisthira and, addressing him, narrated the following stories within the hearing of his 
courtiers. (21) 


ARG 3aq 
Freaetadchh-aennnr et HOA! TAA Ustafadcha |= fea 221 
feat deta UTE iaeaie wat varefafa uiisia 1231 
aaegsaarisd Agatenfurt aq: | aM A ae aceneaamiskaeran: | 
UW CHehdie feat Areal Heed 12%! 

eet Faw wa all Meena al goa wetsaad yan 1241 
aM aS chert A aa anata sta A Frat aft: 1261 
ale: Wid Ge: Hela Ae daar fed aad 1201 
Wa pet wal aaa satiation GAIAM eA feareacay 1221 
IAG Sica Waa WA: | sas aed fear aeaeteh war: 1221 
Ta: AMAA + SaTeleleat TU: | Waele GW: Mela Ase aa fast 1301 
mans A ad: CGS Yet whet | aed Sago wa: Her Fras 132! 





<se 


Dis. 1] BOOK SEVEN 649 


gre Re BRA R RB R BRR BR HERE SRB RR BERR RE ARR RRR ARERR A RE REBAR RE RRR RRA REBAR AAR LALA LIES ES. 


aged «age adders unmediudead fawnfasanarereaddt 132! 


Narada said : The body is brought into being through lack of discrimination, O king, 
between Prakrti (Matter) and Purusa (the Spirit, which lies beyond Prakrti) for (experiencing 
pleasure and pain through) calumny and eulogy, honour and contumely. (22) Just as due to 
identification with this body appears in (the mind of) living beings in this world differentiation 
in the shape of "I" and "mine" and there (also) arises (a feeling of) pain as a result of resort 
to force and reproachful language, and evenas the destruction of living beings is (considered 
as) non-different from the destruction of the body to which attaches the aforesaid notion (of 
"|" and "mine’), there is no such notion (of identity) in Sri Krsna, the Universal Spirit, because 
of His being One without a second. On what ground, then, can violence be ascribed to Him, 
who was indeed the chastiser of His foes (in their own interests)? (23-24) Therefore, one 
should (anyhow) fix one's mind on Him either through constant enmity or through devotion 
(which is free from enmity towards any creature whatsoever) or fear or affection or love. By 
doing so he will in no way perceive anything else (than the Lord). (25) A mortal may not attain 
such absorption into Him by fixing his mind on Him through devotion as through constant 
hostility: such is my conclusion. (26) The caterpillar imprisoned by a wasp in (its nest on) a 
wall and constantly thinking of the latter through (intensity of) hatred and fear attains a form 
similar to the wasp. (27) With their sins thus washed off by constant contemplation through 
animosity on the almighty Lord Sri Krsna, who appeared as a human being by His own will, 
people attained to Him (easily and speedily too). (28) Fixing their mind on the almighty Lord 
through concupiscence, hatred, fear or attachment as through devotion, and getting rid of 
their sin standing as a barrier against His realization, many attained union with Him. (29) The 
cowherd women (of Vraja) attained to Him through concupiscence; Kamsa, through fear; 
SiSupala (the ruler of the Cedis) and other kings (like him), through hatred; the Vrsnis (the 
kinsmen of Lord Sri Krsna), through kinship; you (the Pandava brothers), through attachment 
and we (the sage Narada and others), through devotion, O lord! (30) Vena (stood no chance 
of attaining to the Lord inasmuch as he) did not fall under any of the five categories 
(mentioned in verse 29) of those contemplating on the Lord. Hence by any means 
whatsoever one should fix one’s mind on Sri Krsna (the all-enchanting Supreme Deity). (31) 
SiSupala (the ruler of the Cedis), your maternal aunt's son, as well as Dantavaktra (son of 
another maternal aunt of yours), O Yudhisthira (son of Pandu), were (no other than) the two 
foremost attendants (Jaya and Vijaya) of Lord Visnu, (that had been) hurled down from their 
(divine) abode (Vaikuntha) under the curse of the Brahmana sages. (32) 


qaet Sara 
alc: met at aay eftaranfimela: | sterga sarnit ated a: 1331 
cersarget AMVSUaAM | Cea aa gaa ae tal 13X1 
Yudhisthira said .: What kind of and whose curse was it that prevailed (even) against 
the servants of Lord Sri Hari ? The incarnation of those exclusively devoted to Sri Hari 


appears as something incredible. (33) Be pleased to narrate the episode connected with the 
corporeal existence of the denizens of Vaikunthapura (the abode of Lord Visnu), devoid (as 


they are) of a (material) body, Indriyas and life-breath. (34) 
Re sad 


Ue FEI: ut fawieth AEM Grate ae Wasa 

usages: = gear || ets: 1 ferarere RL Aa TN A ETAT, 13 & 

aI, ira Wa Yai a A Blea: wrens wet wey Ales: | 
UUs ait attest arcaraa: 1319 | 





(564] B. M. 23— 


’ 


650 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4 


LRAKEKLLLKLAHKAAAKKLAL KL LH LLA AAA LL ALLL HNL AKL HT EL ASE SASHA SEA a a A ee tri ey 
a a.  ..  . e 
© = \ ~ 
Ua Bet Maa Vad a: Hoes: | sket Gastahtai Hfietere aera 13¢1 


Narada replied : (While) traversing the three spheres (heaven, earth and the 
intermediate region), the sage Sanandana and his (three) brothers, sons of Brahma (the 
creator), once went to the realm (Vaikuntha) of Lord Visnu by the Lord's (own) will. (35) 
Though born before the elders (in Brahma’'s creation, Marici and others), they look like 
children of five to six years of age and have no covering on their body except the quarters. 
Accounting them infants, the two gate-keepers (Jaya and Vijaya) stopped them. (36) Full of 
anger, they (the sages) cursed them thus : "You do not even deserve to dwell at the soles 
of (much less serve) the feet of Lord Visnu (the Slayer of the demon Madhu), which are free 
from (all tinge of) Rajas (passion) and Tamas (ignorance). Therefore, enter you at once, O 
fools, the most sinful demoniac womb !" (37) Cursed in the aforesaid words, the two gate- 
keepers (of Vaikuntha) were, while falling down from their abode, addressed once more (as 
follows) by the merciful sages (Sanaka and others): "Let this imprecation make for your return 
to your realm at the end of three incarnations." (38) 


Sad ar fed: Uat SwelMaatradt l faxvacnferqeetn faxveentsastetc: 138 

eat © feuaenferaehon «= fkeefror | fexoaratt atte fawet Gli au: Ivo 

fauankg: gi see saatanifartart ad 8 yaeda ive 

Saya od Cad anata Wade Ws  AleHleqded: 1x2 
They were born as HiranyakasSipu and Hiranyaksa (the two sons of Diti), the adored of 
the Daityas and the Danavas (alike). HiranyakaSipu was the elder; while Hiranyaksa, the 
younger, was born afterwards. (39) Hiranyakasipu was slain by Sri Hari, who had taken the 
form of a lion (Lord Nrsimha); and Hiranyaksa was killed by Him even as He assumed the 
body of a boar for the sake of lifting up the earth (from water). (40) Anxious to get rid of his 
son, Prahrada, the beloved of Lord Visnu (the Protector of both Brahma and Siva), 
Hiranyakasipu inflicted on him tortures of various kinds in order to bring about his death, but 
could not kill with (all) his devices that perfectly tranquil boy, who had identified himself with 
all living beings, looked upon all with the same eye, and was invested with a divine 

glory. (41-42) 

ate Uae sit aierat fastasqat i want: qrrnuiss wdetetoamat ive 

aad Weal Seat Asta | Wadi sheafa a aehusaqad Wa 1s~ 

Mea abet sit aqgeiemt dais auotil permed ivu! 

AMAT AAATT AMAA! Ahett | UAE: «UP «| IT feeojordel ive 
Then (in the next birth) they were born as a pair of Raksasas (ogres), the tormenters of 
allthe worlds, Ravana and Kumbhakarna (by name), sons of the sage Vigrava by KesSinl. (43) 
In order to redeem them from the curse the Lord slew them in that birth too, assuming the 
form of Sri Rama (a scion of Raghu). You will hear about the valour of Sri Rama from the lips 
of the sage Markandeya, O king ! (44) Those very Raksasas (Ravana and Kumbhakarna) 
were born (again) In the Ksatriya race as SiSupala and Dantavaktra (sons of your maternal 
aunts). Their sins (in the shape of their impure bodies that were guilty of offence against the 
Lord) having been destroyed by the discus (Sudargana) of Lord Sri Krsna, they have now 
(at the end of three incarnations) been redeemed from the curse (of Sanaka and his three 
brothers). (45) Having (first) been exalted to the state of absorption into the immortal Lord 


(Sri Krsna) through contemplation intensified by constant enmity, they (eventually) returned 
to the (divine) presence of Sri Hari as attendants of Lord Visnu. (46) 





is. 2 657 © 
ed TOTTORI SS EN yrerny reves vrrrereceee rie 


Seast Sara 
frast cfd Wt eeimereiafe A anata seeded vel 
efa shrerrad Hee wee Sears aH WEAR THA WATS HATA: | 8 | 
Yudhisthira submitted : How did intense hatred come to be developed (in the mind of 
Hiranyakasipu) towards his high-souled and beloved son (Prahrada)? (Also) tell me, O 


glorious sage, the circumstances under which exclusive devotion to the immortal Lord 
sprang up in the heart of Prahrada. (47) 


Thus ends the first discourse, forming part of the Introduction to the story of 
Prahrada, in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


GIS IS 


31g fedtatsear: 


Discourse Il 
Hiranyakasipu rids his mother (Diti) of her grief (caused by the death of his 
younger brother, Hiranyaksa) 
ARG Saad 


wdda fated eon categhtari fevanitg wr waeget Zari 2 | 
ae Ue BN Yl: Waveehtada: | Hla awas saat frites | 2 | 
UGE AGET ayseyqe: \yeura wef amarensei! 2 | 
MW WM daadcda fanaa aati adel wala Ada ulm seal x | 
fasta’ Aa aa: GoM Weleda: | Add aa faa at fai & | 
aaeaiftd: asuiat A afd: gediufeien eon «waarequenad: 1 & 1 
Ta apamag gaged: | wr WMA aleealientie: | © | 
meeterntaa yor stro aera adfet urat A naeq: 1 ¢ | 
der peed AS ada ate faea sa yea fawn fala: |e | 
wand ya wa faxenanttar gee ANAM ARAAdaI aa: 120} 
faufgsinardet sat aime: Gari daiuquaat ier a aur iee! 
aa aa fest mat dat auisrm: fea id ad sue aa wdlaad ge iezi 


Narada replied : On his (younger) brother (Hiranyaksa) having been slain thus (through 
seeming partiality towards the gods) by Sri Hari, who had assumed the form of a boar, 
Hiranyakasipu (the elder brother), O king (Yudhisthira), felt agénized with anger and grief.(1) 
Whirling with rage, he closely bit his lips; nay, with his eyes burning through anger he gazed 
intently at the sky, which looked misty (due to the smoke issuing from those fiery eyes as it 
were) and spoke thus. (2) With a frowning aspect, terrible to look at because of his fearful 
teeth and fierce glances, and raising up his trident, he spoke as follows to the Danavas 
(assembled) in his court. (3) O Danavas and Daityas, hullo Dwimirdha (lit., a two-headed 
monster), Tryaksa (a demon with three eyes), Sambara, Satabahu (a demon witha hundred 

arms), Hayagriva (one endowed with a horse's head), Namuci, Paka, Ilwala, Vipracitti, 








652 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 2 


We Re Re Be Br Br Be Be REA Be BER RE eS Be BBE BBE RE EGE RE BE EBLE Be BL BEBE BY BE Be Br Br Wr Br Br Br Ke Gr Hr Hr Hr Sr Sr Kr Hr Sr Sr Kr Sr Sr Hr Ht Se Wr Br Sr Br Br Kr Br Br Hr er Br Br Br rk tr tr gy 
Tose eee eee_—oeee ea Rf 


Puloma, Sakuna and others, listen all tomy word and then let it to be carried out at once; there 
should be no delay. (4-5) My beloved and devoted (younger) brother (Hiranyaksa) has been 
caused by the petty enemies (the gods) to be slain at the hands of Hari (the god Visnu), who, 
though impartial, has been won over to their side through services (rendered to Him). (6) With 
the copious blood of that god—who, though all effulgence (in essence), assumed the 
semblance ofa wild animal (boar) through a deceptive trick and has relinquished his (very) 
nature (impartial character), nay, who follows anyone who adores him and is (therefore) 
fickle-minded as a child—when his head has been severed by my spear, | shall gratify (the 
spirit of) my blood-thirsty brother and be (thus) relieved of my agony. (7-8) When that wily 
adversary’ (in the person of Visnu) has been disposed of, the gods (the denizens of heaven), 
whose (very) life is Visnu, will wither away like the boughs on a tree whose roots have been 
cut off. (9) Meanwhile resort you to the earth, made prosperous by the Brahmanas (the 
sacerdotal class) and the Ksatriyas (the ruling and warrior class) and exterminate those 
engaged in austerities, sacrificial performances and the study of the Vedas, observing 
sacred vows and practising charity. (10) God Visnu depends for his existence on the rituals 
of the twice-born, being Yajfia (worship) personified and an embodiment of righteousness. 
He is the ultimate resort of the gods, the Rsis (seers), the manes and other living beings and 
the final goal of righteousness. (11) Repair to each such territory where there are Brahmanas 
(lit., the twice-born), cows, the (four) Varnas (grades of society) and (four) ASramas (stages 
in life) and rituals. Set fire to them-and cut them (their trees etc.) to pieces. (12) 


Sia ad dmesg fRrraissed: ida weit wat faay: aaah: 1231 
OCB IRE IGIC PCIE SIC § |\Geadensigs dag: Ud IRs! 
cfacatatatie: ACMA | Senate Afra: | 
Wee ARUN Tat vaferiteyah: 1241 
Wa faspd oth ecetatquede: | fa ear: afieea yfa aerofera: 126! 
Reverently bowing to the aforementioned command of their lord (HiranyakaSipu), the 
demons (who were fond of bloodshed) began to oppress the people accordingly. (13) They 
burnt towns and villages, cow-pens and gardens, corn-fields and parks, hermitages and 
mines, farmers’ hamlets, villages at the foot of mountains and stations of herdsmen and 
(even) cities. (14) Some (of them) demolished with spades bridges, defensive walls and city- 
gates; while others, with axes in their hands, cut down (fruit-bearing) trees which served as 
ameans of livelihood (to the people). And (still) others burnt down the dwellings of the people 
with flaming brands. (15) When the people were thus oppressed again and again by the 


followers of Hiranyakasipu (the lord of the Daityas), the gods deserted heaven and 
wandered over the earth unperceived (by the demons). (16) 


fewaaiquig: wma efadiaea aaeesit wagers 120! 

US Wat YE YM gal aed weit eftenyqnealeay 1c! 

car wa, felt a St PATI gma ARreHlet «aNTE WAT ee 
Having offered water and other oblations to (the spirit of) his deceased (younger) brother 
(Hiranyaksa), Hiranyakasipu, who felt (very) miserable (himself), comforted his brothers 


sons—Sakuni, Sambara, Dhrsta, Bhutasantapana, Vrka, Kalanabha, Mahanabha, Hari§maésru 
and Utkaca. (17-18) Knowing as he did what was appropriate to a particular time and place, 





: 


* The expression ‘#efea’ (which has been split up in the above translation as #2 + if4) may also be taken as a compound 
word and interpreted as ‘sé #fed 4 3:’ (a fellow whose actions are of a puzzling nature). 





> 


Dis. 2] BOOK SEVEN 653 


SABA RRR LER ELLE BEBE EB BEBE BER BB BEB BER Re Be BERR RE RR RE Re he Be Be Re Re Re Be Br Be Be Be Bee RR Be RR RE RRR RABAT Br Wr br Rr Br Bt Br Re Br Be 





he addressed the following to (them as also to) their mother (and his own sister-in-law), 
Rusabhanu, as well as to Diti, his (own) mother, in soft words, O lord of men ! (19) 


feCraraTeaTa 
ores & AA: UAT att ade aera | RAR Vora: BRIO ater sia: 1201 
yar Mate: sornfta Yad cater ataaregitaat «erence: 1221 
Peat area: Ye: adn: adieu: | eisararerht fas craze gaa, 122 | 
aaa Tae ats eT sal aT UTAH ead Pediat YT 1231 
w Weta wees: gar af dana wz giest faearhra 12%! 
we srafaratet aieg fegeaniua fenfdatt faa: ania: 1241 
aatag feast zirens fafaer: aya: | afades fara a faderefata aie! 
saTgerecdtatatcrenrd ei aa weet dar ad fated 121 


HiranyakaSipu said : Mother, O mother, sister-in-law and sons ! You ought not to lament 
the hero (Hiranyaksa). The death of the brave in front of their enemy is praiseworthy and (as 
such) coveted (by them). (20) The dwelling together in this world of created beings (first) 
collected at one place (under one roof) and (then) separated by Providence on account of 
their (past) actions, is (just) like the gathering of men in a shed (on the roadside) containing 
a reservoir of water (for the wayfarers), O virtuous mother ! (21) The soul is eternal 
(deathless) free from decay, taintless, omnipresent, all-knowing and transcendent. It 
assumes bodies (of various kinds), procuring the (numerous) objects of senses by its own 
Maya (ignorance). (22) (Just) as due to (proximity to) a running stream the trees (standing 
motionless on its edge and reflected in it) appear as though moving and (even) as due to 
one's rotating eyes the earth (around) appears to revolve, so when the mind is agitated by 
the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti), the soul, which is really unagitated (free from the morbid 
feelings of grief etc.), acquires homogeneity indeed with the mind, O blessed one, so 
that, though (really) detached from body etc,. it appears as if endowed with a body and so. 
on. (23-24) To identify with the body the self, which has no connection (whatsoever) with a 
body—this is the perversion of the soul. (And) it is from such identification that there ensues 
its union with agreeable objects and separation from disagreeable ones and vice versa, 
(egoistic) action and (consequent) transition from one embodied state to another, birth and 
death, grief of various kinds, mentioned in the scriptures, want of discrimination between 
matter and spirit and so on, anxiety and forgetting the aforementioned distinction (even 
though having known it once). (25-26) On this subject the wise narrate the following ancient 
legend too in the form of a dialogue between Yama (the god of retribution) and the relations 
ofa deceased person. (Please) listen to it. (27) 

Simgyern gaa sit faye: iaueated Ge aereqored 12! 
fanittianad favsrureasty | anttiagc Wa Maes, 12 | 
yeiuiast eel Weal Sescli wguqamist feast Wa iszol 


In the Usinara territory there lived an illustrious king Suyajna by name. He was killed by 
the enemiesina battle and his kith and kin sat around him even as he lay on the field of battle, 
 Stained-with blood and biting his lips in anger, his jewelled armour smashed, his ornaments 
and wreaths of flowers fallen off (from his person), his heart pierced through with an arrow, 
his hair thrown about (in disorder), his eyes sunk deep, his lotus face covered with dust and 


his weapons and arms cut into pieces. (28—30) 


Bb ee e8e" 6° Si ane Ort wm _ 4. 





654 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis.'2 


LREKLRELKAAAAAAKALAHKLAE LA RELARKAAAKALAKAAARH ANAL AA AHA LH HALA HH HH BH BR A EH Bro g, 
Le 


wa facudar a ukqa ad ufaiatredat fRelkaaiset dada 1341 
a & wae uafefaq ste aA Aen Yr aA: aqua: 1361 


Closely observing their husband, the lord of the Usinaras, reduced to such a (pitiable) 
plight by Providence, the queens felt (much) distressed. Violently beating their breast with 
their hands again and again and exclaiming "We are lost. O lord !" they dropped down beside 
his feet. (31) Weeping loudly and bathing the lotus-feet of their beloved husbend with their 
tears, tinted reddish with the saffron paste on their breasts, and causing grief in the heart of 
men, the ladies wailed piteously, their locks and jewels loosened and displaced : (32) "Alas, 
by the pitiless Providence, O lord, you have been reduced to a state (of existence) beyond 
the range of our sight ! Once the life-giver (support) of the Usinaras (the inhabitants of this 
land), you have now been made by Him the augmenter of their woes. (83) How can we, O 
ruler of the earth, live without you, our dearest friend, who were disposed to appreciate 
whatever was done to you (by way of service)? (Therefore,) permit us, servants of your feet, 
O brave one, to follow you to the place where you will go." (84) While they lamented as 
aforesaid, clutching their dead husband and unwilling to have him carried out for cremation, 
the sun actually sank below the horizon. (85) On hearing the lament of the relations of the 
deceased monarch, it is said, Yama (the god or retribution) himself appeared there in the 
form of a child and addressed them (as follows). (36) 


4 Ssdq 
Set smiet aaaftnrmt faggaat otenfafer fant: | 
atta Wd Aq wa went aft sereorediisy 
Se a ait wet we: faqear a faferaam: | 
AMAA staer Gea: a wer waft ar fe mt 13¢1 
a gear: gadene @ we waged WA a: | 
qeiset: = istagigsrst «=| EEE TY: 1381 
ufa wd fasta festa we fem afasd farsata 
Saaaanst adie at west waiser edt a sftafa ixol 
Yama said : Oh the infatuation of these, my superiors in age, who clearly perceive the 
course of the world (the inevitability of death for everyone that is born) ! Though themselves 
alike in nature (equally mortal), they bewail in vain the man who has returned to the source 
(the Unmanifest) whence he came ! (37) Ah, most blessed are we that have no anxiety 


(whatsoever) and who are not being devoured by wolves and other carnivorous animals, 
though weak and forsaken here (in this world full of woes) by our parents (who were 





Dis. 2 ] BOOK SEV 655" 


recognized as responsible for our protection) ! For, He alone is the protector (everywhere), 
who protects us In the (mother's ) womb (where there is nobody to look after us excepting 
the Lord). (38) The wise, O ladies, call the animate and inanimate creation a (mere) plaything 
in the hands of that (very) Lord who creates it by (sheer) will, who alone, all-powerful as He 
is, protects It and who, though imperishable (Himself) destroys it. He (alone) is competent 
to maintain and dissolve it. (39) A thing protected by destiny remains intact even though 
dropped on the road; while that which is consigned to destruction by (an evil) fate perishes 
even though staying athome. A forlorn creature watched over by Providence survives (even) 
in the forest : while he whose doom is decreed by Providence will not survive though guarded 
at home. (40) 


Wh cahindhenifsiaha ares a waha wader: t 

Tow met spate fermen Waa Praeacd 1se 

oe ARK Gere est ae germaitfenritaa «= eT 

autes: 9 Ultadstisit: chied aidt fagdt faasata 1s 

aaa deg fir gaa aeet zera: gern fier: 1 

aa AM: Ratt A Wed aM GAM BayUNAG: az: 1¥31 

The bodies (of living beings) of every description come into being and perish at the 

appointed time due to a variety of Karmas determining their species. The spirit, however, 
which is altogether different (from the body), is not bound by the laws relating to the body even 
though dwelling in it. (41) This body is born (as something identical with the spirit) due to the 
ignorance of the Jiva, though (as a matter of fact) it is different (from the Jiva) because it is 
perceived (as such) and is material (too) as a house. Like an object made up of aqueous, 
earthy or fiery atoms, the body, which is made up of the atoms of water, earth and fire (put 
together) gets transformed in course of time and (ultimately). perishes. (42) (Just) as fire 
(though) existing in pieces of wood is observed to be distinct (from them as having the 
capacity to burn and illuminate things), nay, (even) as the air, though existing (everywhere) 
in the body, appears as existing separately (in the different parts of the body such as the 
mouth and nostrils), and (just) as ether, though pervading everywhere, does not cling to any 
substance, so the spirit, (which is) the foundation of all products of matter (such as the body 
and the senses) is distinct (from them). (43) 


Gag Ass WA Yel AAqgaw! a: sla Alsqarhe A A Gea Slated 1sv 

T Mea AMeawa Weiser vera: | akathsaaMieal A Aa: Wega: S41 

YaraAMegt separa, fay: | wae Date Ga asta ive 

Matestadl MAN Mad oH Haresr | adt fauda: Sat avrearnisqada ive 

faaenfatrasisd aa Wrydeaa: ae aARe: we: aatfsach WaT 1x21 

ax raat al ae aiteha fee: | ARM Baad Hd aaa: areata xe 1 
Indeed, O fools, here lies (the body called) Suyajna, that you lament. He (however) who 
was the hearer and the speaker in this body could never be seen even before. (44) Nor is 
the great vital principle—(which inspires all the Indriyas and) which is (therefore said to be) 
the foremost—the hearer or the speaker. As for the soul, which (while remaining) in a body 
is endowed with the senses (perceives the various sense-objects through the different 
Senses), is (altogether) different from the (said) vital principle as well as from the body (both 


of which are devoid of consciousness). (45) The (aforementioned) all-pervading spirit, that 
is different from the body, accepts (as identical with it) bodies (of various kinds)— (both) high 





656 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [Dis 2 


BeBe Rr Re Ree Be Be Re Ke Re Re We Be Bee Bee REO We BOE Be BET Be Be Be WI AY Be We We We We Be Hr Wr We We Ke We We Me We We We We Ke We We We We We Be We Ke We Wi We Ke We We We Ve We He Be We Bewe Be Be We Be We Ke He He eg, 
———————— ET aE 


and low and characterized by the (five subtle) elements, the Indriyas (the five senses of 
perception and the five organs of action) and the mind—and (in the long run) even actually 
gives up such identification by force of its own discrimination. (46) Action proves to be a 
source of bondage only so long as the soul stands identified with a subtle body. From such 
identification follow the perversion of the (all-blissful) Soul and (the attendant) misery, which 
are (however both) conceived in illusion (and not real). (47) To look upon the (three) Gunas 
(their products in the shape of pleasure and pain arising from the contact of the senses with 
their objects) or speak of them as real—this is a false prepossession. Like a fancify| 
conception or a dream every sensuous pleasure is unreal. (48) Hence the knowers of Truth 
grieve neither for that which is abiding nor for that which is transient in this world. Nor can 
the nature of those who are given to grieving be changed. (49) 


Sarl fafaa aafraternt Afidiswe: (faa ses feat aA TA Te 1401 
giegita: daa faamangeadi aa: qiogt deal Geter seria 148 | 
asia freer afedt areata) alae aaissaat utes Yee: Raa: | 
AEleHea: HUT: PUNT TagaaAT 142 | 
atal armour ea: Raaissouran fay: | Hao Uraaieren deer fer cahearia 143 | 
ia qdq at da: fate fe Aida lam gaat fares ius 
HY AMAIA Ades ase Ware: Welara Als A AAT TST: 1G 
Ww eg ferme  sarfaarndayncsr | 
@ wa ad Meme: ao faena crestedt fact: 14! 
Wa gamut | 9 eas: 1d IRI ater: oft atari 140 


A certain fowler, who had been created (by God) as a (veritable) death (as it were) for 
birds, spread his net in a forest and employing (all sorts of) allurements, caught them 
wherever he could. (50) A pair of fork-tailed shrikes was seen moving about there. Of them 
the female bird was precipitately allured by the fowler. (51) Subject to the control of Time, 
the said female bird got entangled in the meshes of the net. Sore afflicted to see her thus 
involved in (mortal) danger, yet incapable (of doing anything), the helpless male bird 
bewailed (the lot of) his miserable mate out of affection (as follows):— (52) "Oh, what will the 
mighty yet merciless Providence do with my wretched wife, pitiable in everyway and grieving 
for my miserable self ? (53) Rather let the Deity take me (as well); (for) what is the use to me 
of this wretched half body, surviving miserably and dragging a desolate existence (when the 
other half in the form of my mate has been snatched away by Him)? (54) My youngs of poor 
luck (keenly) await in the nest (the return of) their mother. How shall | (be able to) nourish 
those motherless little ones still unfledged?" (55) Hidden close by and impelled by Death, 
the same fowler pierced with an arrow the male shrike (too), sore with separation from its 
beloved mate and wailing thus, its throat choked with tears. (56) Not foreseeing your own 


death and lamenting your husband in this way, you foolish women will not (be able to) get 
him back even in hundreds of years. (57) 


fevvanheqeara 
ae Ua Seeit ad faferada: iat Amt wdattemaatferda ic! 
aa Wigs «=| dala | arash Wager epee 148 | 
dd: Braid A FA W AMA al H san a: Wl aa Mla: una Ua aT | 
Mauasaart faa hear 1&0 | 





Dis. 3] BOOK SEVEN see 


Be RA MEHR RORE BCR REBAR REE CRORE ME ERE MOREE Re LEME ORE RE CRE REE HERE Re MC AERC HE CBE RERE He WEBER. He He BEEBE BEBE LE Bh i il 


HiranyakaSipu went on : While the child was thus discoursing, all the relations of king 
Suyajna felt astonished and realized everything as transient and unreal. (58) Having 
narrated this (legend), Yama (the god of retribution) disappeared on that very spot. The 
relations of Suyajfia too performed what was conducive to his future (other-worldly) 
good.(59) Hence don't you grieve for another nor even for yourselves. Apart from the 
preconceived notion distinguishing one's own self from another, which Is nothing but 
ignorance, what distinction is there between one's own self and another or again between 
one's own possession and that belonging to another in the eyes of embodied souls in this 
world ? (60) 


ARG Sava 
Sit ceudatest § fefacenvd Geet Uae aU aa ferme 1&2 | 
ofa Sead Fe GRAS Bisa Gees fefsnenrases aa fedasear: 121 


Narada continued : Hearing this speech of HiranyakaSipu (the lord of the Daityas), Diti 
(his mother) along with her daughter-in-law (the widow of Hiranyaksa, his younger brother) 
instantly gave up sorrowing for her son (Hiranyaksa) and fixed her mind on the (highest) 
truth.(61) 


Thus ends the second discourse entitled "Diti rid of her sorrow", 
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-FPurana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


wh Peck Ft FS 
PIRES OS 


HY Seal a: 


Discourse III 


HiranyakaSipu asks a number of boons (of Brahma, 
who is pleased with his austerities) 


ARG SaTq 


fervaenerg, Wa ARAN | SIA fates st ceca | 2 1 
a a Wesval a: UMEeUN| Heda wey: Ulelg Sistah: 1 2 1 
weretiafast wt dadich saiafy: | afereamemm da: wot Ati 3 
qa ye: Wasa: weishrema: | fedyedaetetremaafegiiha: 1s | 
aaidead: dels =| Pg: caer Seager feet cari & | 
wa dal fed Beat Heleth 44: WU: ia 4 fanaeaerdéata «= sea 1 I 
aerate dat fafa wid A Wea: ide alas yoq fade ake na 
ole A Aeatgaid seenretarrsay: |e | 

wert fae aseusd ga aa:1 saat fe a fafeqerronfa frafea: 1c 1 
Ue arene aaa | steamed aferaea: aes fsa e | 
dee ada AUSRTAATEMT | chronic ss Pea areal AISA: 120] 
state faeretseraengenistan | feat: reel: Acard Awash: 122 1 
sit 28 fei au: unified: facet ah wa fAYaAA 1221 





 & 
fete 
any fp. 
TA ‘ 
Se ~ 





658 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3 


Be Re Re Re Be Re Re Ree Ree Re RB eRe Ree BEBE BER EE Be REE Be Be Ke Be Re Wr BeAr Be Me Be Me Br Wr My Wr Br We Be We We Mr We We We We Be He We We We Be Mr Wr We We We We We We Me He He Hr BeBe BeBe Be Re Be He He 9, 
° fe ° : cc ° > . > 


Narada resumed: Hiranyakasipu, O king (Yudhisthira), (now) wished to make himself 
invincible, free from old age and death and the sole monarch of the three worlds, having no 
rival. (1) Inthe valley of Mount Mandara he practised asceticism of the severest type, keeping 
(both) his arms lifted up and his gaze fixed on the sky, and touching the ground with his great 
toes. (2) With the (dazzling) splendour of his matted locks he shone as the sun with its rays 
at the time of final dissolution. While he was (thus) practising austerities, the gods (that had 
been dislodged from their home took advantage of his absence and) returned to their 
(respective) abodes. (3) The smoky fire of asceticism sprung from the crown of his head 
spread on all sides and began to scorch the higher and the lower worlds as well as the 
intermediate region. (4) The rivers and the oceans swelled; the earth with its (Seven) main 
divisions and mountains shook; stars and planets shot out (from their respective positions) 
and (all) the ten directions flamed forth. (5) Scorched by that fire, the gods left heaven and 
went to the realm of Brahma and submitted to the creator (as follows):—"Tormented by the 
asceticism of Hiranyakasipu (the chief of the demons), O god of gods, O lord of the universe, 
we can no longer stay in heaven. (Pray,) devise some remedy against it, O perfect one, if you 
think fit, before the worlds that bear tributes to you perish, O universal lord ! (6-7) The 
following is his avowed purpose in practising the austerities so hard to perform. Although it 
is not unknown to you, yet listen to what is being submitted (by us). (8) ‘Having evolved this 
mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate) creation by virtue of his devotion to asceticism 
and Yoga (contemplation), Brahma (the supreme deity) occupies his abode (Satyaloka), 
higher than all (other) spheres. (9) Through increasing devotion to austerities and Yoga 
(concentration of mind) and because time and the soul are eternal, | shall likewise secure 
that very position for myself. (10) By (sheer) strength of asceticism | shall change the world 
order (by exalting sin and depreciating virtue and by driving away the gods and the Rsis to 
the subterranean regions and placing the demons in the higher spheres) so completely as 
to make it (look altogether) different from what it was before. What shall | do with other 
spheres such as the realms of Visnu and so on, which are destroyed by Time at the end of 
a Kalpa* (the period covering the entire life of the three worlds)?’ (11) We hear of his 
resolution in this behalf and it is with this intention that he has undertaken austerities of the 
severest type. (Kindly) do yourself at once what is advisable (under the circumstances), O 
lord of the three spheres ! (12) Your supremely exalted position, O lord of the universe, is 
conducive to the growth, happiness, prosperity, protection and triumph of the Brahmanas 


and the cows. (If he succeeds in replacing you, there is no hope for the Brahmanas and the 
cows.)" (13) 


sia fetal «= easinerareayfaiuiidt §«6oyqeenertat «= Sears ev 


A cael Sitesa 9 actienquntetch: | fudifmenfrhvitaeaenreenura 1241 
dod Wel ole aurttfed wan fanea fafa: sre wea Seale: 1261 


Thus addressed by the gods, O king (Yudhisthira), and accompanied by the sage Bhrgu, 
Daksa and others, the glorious Brahma (the self-born) wentto the hermitage of Hiranyakasipu 
(the lord of the Daityas). (14) (At first) he did not find the Daitya, who was covered all over 
with ant-hills, grass and bamboos and whose fat, skin, flesh and blood had been consumed 
by ants. (15) Brahma (who was mounted ona swan) was (later) amazed to see him scorching 





* Even though the divine abode of Lord Visnu and other manifestations of the Supreme Deity are all eternal, 
HiranyakaSipu regards them as limited by time because of his perverted intellect, which showed him everything upside down. 





Dis. 3] BOOK SEVEN wawanex eee 


Sr Br Be Be Br Br Be Be Be Be He Ke Hr Br He Me Ke He Gr Be Ke He Le He Ke Hr We Hee We Ke Ke Ky Ke Me Ke Ke We Hee Ke ee He Re Re Me Ke Ke Be He Re Be Re Be Re He He He Be Le Be Be Be Br Br He Se Br Sr 





the worlds with his asceticism, like the sun wholly screened by clouds, and HUES laughingly 
(as follows). (16) 


TENA 
shits ws a ca:fagiste armaqiacisenama  fiaaniifiadl az: 1291 
sare = ET RTL GRIME WoT afery BN 1801 
aaqetaset ake arr froquidenonman a fear: aa 128! 
aaa ast gent waeamiadiea waat faatse fefaaed 120! 
ade: ome: wat anaqugaiaee a smefe aght armed aT iRel 


Brahma said: Arise, arise, O son of KaSyapa ! May good betide you; you have achieved 
your purpose through austerities. (It is therefore that) I, the bestower of boons, have come 
over to you ! Any boon desired by you may (now) be asked. (17) | have witnessed this 
extraordinary and marvellous stamina of yours, that your body having been eaten away by 
gnats, your life actually hangs an your bones (alone). (18) Neither did the former sages 
practise such asceticism nor will the coming ones do it. Indeed, who can support life 
without water for a hundred celestial years (or 36,000 human years)? (19) Through this 
perseverance of yours, (which is) hard to practise even for those who have controlled their 
mind. | have been conquered by you, intent as you are on austerities, O delighter (son) of 
Diti. (20) Therefore, | bestow on you all your desired blessings, O chief of the demons. My 
sight, immortal as | am, cannot go in vain for you, a mortal. (21) 


MG SAA 
saaaissteval tat uferns fatitfeen: | mausesteterfectararenrerar 1221 
a deldnaion aesiiactad: | dalagaaust anqdeqt ari 
Sfuceraeatn fasraghaera: 123 | 
a fidemet 24 gaaenaheatiaaa free ot aestaneleda: 12x11 
Sura Sates: Te sera aan fay waisted FR WeesISTOMTL I! 


Narada continued : Having spoken thus, Brahma (the first-born deity) sprinkled the 
demon, whose body had been eaten away by ants, with the water of his Kamandalu (a water- 
pot made of wood or the hard shell of a coconut)—water which was supernal (in substance 
and of unfailing virtue. (22) From the ant-hill covered by bamboos, he then emerged like fire 
from fuel, endowed with potency of mind, keenness of the senses and strength of body, 
perfect in all limbs, possessed of an adamantine frame, youthful and brilliant as molten 
gold.(23) Perceiving the god Brahma (who was mounted on a swan) standing in the air, the 
demon greeted him with his head resting on the ground, transported with joy at his sight. (24) 
(Then) rising with joined palms in a suppliant posture and gazing at the powerful god with 
unwinking eyes, he offered (his) praises in faltering words (as follows) with tears of joy (in 
his eyes) and hair standing on end. (25) 


fevqeferqeara 
Heard HOGA asa aAraissqd! sifeqa safe wawatfa: wafers 1261 





660 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 3 


BRE Re Re Re Ree Re RRR RR RE Be RR Br Be eRe ee Wr Be Ke Wr We He He Me He Ke Hr Br Wr We Me Br Be Me BeBe He Ke Re He Be Me Ke Br He Be HT Se HEHE BAER HERE HAE A HM He eee tee, 


sre fram ae gucatt quai werden Ga Fed AA: R01 
aq ater aia  wrefagadda | soifsontaieiaeneatiadige KYAT 

HM Wades wa Wa Ua: WMA! 

fara fardttastxarart PITRE § UCMMTTAT: 12k I 

@ ae fanie aa wn uadeanfarn a 

anh BIAISSMaAA AA eA: HATA 1301 

aaa mest  wsamrmrmcarmaca: faronfe 

FEU BIA WARM Heed Wales a vitq sre 13g 

ad: ww aamenaet fea  afaimaa 

fam: mem daz wal fevansist gefcms: 1321 

am fat wee ak  aAfeoromariea 

qq fet aah uRAsa Berm Bre Gee: WUT: 1331 
Seren «= aA «= i fecha «ae OWTad «AA: 13%) 
ae eed a aA Waeaiggeeal Gaal AA TAT 1841 
arden  aAmaetene aaa:ia wat arat aad ae winft 136i 
arafiatquisat Mga: | softest ae teat a aearmiszet 
Baal Gledieomt Afar asset: | aaron aa feafa aféfacisc 





Sa AA Mad A TRAM Ged Pate fears AA Teraseara: 131 


HiranyakaSipu said: Hail to the all-pervading Supreme, the Ground of (the three modes 
of Prakrti, viz.,) Sattva, Rajas and Tamas (the principles of harmony, activity and inertia 
respectively), who—self-effulgent as He is—manifests (again) by His native splendour this 
universe, enveloped at the end of a Kalpa (the life-time of the three worlds) in blinding 
Tamoguna evolved by Time, and whoby His own Self—associated with the (aforesaid) three 
Gunas—creates, protects and destroys it. (26-27) Salutations to the First Cause, who is an 
embodiment of both (scriptural) knowledge and wisdom and who has (objectively) 
manifested Himself in the form of the vital airs, the Indriyas (the five senses of perception and 
the five organs of action), the mind and intellect and the (five gross) elements (which are 
modifications of the five subtle elements). (28) (Itis) You (who) rule over the mobile (animate) 
and immobile (inanimate) creation with the Prana (the life-breath), the foremost of the five 
vital airs, and are (thus) the lord of created beings. (Nay,) You are the Controller of their 
reason and consciousness (the modification of reason) as well as of the mind and the 
Indriyas and are (thus) supreme, being the ruler of the (five gross) elements and their 
properties (viz., sound, touch, sight, taste and smell), the internal senses (viz., the mind, 
intellect, reason and ego) as well as of (their) cravings. (29) Through Your body in the form 
of the three Vedas and the science of rituals conducted with the help of four officiating priests 
(viz., Hota, Adhwaryu, Udgata and Brahma) You popularize the seven types of sacrificial 
performances (namely, Agnistoma, Atyagnistoma, Uktha, Sodasi, Atiratra, Aptoryama and 
Vajapeya). You are the Soul as well as the Inner Controller of (all) embodied beings; for You 
are omniscient, indivisible, without beginning or end and unlimited (in space). (30) You alone 
are the unwinking Time and (as such) shorten the duration of life of (all) men by Your divisions 





Dis. 4 } BOOK SEVEN Con 


such as a Lava (the sixteenth part of the twinkling of an eye). (Nay,) You are the immutable 
Self, occupying the most exalted position, birthless and all-pervading, the Life-giver and 
Controller of the (entire) animate creation. (31) There is nothing apart from You, cause OF 
effect, mobile or immobile; nay, all the branches of knowledge (such as the Vedas and 
Upavedas) and sciences auxiliary to the Vedas (Grammar and so on) are Your bodies; for 
You are (no other than) Brahma (the Infinite) holding the (entire) universe (jn the form of a 
golden egg) within You, existing beyond Prakrti (consisting of the three Gunas). (32) This 
visible universe, O all-pervading Lord, is (nothing but) Your physical Body, with which You 
enjoy the objects of the senses, the vital airs and the mind, though continuing in Your most 
exalted state; while You are (as a matter of fact) the unmanifest Spirit and the most ancient 
Person (the Inner Controller of all). (33) Hail to that almighty Lord (viz., Yourself), endowed 
with the faculties of illumination and obscuration (both), by whom in His infinite and 
unmanifest state all this stands pervaded. (34) If you will confer on me (my) desired 
blessings, O Chief among the bestowers of boons, let not my death occur at the hands of (any 
of the) living beings created by You, O Lord. (35) Let there be no (fear of) death (to me) 
indoors or outdoors, by day or by night, even from anyone else (than those beings of Your 
creation) and even through weapons, neither on earth nor in the air and neither from men 
nor from animals. Nor should | meet my death at the hands of animate or inanimate beings, 
gods, demons or great serpents. (Also be pleased to) grant me the boon of having no 
adversary in battle as well as undisputed lordship over (all) embodied beings, (towering) 
glory like Your own in the midst of all the guardians of the spheres and unfailing mystic powers 
enjoyed by those who have risen to pre-eminence through austerities and concentration of 


mind. (86—38) 


Thus ends the third discourse entitled "HiranyakaSipu asks a number of 
boons (of Brahma)", in Book Seven of the great and 
glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


ee te +4 
PITRE ESN ID 


BAY AT*ASeaTa: 


Discourse IV 


HiranyakaSipu's atrocities and Prahrada's virtues recounted 
ARG Sard 
Wa 86 gd: «Ss cifeoaeniaeana | Merde Mat axrerel Gesu! 2 | 
Narada began again: Thus solicited and pleased with the asceticism of Hiranyakasipu, 
Brahma then conferred on him boons which are most difficult to obtain. (1) 


SeNaTa 
areal Ge: eT a FORA a AA wee fay AU Aah EMT | 2 I 
Brahma said : These boons, my child, which you seek of me, cannot be easily secured 
by living beings. Nevertheless, | confer (on you), O dear one, those very boons though (so) 
difficult to obtain. (2) 
dd wna wamarerze fay: i ghadisaqad Waa: yt: 1 3 | 
wa ost aa fawaand ay:ismagate 38 wademaedi x 





662 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 4 


RRR RRR RR RRR RRR RE RRR RR RELEASE EME BEBE ME SEER A Fe SER RH Re Re He Be He Ber He Hg, 
(ee A EE EE Ee eee Te a ea ea aE maf 


a fafa fea: dat Meta A Fee: | PaCS TATE OTT | 
fageruifaenengata,  frqudta | Aaa! Garrat: greta, MAYA AT 1 & 
adaaudiea aga faa ser oleate wri ae ATT! © | 
Sabra wear wt fifasainesnad cantata  fagendon 
Sareea AA eaTaha esa | S| 

aa fagndtart «oaeRed «Ya: aa BHeaqGenit agdermsmerna: | ¢ | 
aa faalaaeia deemed aldathafaat: seat armleaaitesal: 1201 
Saeed: Ie ST TINY TR Yar: Tat T1821 

aRaaeevan veel wea 4 fidete = (Ue 

Ws frases: aufate: TaTfaceafsitaqvSga: 1221 

mag Wi Aetetert faquarareraratercacn: | 

sorearareaacarfurfsafear fahreadrartacistat Wa 123 1 

SAS aTaAASTaT Read fameaerayereeiea: | 

Tae 4860 - NISefeaeideent «= NT TUS 8X 
Qa Wa anisiafa: mafarieiadt: i scan waning Ga aa eu! 
eT «aed Aaaltadl Aelia cM Bey AMiseae ay: 1261 
Wale st Tao teraea sea: | amceterqaattseferatergdtaces: 1219 | 
Set sofas Gade WO SHI: | eM Slama Va Yur iecl 
a su fisidapanue fara fai agate wart arqa@efrdsa: 128! 

The glorious and mighty Brahma of unfailing grace thereupon returned (to his abode), 
worshipped by Hiranyakasipu (the foremost of the demons) and being (still) extolled by the 
lords of created beings. (8) Having thus secured boons (desired by him) and acquiring a 
golden (effulgent) form, the demon (Hiranyakasipu) nursed a grudge against the Lord, 
constantly recollecting as he did the death (at His hands) of his (younger) brother 
(Hiranyaksa).(4) Having completely subjugated all the (four) quarters as well as the three 
spheres (heaven, earth and the intermediate region) and having conquered and brought 
under control the gods and demons, rulers of men, Gandharvas (celestial musicians), birds 
of the species known by the name of Garuda (secretary bird) and serpents, Siddhas (aclass 
of demigods endowed with mystic powers from their very birth), Caranas (celestial bards) 
and Vidyadharas (heavenly artistes), Rsis (seers), the chiefs of the manes, Manus 
(progenitors of mankind, each presiding over a Manvantara), the lords of the Yaksas 
(another class of demigods), Raksasas (ogres) and Pisacas (goblins), the leaders of the 
Pretas (evil spirits) and Bhitas (ghosts) as well as the rulers of all other species of living 
beings, the great Asura (HiranyakaSipu), who had (thus) conquered the (whole) universe, 
now usurped the thrones of guardians of the (various) spheres along with their glory. (5—7) 
He established himself in heaven, (which is) enriched with the beauty of the celestial garden 
(known by the name of Nandana), and took up his residence in the palace of the mighty Indra, 
built by Viswakarma (the architect of the gods) himself, the abode of the wealth of all the three 


worlds and rich in all luxuries, where there are stairs of corals, floors of most precious 
emeralds, walls of crystals and rows of pillars of cat's-eyes, canopies of various designs and 





Dis. 4 ] ae BOOK SEVEN 663 
ABABA SE SS SAM GM AM MEME AEM HME AEH REMEMBER RETR ERO HEREMERCHEREEEREREAAAEAALAEMAEREEESESE EE 


wonderful workmanship, thrones of rubies and beddings white as the foam of milk and 
fringed with festoons of pearls, and where celestial ladies possessed of charming teeth 
and producing a sweet sound with their jingling anklets here and there see their pretty faces 
(reflected) in the pavements of precious stones. (8B—1 1) In that palace of the great Indra 
revelled the mighty and proud Hiranyakagipu, who had conquered (all) the worlds and was 
(now) their sole monarch, (nay,) whose feet were respectfully tended by gods and 
others severely oppressed by him and who ruled with a strong and iron hand. (12) Upon him, 
O dear one—who remained inebriate with a strong-smelling wine and whose coppery eyes 
ever kept rolling (through intoxication), (nay,) who was a reservoir of austerity, Yoga 
(concentration of mind) and strength of body and acuteness of the senses—waited with 

presents (of various kinds) in their hands all the protectors of the worlds barring (of course) 

three (viz., Brahma, Visnu and Siva). (13) Him, who had occupied the throne of the great 
Indra by (sheer) force, glorified (the celebrated Gandharvas) Viswavasu and Tumburu and 

singers such as myself (Narada). (Nay, other) Gandharvas and Siddhas as well as seers, 

Vidyadharas and Apsaras (celestial nymphs), O son of Pandu, extolled him again and 

again.(14) Propitiated by men belonging to the different Varnas (grades of society) and 

Asramas (stages in life) through sacrifices with liberal gifts, he alone appropriated (all) the 

sacrificial offerings by his own might. (15) The earth consisting of its seven Dwipas (principal 

divisions) yielded to him (all) its produce unploughed; even so heaven showered (on him) 

everything desired; while the sky presented many a wonderful phenomenon. (16) The 

(seven) oceans (lit., reservoirs of precious stones of various kinds), full of salt water, wine, 

clarified butter, sugar-cane juice, curds, milk and pure water respectively, as wellas the rivers 

falling into them (which are spoken of as so many wives of the oceans in view of the fact that 

each of the seven oceans is presided over by a male deity who has a number of wives each 

presiding over a river) bore (to him) heaps of jewels on their waves. (17) Mountains provided 

him with a pleasure-ground in the shape of their valleys, while trees bore him (excellent) 

flowers and fruits in all seasons. (And) he singly possessed (usurped) all the distinctive 

qualities (functions) of the guardians of the (various) spheres. (18) Having thus conquered 

(all) the (four) quarters, the demon (who was the undisputed sovereign of all the three worlds) 

did not feel satiated even though enjoying as he pleased his beloved objects, since he had 

not been able to subdue his senses and mind. (19) 


Wana qHeresraatda: | let He adler welenraqaga: 1201 
aMaeusdfaat: Wa lel: ATleochl: | AANSAAON: BWV Aqreqay 12g! 
TA AAS HIB Bare Metta: | Aqal aA Madd Wee: GaAMealsAeT: 122 I 
sfa & dace: aarfectiatsaen: | sameettest §=fafist 9 ageism: 1231 
Tafa seat | AeA Gea HM: «| ATTA 12s 
a Sp faaeste: adet ware aided fe Yat 9 AdstarroTa 1241 
Saha «eC (i TTR A et ad HREM aie Maadiad 1261 
aa faq aeg TC festy aTa | ae fat fase: & oT oral farzata 1201 
fifa ws Saas veer sea sal slash airy i221 
In this way a considerable time slipped past Hiranyakasipu, who, having been subjected 
to an execration by the Brahmanas (Sanaka and his three brothers), was (not only) arrogant 
and drunk with power and pelf, but violated (the injunctions of) the Sastras (holy books). (20) 


Unnerved by his stern rule and finding no shelter elsewhere, the inhabitants of all the worlds 
along with their guardian deities resorted to the immortal Lord (Visnu) for protection. (21) 








664 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 4 


BeBe Ree PRE Re Re Re eRe Re Re CRE RRA Be Re Be Bee Be Ae Be eB Be ee We We Ve We We We Ve We We Ke We Ke He Ke Ge Be Her He ee Wee Bee eee eee eee ee BEER He He He He 9, 


(They prayed as follows :-) "Salutation be to that quarter where resides the almighty Sri Hari 
the Universal Spirit, and on reaching which the pure-hearted recluses of tranquil mind do not 
return (to the mortal plane)." (22) With their mind and intellect (duly) controlled and rid of (all) 
impurities, they waited upon Lord Visnu (the Controller of the senses) with the aforesaiq 
prayer, remaining without sleep and subsisting on air (alone all the time). (23) A voice without 
(any trace of the speaker's) form and deep as the rumbling of clouds, was heard by them, 
filling the quarters with its echo and bringing with it assurances of safety to the righteous :(24) 
"Do not be afraid, O jewels among gods; may good betide you all ! My sight (as well as the 
hearing of My voice) is undoubtedly conducive to the attainment of all blessings for created 
beings. (25) The wickedness (tyranny) of this vile demon is (already) known (to Me) and | 
shall put an end to it. (Please) wait till then. (26) When hatred develops in the mind of an 
individual towards the gods, the Vedas, the bovine race, the Brahmanas and (other) pious 
souls, nay, towards righteousness and Myself, the fellow surely perishes before long. (27) 
When the demon seeks to harm his own high-souled son, Prahrada, who is free from 
animosity and extremely calm, | shall slay him, even though he is powertul by virtue of boons 
(bestowed on him by Brahma)." (28) 
Mg Saad 
Sal wleyeo d sung fedima:i add adam Ae art erie 
Narada continued : Thus addressed by Lord Visnu (the Preceptor of the universe), and 


bowing down to Him, the denizens of heaven, who were (now) free from anxiety, returned 
and accounted the demon (already) slain. (29) 


Ta Sed: UMAR: aga: | NelelsyereaaT TUMgeanash: 1301 
Seva: Beards: aan farsa: | smmacddyarnea: fPreargqeds: 1321 
aaa arate: faqadttacde: | wigaceat fare  qeytaure: | 
famdeastien arerstaatsia: 1321 
\ fz = \ \ fw: \ apy ‘ 
Slr SATURN et: Gal aleenrat Ss Ue: 1331 
aes Us Jed alate: 13 asefaeiiad ae wnadiat 13x! 
a mepmereea Ruast ga qaisfaad seedfa feeqara’ wares: 134! 
Tena «8a eldiamed wna ae aahiant wa: 136! 
Four most marvellous sons were born to that ruler of the Daityas. Prahrada, (who was) 
a votary of exalted souls, was pre-eminent among them (all) in point of virtues. (30) Devoted 
to the Brahmanas, rich in amiability and true to his word, he had his senses under control and 
was the unique beloved friend and the greatest well-wisher of all living beings as their own 
self. (31) Like a servant he bowed low at the feet of the venerable: like a father. he was kind 
to the poor, he was affectionate like a brother to his equals and looked upon his elders as 
God Himself. Though endowed with learning, wealth, personal charm and high birth, he was 
altogether free from pride and arrogance. (32) Always unperturbed at heart in the midst of 
calamities, he had no craving for sense, objects seen or heard of, since he looked upon them 
as unreal. He had not only controlled his senses, breath, body and intellect, but he had 
thoroughly conquered his desires (too); though a demon (by birth), he had relinquished the 
characteristics of a demon. (33) The qualities of exalted souls (present) in him, O king 


(Yudhisthira), are constantly imbibed by the wise and are not obscured even now (at this 
distant date), any more than the excellences present in the Lord. (34) Even gods, his 


™ 


Dis. 4} BOOK SEVEN 665 - 


enemies, 7" king, treat all aS a model (of virtue) in their assemblies holding discourses On 
the lives of pious souls ! What wonder, then, that others, like you should do it ? (35) It is futile 
(indeed) to recount his excellences which are innumerable. The greatness of Prahrada, in 


whom could be seen a natural affinity for Lord Vasudeva, is (only) hinted at (in the following 
words). (36) : 


aenistal owe | wean PUAejeaea A ada wWidlee 131 
anda: Wear, War: sited gai agent um | tfereufeefine: 1321 
apbaggic ; agvstdietcdcrekt: | pfrgaft fade seat mwmfai3et 
qalt alagenvel frost yeaft afer! HferdnaaramEa ster ZS 1vol 
bag U Home Tega: | cereus end AUT: set 
a STAR Mla area Mace Haar aS e Wott : Hela | 
Ta ow gira «6oygdé-agdareard EMAL SRI 
qerreartad = = Feat = tener | fexvacnfarg Weta learaiast 1¥3 | 
Having laid aside playthings even as a child, Prahrada, who looked like a dunce by 
reason of his mind being (fully) absorbed in the Lord, and whose soul was possessed by Lord 
Sri Krsna as though by some spirit, did not view the world as such (as it appears to worldly 
men, but as full of Sri Krsna). (37) Sitting or walking, eating or drinking, lying down or 
speaking, he was never conscious of these acts, finding himself constantly folded in the arms 
of Lord Govinda (the Protector of cows). (38) Now he would cry (in agony at the sudden 
disappearance of the Lord), his mind overwhelmed with the thought of Lord Visnu; now 
(when the Lord appeared again) he laughed and full of delight at His thought he would now 
sing His praises at the pitch of his voice. (39) Now he shrieked with open throat and now he 
would dance casting all bashfulness to the winds (as It were). Now imagining himself to be 
(none else than) the Lord and completely merged in Him, he imitated His doings. (40) 
Enraptured by the thought of having become one with Him, he would now sit mute with the 
hair on his body standing erect and his half-closed eyes brimful with tears of joy brought by 
constant love. (41) By devoted service to the lotus-feet of the Lord of excellent renown, 
obtained as a reward of the fellowship of devotees claiming nothing as their own, he not 
only brought supreme felicity to himself but also soothed the mind of others (other Daitya 
boys who were his fellow-students), miserable through evil inclination (attachment to the 
pleasures of sense). (42) It was such an illustrious and high-souled son, a great devotee of 
the Lord, O Yudhisthira, that Hiranyakasipu sought to harm. (43) 
eas SATA 
Saf udm afq da Gad aq Yas Mare Aes Way sel 
wa fasfaaert aM, frat: Yara: \sqrewd feast Aart «ae ial 
REUAERI AIRTEL, URAAAL | Ul SiGe Here Fae Ts 
frq: Yara ae Sat ALOT Hatfsa: Se | 
sf Sera HEN URS Alea AAA Melee Ga seAA: 1% 
hae ae : : i llent vows, we are anxious to know 
Yudhisthira submitted ; O celestial sage of exce , We \ 
from you As tems Hiranyakasipu (Prahrada's father) actually inflicted suffering on his 
innocent and righteous son (Prahrada). (44) Fathers fond of their sons do admonish their 


- but! do they persecute them as an enemy 
retract order to correct them; butin no case ) | 
would Wieatees would they oppress obedient and pious sons like Prahrada, who look upon 





666 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 5 


We Ree Re Re We Re Re Re Re Re RRR RRR RE ER RRR eR Re Re RY Re Re Re Be Re Re Re Re ee Be Re Me Re Re Be He Be Be We We Be He We Me Be Hr Re We We We Fe -We SERRE R RRM HM See MH 
Wer y, 


their father as a deity. (Pray,) remove this curiosity of ours, O holy one, as to how the hatreg 
of the father for his son was directed towards the latter's death, my lord ! (45-46) 


Thus ends the fourth discourse forming part of the narrative of Prahrada, 
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 





SERRE 
PGDTEERER SEIS 


31g USaIseara: | 


Discourse V 


HiranyakaSipu attempts the life of Prahrada | 
ARG Sad 

| 

| 

| 


GBA Wa qa: crea: forge: | avert Pat Tel aesrjerhas 1 et 


at Ul Mid ale ele aAaetfaa| WSaAad: Wed AAs | 2 | 
aaa WR skh Was] Ws Dla MY Ate AA wWaAaeswa | 3 | 
Unde  UMSaN usd wed Head aa Aad AY asa | X | 
Narada began again : We are told that the glorious sage Kavya (Sukracarya) was 
chosen by the demons to (fill) the office of their priest. (Hence) his two sons, Sanda and 
Amarka, lived close to the palace of Hiranyakasipu (the ruler of the Daityas). (1) They taught 
(all) subjects that were worth teaching to Prahrada—who had been sent (to their house) by 
the king (Hiranyakasipu) and, though (yet) a child, was skilled in reasoning—as well as to | 
other children of the Asuras. (2) He listened to and immediately reproduced what was taught 
to him by his teacher there; but at heart he did not approve of it, based as it was on the false | 
notion distinguishing a friend from a foe. (3) Placing his son (Prahrada) on his lap, one day, 
Hiranyakasipu (the ruler of the Asuras), O Yudhisthira (son of Pandu), addressed him :— 
“Tell me, my child, what you regard as good (for you)." (4) 


Yel sad 
ag | Asada «= ie «Ss eT fg ferarqaenera | 
fecaissare yeqwRd 8 at «qd Agata 1 & | 
; Prahrada replied : For (all) embodied souls whose mind is ever disturbed with the false 
ideas of I and ‘mine’, | hold this to be good, O chief of demons, that having abandoned one's 


home, which degrades one's soul, and is just like a well whose mouth is hidden, one should 
go to the woods and take refuge in Sri Hari. (5) 


ARG Sq 
et UA ea: 9 UMaereifedt: | sera ahestora fara uxvahefe: 1 6 | 
wahanda aet weve fesniaty: | fasud: ufresat fara efiders vo | 
Narada continued: On hearing the words of his son (Prahrada), full of faith in Lord Visnu 
(who belonged to the hostile party), the demon (Hiranyakasipu) laughed and said :—"The 


intellect of youngsters is perverted by the machinations of others. (6) Let the child be properly 


guarded, so thathis intellect may not be perverted by Brahmanas devoted to Visnu andliving 
| incognito at the preceptors residence.” (7) 





——_ 


| 667. 
Dis. 5 BOOK SEVEN weaceipoereesereee 


Dis. 2 JAneAHReeNeS UNSURE ESENNGneEHRet neta en eee SSS OSE RGR ee eS EERES SS EES e ETE TES 
yeaa =—|_ Sele SarastchT: | SRI SQV ATA SAGES AAT: 1S | 
qa Wee WA a we mM qMigera Pagan afefauda: |< | 
qfgne: Wha Sel A Malswad| Wad MHA THI Hered |e! 


Summoning Prahrada, who had (now) been brought back (from the royal palace) to their 
residence, the (family) priests of the Daityas praised him (by way of encouraging him and 
winning his confidence) and duly questioned him in a soft language and in coaxing words (as 
follows):—(8) Child Prahrada, may good betide you: speak the truth and do not tell a lie. 
Whence this perversion of your intellect, which is not to be found in other boys (your 
companions)? (9) (Please) tell (us) your teachers, anxious as we are to hear (the truth), O 
delight of your race, whether the aberration of your mind has been brought about by others 
or it has come about by itself. (10) 


Tele sara 
a: wget: Gat aaa oa: 1 fantfedirat « aeeret «ad «AA: 1221 
a Uadad: Yar ugeteidtsadiar wa aaensefafa ena 1221 
a Ww wet watteafeteragenot 8 Freed | 
dora sei deaett sereat da fife A via 123! 
am wraeaa se weedeat iam A feed Dagenardtdaaar ex 


Prahrada replied : Hail to that almighty Lord, by wnose Maya (delusive potency) has 
been brought about the false notion that he is ons's own and he is another, which is 
observed (only) in men whose mind is deluded (by that Maya). (11) When He is propitious, 
(it is then alone that) the false notion in men, embracing the distinction that “another is he 
and another am |", which is generally found in beasts, is dispelled. (12) That (supreme) 
Spirit Itself is described (by the wise) as one whose ways cannot be easily comprehended 
by those that are labouring under the misapprehension that “he is my own and he is 
another", and in whose quest even (great) exponents of the Veda such as Brahma (the 
creator) get bewildered. Indeed it is He who is responsible for (changing my outlook and 
making it universal). (13) (Just) as iron, O holy one, moves of itself (without any ostensible 
cause or purpose) in the vicinity of a magnet, so is my mind unaccountably drawn towards 
Lord Visnu (who holds the discus, SudarSana, in one of His four hands). (14) 


ARG Saq 
UMageunrarera fawm  xvema: id five pita: a dat usta: 1241 
STA aaa AAAMAIHAA: | HOSA  aeawsaaisenfet aA: 121 
edad «= SIS HUSH: | GSIAoUaawiaeladisus: 12191 
sit dS feafaretroretsiivetenstarfefa: igre) reaarea «Ss fkertfetrooest 122 


a WW Wale wWeatdadqpaqieas  aalarra ATGYSAS SM 123 I 

Ueat: Ufad are 9 sitaenferarge: i unger fat deat amram fefaizol 

ANAS AaAaT qaaugordia: | snfts, fandgeafkente afefer 122 
Narada wenton: Having said this much to the Brahmana (his preceptor), Prahrada (who 
was possessed of a lofty mind) stopped speaking. Reprimanding him, that poor Brahmana 
(who was a servant of the king) then angrily said :— (15) "O bring (me) a cane! The boy is 


bringing us into disrepute. The fourth expedient of punishment (alone) has been prescribed 
(in the Sastras) for this silly chap, who is proving to be the (very) ruin of his race. (16) Heis 





y 


668 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


OKRA KALA LENLHNRVALK KKH VAHN KH A HAHN Be Wr Br Wr We Be Key Hr Br Br By Be He Br Br BY Br HAL Br Br Ar Br Sr Br Br Er Hr Br Mr Br Hr Br Gr Br sanennmwrene oS: 5 
———_—————S ae 


born a veritable thorny bush in the forest of Diti's sons, who are like so many sandal trees. 
(Nay,) the urchin has served as a handle to the axe, in the form of Visnu, cutting at the root 
of that forest." (17) Thus intimidating him with threats and various other expedients, the 
preceptor taught Prahrada only texts dealing with the first three objects of human pursuit 
(viz., earthly possessions, gratification of the senses and religious merit). (18) Thinking that 
the boy had mastered the four expedients worth knowing (viz., expostulation, gift, coercion 
and sowing seeds of dissension), the preceptor later on ushered the boy, when he had been 
washed and adorned by the mother, into the presence of Hiranyakasipu (the ruler of the 
Daityas). (19) Greeting with benedictions the child fallen at his feet, the demon kept him 
folded in his arms for a long time and derived supreme gratification (thereby). (20) (Then) 
placing the infant on his lap and smelling its head (out of affection) and bathing it with tears 
(of joy), he spoke as follows to the boy, whose face was beaming (with delight), O 


Yudhisthira. (21) 
fervapfarqeara 
Jeehet ad weld fabrqrr ll qecracssys aafeare THA 1221 


HiranyakaSipu said : Prahrada dear, repeat (to me) something excellent that you 


have learnt from your teacher all this time, O long-lived one, and which you have fully 
mastered.(22) 


Were Sara 
Sant chidd fawt: BO Wedaql sted aed aet Awarded 123 | 
Sta dafta fawt wafataacseunifmad wiaeel 3 aaeiseilaai ex! 
frarcacadaal fauantgea iaegmare sat sepia: 1241 
ween  fedtat facet sade san ale set areata aed 126! 
Gra gala wl adareddfi: idee aie Wt: uldteHara 1201 


Prahrada replied: (1) Tohearthe names, praises and stories of Lord Visnu and (2) chant 
them, (3) to remember Him (as well as His names and stories), (4) to wait upon Him, (5) to 
offer worship and (6) salutation to Him, (7) to dedicate one's actions to Him, (8) to cultivate 
friendship with Him and (9) to offer one's own body as well as one's dependants and 
belongings to Him—if Devotion marked by these nine features is practised by a man as 
something already offered direct to Lord Visnu, | reckon that (such Devotion) to be the highest 
(form of) learning. (23-24) Hearing this observation of his son (Prahrada), Hiranyakasipu 
then spoke to the son of his preceptor (Sukracarya) as follows, his lips quivering through 
rage:— (25) "O vile Brahmana, having espoused the enemy's cause and disregarding me 
what is this nonsense that the child has been taught by your wicked self, O fool ? (26) Indeed 
there are !n this world impious souls who have assumed a deceptive garb and whose 
friendship is of a vicious (most unreliable) type. Like the malady* of the sinful, their mischief 
comes to light (only) at the proper time." (27) 


RGA Sard 
q ait A ust aa aaa dasa | 
Tatiana die ws fas aa meg: A AT A: 121 


* We find the following Smrti-text quoted in the commentary of Sridhara Swami :- 
FC FAO TA AIG: Valsexteh: | AMEN F Pra seal ySaeM: i 
“The murderer of a Brahmana suffers (in a future incarnation) from the fell disease of consumption; a (habitual) drunkard 


comes to have discoloured teeth; he who has (ever) stolen gold comes to have diseased nails and he who has violatea the 
bed of his own teacher is afflicted with leprosy (after he has suffered tortures in hell and is born again as a human being).” 





- ST TTT VEE SMTi lene 


he 


, 669 
is. 5 BOOK SEVEN cess 
vis.» leneuntaneannennenasesenscnscnsesstnaseseteseesnanneneansstenea tees ee eees eee 


The preceptor's son replied : This son of yours, O enemy of Indra, is saying something 
which has neither been taught by me nor by anyone else. This view is natural with him, O 
king! (Pray,) curb your anger and do not lay the blame at our door. (28) 

Tee sisiknt Wa seat: aAia aaqeqdla a aalsusradt Ald: 12°! 

Narada resumed : Thus replied to by the preceptor, the demon addressed his son 


(Prahrada) again: "If this vicious idea of your's has not been imbibed from the mouth of your 
preceptor, whence has it come, O inauspicious one?" (29) 


Velq 3a 
aed pet wd: wat a faetsituda ead 
Sera sAaarad ama WA: GAsfataaunrry 130 | 
a a fae ereinfe fe fany quae a afeceiattr: | 
ste aoe aay areiarreargeelta aegl: 1321 
wai Uferettagacn Arete BAA ATA aed: | 
Teal «=o eesnsfaaen «= feast «6 ATC is TAL 321 
Prahrada submitted : The mind of those who are devoted to their home (worldly 
activity), (nay,) who (repeatedly) fall into the hell-like whirlpool of transmigration because of 
their unsubdued senses and are engaged in enjoying over and over again the pleasures they 
have already enjoyed (in this as well as in previous lives), does not get attached to Lord Sri 
Krsna either by itself or through (the exhortation of) others or (even) through mutual efforts. 
(30) Indeed they whose mind is impure (attached to the pleasures of sense) and who, like 
the blind led by another blind man, esteem (only) those regarding the external (worldly) 
objects as. their (only) aim (in life) are unable to realize Lord Visnu, the goal of those who 
recognize Him as the supreme object. (On the other hand,) through actions (done from 
interested motives) they remain bound (like so many oxen) to the rope of the Lord, in the 
shape of His Word (the Veda), with numerous (individual) strings in the shape of different 
denominations (Brahmana and so on).(31) The mind of these (people) fails to approach the 
feet of Lord Visnu (possessed of infinite strength)—the object of approaching which is to get 


rid of evil (in the form of transmigration)—so long as it does not seek a bath in the dust of 
feet of exalted souls who claim nothing as their own. (32) 


saeard «owt fauany cei site ales adlde 1331 
STeTasSaas: Hala ydored: ladda aeal f:aRad Asad: 13X1 
ata A wiger aise feat aM qeelsem: | fagqeredd: wel fawtetaaectiat 1341 
fanial aeaet fe qy alterna: | dtee gees feoiera: 9 asters: 1361 
Tusa fedqperateel CEM SAMA A See: 
fedmeg agierised WwW qa siaft afgasiam isl 
Aeente de: ASSAM: | eleaeene: WadreE Hara 1321 
Hiranyakasipu, whose intellect had been blinded by wrath, threw his son (Prahrada) from 
his lap to the ground as soon as the latter stopped after uttering the aforesaid words. (33) 
Possessed by indignation and anger, and with bloods-shot eyes he exclaimed, "Let this boy - 


be killed at once, deserving of death as he is ! Turn him out, O Raksasas ! (34) (Surely) he 
is responsible for the death of my brother (Hiranyaksa); (for) it is this vile fellow who, 





>. 


670 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


canusenaenahsansensesenstnanannarethashatTensGhwereeneneennerrerneonsnnmnnwnsoe© 
wr 


abandoning his own kith and kin, worships like a servant the feet of Visnu, the slayer of his 
uncle. (35) Indeed, what good turn will this wicked boy do to Visnu either—the boy who yet 
an infant of five years has spurned the love of his parents, (so) hard to renounce ? (36) Even 
an enemy (whois) beneficent as a medicine is a (veritable) son; while an inimical son, though 
begotten by one's own body, should be shunned as a disease. (Nay,) one should amputate 
even that limb which is injurious to one's body (as a whole) and by removing which the rest 
of the body may servive in good health.(37) He should (therefore) be got rid of by all 
(possible) means—through (poisoned) food or (by disposing of him) when he is lying asleep 
or sitting (unguarded). (For) like the corrupt mind of a hermit he is our enemy, though 
masquerading as a friend." (38) 


SSareat wafest wal a Youre: | frmeundereanednaanaeniee: 1321 
Ted Warcikera faeifa ae: | ord ae we: see awdedyg ixo 


T 8 navaesd waders! gHeaher sreaaquaea Aina: 1x2! 
yarscea odie tas: Uftefsa:i ae asec = aferfet ix 


ferste-cans aifireamraanda: | araha: «= aT TRSTCISTA: 13 I 

fenareatirater: Uddinaunta 1a Male Bel eaaaaaE: Pa 
farat ctelaat STaeiechd AEA Ise | 

WW A see atiarns ffi: \delemadde: Ata ate iva 

adumisat a melsemedkaia faana Asad Bre ga Wy: Ise l 

STAT AMIN SAMS AMSAT: sande «ya ufaat A ar ixel 


Actually commanded by the master (HiranyakaSipu), those demons, who had sharp 
teeth, fearful faces and coppery beards and hair and had spikes in their hands, struck 
Prahrada, who was sitting (still), with spears in all (his) vital parts, emitting hideous yells and 
shouting “Cut him down ! Rend him asunder !!" (89-40) Like the commendable acts of an 
unlucky fellow, their blows proved of no avail against Prahrada, whose mind was en rapport 
with the immutable and indefinable Supreme Deity, the Soul of the universe. (41) On that 
effort having been foiled, HiranyakaSipu (the ruler of the demons) felt greatly alarmed and 
resorted with pertinacity to (various) devices of despatching the boy, O Yudhisthira ! (42) 
When (however) the demon failed to get rid of his sinless boy by means of the elephants 
guarding the (four) quarters, serpents and destructive spells, by hurling him down (from great 
heights), employing conjuring tricks, confining him (in caves etc.) and administering poison, 
(nay,) by starving him, exposing him to frost, winds, fire and floods and even crushing him 
under rocks, and could not lay his hands on any (other) means to dispose of him, he was 
plunged in the deepest anxiety. (43-44) (He said to himself,) "The boy was reproached by 
me in a number of ways and devices were (also) employed to kill him. But (lo !) he escaped 
(unhurt) from all those mischiefs and destructive spells by virtue of his own glory. (45) Though 
Standing close to me anda child yet, the fellow is really undaunted in mind and powerful (too). 
Like SunahSepa* he will not forget my wrongs (and is sure to retaliate sooner or later). (46) 
Possessed Of infinite glory and fearing none, he is immortal (to all appearance). My death 
will surely follow as a result of hostility to him. Or else it may not occur (at all). (47) 


sf ad fade fafeomtranetqen! ausmatatarat fafa sft ered: xc! 








*Sunahsepa was the second son of a sage, Ajigarta by name. Having been sold by his parents in favour of the famous 
= king HariScandra, the boy joined his father’s enemy, the celebrated Vi$wamitra, and adopted the latter's line as his parentage. 


. 671. 
Dis. 5] BOOK SEVEN meeecavareee 


BeBe BB RRL EEE ERR AAR RR BRR A RB RRR LLANELLI DBS 
ft ae eR: Yet fegpoTEeewa | 
a wel foi da aa dene a a fara qorereal: waive 
so qd urideue aca fafe dit a usa aa 
qisa uml aaassdaam aac weultla amrftrerfa 140! 


To him, who sat with his face downward, his splendour having been blasted to some 
extent by his anxious thought as aforementioned, Sanda and Amarka, the sons of the sage 
Usana (Sukracarya, the preceptor of the demon race), as the tradition goes, spoke thus in 
private:—(48) “You have conquered single-handed all the three worlds, whose guardians 
are frightened by the (mere) play of your eyebrows. Such as you are, we see nothing for you 
to be anxious about, O lord! Indeed the behaviour of children is no topic for judgment as good 
or bad. (49) Until, however, your preceptor (and our father), Sukracarya (son of Bhrgu), 
comes back, (please) keep the boy bound with the cords of Varuna (the god of water) so that 
he may not abscond through fear. A man's reason returns with (advanced) age as well as 
through the service of exalted souls." (50) 


cette Rhee | sat geataegen Ut F Weary 1421 
may ad am a fiat alagde: i seit wer sae 1421 
am fet ower sofefaaia are AA afeat genmoafetar 143 | 
aassat: get «= Wenetaendqiaadatechea 8 6aloed: «= aT: 1G 
BAA AM WV aa Wea Hela: | sara faghafast qa yeafaa uu 
a @ dead wametsmited: iat a aaa sarmfafea: ue 
udaead = Uist RATRTRCASIUT: | ae HSU «A AeTuTadisae: 1491 
Sia SMa ASNT URASR Seda AAA Nelelqpaha TSAISeATa: 141 
Having accepted the advice of the sons of his preceptor (Sukracarya), saying "Let it be 
so," Hiranyakasipu spoke as follows : "As a matter of fact, such duties (alone) should be 
taught to him as are proper to kings leading the life of a householder.” (51) To Prahrada, who 
_was not only modest but meek as well, O king (Yudhisthira), they always taught in the proper 
‘order only Dharma (the code of right conduct), Artha (the ways and means of producing and 
enhancing wealth), and Kama (the correct way of enjoying the pleasures of sense). (52) 
Prahrada, (however,) did not approve of the (aforesaid) three objects of human pursuit even 
when properly taught to him by his teachers, much less the teaching imparted by those who 
feasted their mind upon the objects of sense through feelings of attachment and aversion 
etc.(53) (One day,) when the preceptor was away (from the school) in connection with his 
household duties, he (Prahrada) was called there (for play) by the boys of his own age, who 
had (now) found time to make merry. (54) Answering their call in sweet words, Prahrada (who. 
was very wise and) who was aware of their devotion (to himself), then kindly addressed them 
as though smiling. (55) Laying aside (their) playthings out of respect for him, however, all 
those boys, whose judgment had not (yet) been vitiated by the precepts and actions of those 
who delighted in sense-enjoyments through feelings of attachment and aversion etc., sat 
round him, O king of kings, with their heart and eyes fixed on him; and the Asura (Prahrada), 
who was an eminent votary of the Lord and who was (most) compassionate and friendly 
(towards them), spoke to them (as follows). (56-57) 





* 


672 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 6 


LEAH COAMHAAN AHA HN LVAAHKVH NMA ASLAM ANH H NH HH AH ne eR TT Pt ee ee Te 
% 


Thus ends the fifth discourse, forming part of the narrative of Prahrada, 
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, e 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. = 


PES SSSR 


HAA Uprseara: 


Discourse VI 
Prahrada's teaching to the demon boys 


Wele Sara 
ai steRcist aa aradmeiaed Ae Wa dayne et 
am fe gerae fat: uelradormi aes aay fra sme: Ged! 2 1 
adits fn teat afeamiada ow cae gaa: | 3 
Acta A mde ad sigela: ama am feat aa Yaawmrger x | 
dd aad pale: aaa wana: iat det area faced gen 4 | 
Wet asad 9 wlaeedt aise: | frene seat oat aeiset siftrea: | & I 
WR ead aA aledl atta fear: isa Tete arencre fara: 1 © | 
RO BA Ae A aslaariee WY ama wsadenaaa feic 


Prahrada said: In this (human) life a wise man should practise virtues conducive to God- 
Realization in his very childhood; (for) birth as a human being alone bestows on us our 
desired object, (viz., lasting happiness), and (yet) such birth is obtained with (great) difficulty 
and is transient too. (1) The only course advisable for a man in this world is to betake himself 
to the feet of Lord Visnu; for He is the ruler and the beloved friend, nay, the very Self of all 
created beings. (2) Like suffering, sensual pleasure (too), O Daityas, is obtained by 
embodied beings in every birth by force of destiny without any effort through (mere) 
connection with a body. (3) No effort for (the acquisition of) such pleasure should (therefore) 
be made; (for) from such effort follows mere waste of (one's) life. (Moreover,) in that way one 
does not attain to the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu (the Bestower of Liberation), the Source of 
supreme bliss. (4) Therefore, having fallen into (the whirlpool of) transmigration (the root of 
allfear), a clever man should strive for (the attainment of) blessedness while the human body 
is yet sound and does not perish. (5) Indeed a hundred years is reckoned to be the (full) 
length of a man's life. Half of it (viz., fifty years) is of no use to a man who has not been able 
to subdue his mind; for, consigned to blinding ignorance (in the form of sleep) he remains 
lying down (in idleness) during the night. (6) (Out of the remaining fifty years) twenty elapse 
in (the form of) infancy, when the fellow remains steeped in ignorance, and in (the form Of) 
boyhood, when he remains absorbed in play; and (another) twenty years roll by in (utter) 
helplessness, when his body is in the grip of senility. (7) The rest (of his life) actually passes 
away in (gross) negligence, when the man remains attached to his home through desire 
which cannot be easily sated and through overwhelming infatuation. (8) 


al Wey Wa reeersraesa: | Aeueldeshauerta farrier | et 
cl aaa faye Monash 8 Stead: | a HUTA: Wert: Aaa aforep 1201 





Dis. 6 |] BOOK SEVEN — 673 


Geb BARRA LLL LEB RAR BR RR BBR RR BRR RA RR ARR R RARER RR AAA ARAL A IIIS IES, 


ot Beat sauna: ag wet seni AI! 
Ged A Aefaa: frat menenonaaenfad: 122! 
Prete gece wm wayat fret ai cht 
Te Adigirenftecias «9 aetss © ee: «9 era 1221 
asd oo alaepfedeam: = afin «= eefeaqaenrs: | 
sirenigd ag uM: ae fama Gedale: 1231 
eesua «= ffeaq 0 fiereetS qemtse$ «= feed ST: 
wda 80 aee-fecret «= fe HRT: 1X1 
faty ss Prenfafasaer «= fais «= seer: 
TAS MATS rea eTeRI CHT Ba HET 1241 
feria an: gest yeaa a aed a 
a: Weauneattanaas: sada am faqe: 1261 
at 4 aa ww a gate at da: warms and: | 
fantfad 4 amet  faerntsrt  afanet faa: ie 
at fag ufer jf tay ag fawnaagi 
saa arTaurenfeeet a Urey ieasmTat: 192 


What man whose senses have not (yet) been conquered can hope to liberate his own 
self, attached to his home and bound with the powerful cords of affection ? (9) Who indeed 
can give up the thirst for wealth, which is coveted more than life itself and which a thief as 
well as a servant anda merchant purchases even in exchange for his most beloved life? (10) 
With his mind attached to his relatives and bound by the affection of lisping children, how can 
aman forgo the private company and sweet friendly counsel of his sympathetic wife? (11) 
Remembering his sons and those beloved daughters (living at their father-in-law's place), 
brothers and sisters as well as his helpless (decrepit) parents, and dwellings provided with 
abundant articles of attractive furniture, hereditary vocations, animals and servants, how 
can. he renounce them ? (Nay,) pursuing actions (of different categories) out of greed (for 
rewards of various kinds) like a silk-worm (which builds a nest in which it gets imprisoned due 
to its leaving no outlet from it) and thinking highly of the pleasures relating to sex and the 
palate, how can he feel disgusted with them, his desires remaining (still) unsated and his 
infatuation knowing no bounds? (12-13) Fond of his family, the careless fellow does not 
perceive his life wearing away in the endeavour to maintain his family nor his (real) purpose 
(in the shape of God-Realization) frustrated; and even though his mind remains afflicted by 
the three kinds of agony everywhere, he never gets sick of them. (14) Though knowing the 
Sin attaching here as well as hereafter to the man misappropriating others’ wealth, the 
householder whose mind is ever intent on (accumulating) riches nevertheless takes away 
others' wealth, his senses being uncontrolled and his desires unsatisfied. (15) Indeed he who 
has a differential outlook, regarding this as his own and that as belonging to another, is not 
able to realize the Self while maintaining his family in the aforesaid manner, O scions of Danu, 
even though he may be learned (in the scriptures). (On the other hand,) he is likely to enter 
the dark region (of hell) even like a deluded person. (16) Since none who is extremely 
Passionate and a (veritable) toydeer for the diversion of lustful women, in whom are forged 
fetters in the form of offspring, is ever and anywhere capable of liberating his soul, therefore, 








Es 


674 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Distg 


DER Re Re Re Be ROR AEHe BEER ERE EERE RE RE RE REE BR EBER Be Br BORER He Br Be Be Be Ke He Fe Be Be Sr Be Ge Sr Fe Be Be Be Hr Ke He Gr Ke Fe Be My He Be We Ke Se We Hr Ke We wr SRR R BR Be HH, 9, 


avoiding from a respectable distance, O Daityas, the company of the Daityas, who have set 
their mind on the objects of senses, take refuge in Lord Narayana, the most ancient Deity; 
(for) He (alone) is the final beatitude sought for (even) by those who have given up 
attachment (for everything). (17-18) 
q Gad Mure agarasquent: | seam adam fegariee wea: ee 
UUWaARg aay 8 HelIAeTafey | Aifrey faery yt AE F101 
TS WA aA Weient ai ws wa wt MeN wWarieisea: 1221 
TIA aT A a Sead Uracaisiacnieud: 122 | 


aS va aaa: WA: |Add «= Sa OTT 123 | 
qa BAT HAY aa Hed Pei sgt Weayqer sar _Feretans: 1x1 
q a aa fend ote fe wforeatimuias A wie: | 


mica: fem a aligad Gq AUST A: 14! 
guid sfa aisfifeakaat gan set agent fafaen a araf | 
Ta deddhaes faa aad Mid waged: UA Ge: 1261 
WH dedens aaa ARG awe: fe AR 
Tet Wedel Uenferaweissydctett AT 1 291 
midi ga wa faaadaqtiad wMmad Bae ARele caagarirel 
Indeed there is not much exertion to him who is engaged in propitiating the immortal Lord, 
O children of the Asuras, He being the very Self of all created beings and present everywhere 
in this world. (19) In (all) created beings, high and low, commencing from the immobile 
creation (the vegetable kingdom) and culminating in Brahma (the creator), nay, in (all) 
material products as well as in the (five) gross elements, in the (three) Gunas (modes of 
Prakrti), in Prakrti (Primordial Matter, which is nothing but a state of equilibrium of the three 
Gunas) as well as in the Mahat-tattva etc., (which constitute a mixture of the three Gunas in 
uneven proportions) exists the one and only one transcendent Spirit, the almighty and 
imperishable God. (20-21) Though really indescribable and undifferentiated Himself, He can 
be hinted at as all-pervading in the form of the subject and as pervaded in the form of the 
objective universe. (22) The supreme Lord consisting of absolute consciousness and bliss, 
He is realized as having His divinity concealed by Maya (His deluding potency), which gives 
fise to the material creation. (23) Therefore, giving up the demoniac disposition, show 
compassion and friendliness to all created beings, whereby is pleased Lord Visnu (who is 
: beyond sense-perception). (24) When that infinite Being, the Cause of all, is pleased, what 
is there that cannot be attained? And whatis the use of our worrying over religious merit etc., 
which are attained in this world of their own accord (without any effort) through modification 
of the three Gunas (in the form of destiny moulded by one’s past actions); and what is the 
use of hankering after final beatitude (which lies beyond the three Gunas) to us who enjoy 
the nectar of His (lotus) feet and are (ever) singing His praises? (25) The triad which has been 
spoken of (in the Vedas) as the three objects of human pursuit—viz., religious merit, worldly 
riches and sensuous enjoyment—as well as the science of Self-Realization, the science of 
rituals, logic and political science and the diverse means of earning one's livelinood—all this 
subject-matter of the Veda | regard as true, (only) if it enables one to offer one's self to the 
supreme Person, one’s Inner Controller. (26) (The divine sage) Narayana, the (eternal) 
Companion (and Brother) of (the sage) Nara (His divine Counterpart), it is said, taught this 





Dis. 7] BOOK SEVEN 675" 


tebe BB SARS SSS SR RRR RR Re BRB RR RR BR RR RR RB Rei Re RR RRC ARRAS ELIAS TS 





well-known and pure wisdom—which cannot be easily attained—to (the sage) Narada. It 
can (however) be (easily) attained by (all) embodied beings who have bathed themselves 
in the dust of the lotus-feet of those exclusively devoted to the Lord, and claiming nothing 
as their own. (27) This knowledge with the immediate apprehension of truth as well as the 
pure (innocent) cult of Devotion to the Lord was received by me in the past through hearing 
from the mouth of the sage Narada, who has seen the Lord (with his own eyes). (28) 
e300 SOA Sg: 
wee a ae ait ads fase TEL wat qeqeat arenrafr get 1291 
TOMAR Aes saa: | eter a: dard aha arafesrsyee 1301 
Tt ATES AAR IASG Sedat AAPA WeleqaRa ISISeATA: 16 
The sons of the Daityas said : Prahrada, you as well as we know no other teacher 

except these two sons of Sukra (the preceptor of the Daityas) and indeed these two have 
been our masters ever since we were mere infants. (29) (And) association with an exalted 
soul (like Narada) was (most) difficult when you were an infant (shut up) within (the four walls 
of) the gynaeceum. Resolve our doubt, O gentle one, if there is any (valid) ground for giving 
credence to your words. (30) 


Thus ends the sixth discourse, forming part of the Narrative of Prahrada 
in Book Seven of the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, 
otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


= =~ » 
ISS Swe ey 


AA Aaa seara: 


Discourse VII 


(Prahrada's) teaching to the Daityas’ sons 
Ag sala 
wa deed: Gt weMmadisa: isa Maa Aaa g 
Narada resumed : Questioned thus by the Daityas'’ sons, the Asura (Prahrada), that 
great devotee of the Lord, smilingly addressed them (as follows), calling to mind my teaching 


(to him). (1) 
Were Sara 
faa sfeasers aa Wetton aqeded WwW dgidge aaamiiai 2 | 
ftifeerra fee clenlaaa: lama urtsuattit area ataated: 1 3 | 
Sarasa PTET: | ae: Welat gga: adetfearwi x 1 
HATA HATA erage eesaTT, | ATAgANeaRA: Aa Woraticaa: | & | 
Seay Usifefacaad Waaligur: sae Weafest at AN ai! & I 
Saami 4 owalfeat wal @iifalagsassmtea  dafteret afi | 
we oat ad «ARTI aS OS Fea ait orate ct 


Prahrada began : Our father (Hiranyakasipu) having left for Mount Mandara to practise 
" austerities (and having been eaten away by white ants), Indra and the other gods launched 
@ great military campaign against the Danavas, saying: "Fortunately (for us) the evil one 








676: SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


[ Dis. 


(HiranyakaSipu), the scourge of the world, has been eaten away by his own sin as a serpent 
by ants." (2-3) Perceiving their mighty undertaking and being struck by the gods, the terror- 
stricken Asura generals, who were all anxious to save their life, hastily fledin every direction 

paying no heed to their wife and children, friends and relations, houses, animals and other 
household goods. (4-5) Desirous of victory, the gods looted the king's residence; while Indra 
(the ruler of the gods) even seized the queen, my mother. (6) Narada (the celestial Sage), 
who came there by chance, saw her being taken on the road, trembling with fear and crying 
like a female osprey. (7) He peremptorily said, "You should not take this innocent lady, O lord 
of divinities ! Leave, leave, O blessed one, the good woman, who is another's wedded 
wife."(8) 

sx Sdd 


sTeaset «Cot atdufaser «atieN: | Sela Alacraa = Aladseuad? Wa: 1 e | 
Indra replied : There is in her womb (in the form of an embryo) the formidable seed of 
HiranyakaSipu (the enemy of the gods). Let her (therefore) stay (in my captivity) till (the time 
of) delivery. | shall let her go when | have achieved my object (by killing the new-born 
babe).(9) 
) Ag said 
37a ffeaicas: MASAIAIMTaAM Aer | aa A WRIA ALTA Ait 1g! 
sane  fagest  tatniqaaa:iamadtanada ufime fed aatiee 
Narada said : He (the child in her womb) is not only (absolutely) sinless but a great 
devotee of the Lord and eminent by his own qualities. This mighty servant of Lord Visnu will 
not meet his death at your hands. (10) Thus addressed (by Narada) and accepting the advice 


of the celestial sage, Indra left her (my mother) and going round her (as a mark of respect) 
out of devotion to me (the beloved of the eternal Lord), returned to heaven. (11) 


adt at aeagf: aarta fonsm saree ae Arad aA MATA: 1221 
qaaaieie 9 eadtht  aeaepdyari aac caufaaiid areal A ada 1231 
mM Ue dA Vaal UMA Udlistdadt waste  Aarewomgda iv! 


Then the sage took our mother with due honour to his own hermitage and, comforting her, 
said, “Stay here, my daughter, till the return of your husband." (12) She too signified her 
assent in the words "So be it !" and lived near the celestial sage, free from all fear, so long 
as my father (the ruler of the Daityas) did not cease from his terrible austerities. (13) For the 
well-being of her embryo (myself) and in order to deliver it at the desired moment (after the 
return of her husbanq) the virtuous and pregnant lady waited upon the sage in that hermitage 


with supreme devotion. (14) 
male: prelate: §«Meleuarian: | ender a AM a Aerie fader eu 
ad FIOM sthard vikararghertad | safeorgyed: at AeATeATETA, wf: 186 
waa «Wart ale Mead au: | aaneedl et: seid: Galo aA aM 12091 
SEM: Uf Wal eB Cea Ae: wera gar areawefdat 1c 
STN FAIS: Wes We: AAs B97: | sifatena: Sal Maen SAS: 1221 
Udgiertatdgeraa wari: Ut: 13% Atala eel Alest ASI 120 | 
eo am mag ee: ay athe = engar 
aay ea deaissearennfaq semi  owita ire 





Dis. 7] | BOOK SEVEN 677 


In order to assuage her grief and for my sake too the compassionate and powertul sage 
imparted (to her instruction in) both the essence of religion (in the shape of Devotion to the 
Lord) and pure wisdom (discrimination between the Self and non-Self). (15) That teaching, 
however, disappeared from the mind of my mother due to (the inordinate) length of time (that 
has since elapsed) and because of her womanly nature. Its memory has not (however) left 
me, the favoured of the sage, even to this moment. (16) That devotion and wisdom can take 
root in you too if you give credence to my words. Through faith such sense as is proficient 
in uprooting the feeling of identification with the body etc. can appear even in women and 
children as it has dawned on me. (17) Through the agency of Time, whichis by its very nature 
capable of bringing about transformation, the six well-known states of being commencing 
with birth (viz., birth, existence, growth, ripeness, decay and destruction) are seen in relation 
to the body (So long as it is connected with a soul) and not in relation to the soul, just as they 
are observed in the fruits of a tree (so long as they exist on the tree, and not in the tree itself, 
which stands comparatively longer). (18) The Spirit is eternal, free from decay, taintless, one 
(without a second), the knowing subject, the ground (of everything), changeless, self-seeing 
(self-effulgent), the cause (of the universe), all-pervading, unattached and having no sheath 
(of Maya). (19) With the help of these twelve transcendent characteristics of the Self a wise 
man should give up the false notion of'l'and 'mine'—sprung from ignorance—with reference 
to the body and persons and things connected with the body. (20) Just as a goldsmith 
acquainted with the process (smelting etc.), of extracting gold from its ore is able through 
those processes to find gold in the ore existing in gold mines, so is a man well-versed in 

the science of the Spirit able to discover the (true) nature of Brahma in the bodies (of the 
various Jivas)—which are so many fields (as it were)—through the (diverse) processes of 
ascertaining the true nature of the Self. (21) 
3TSt Neda: siepraa wa fe aan: | fam: Seared: Game: AAMT 1221 
tee Added si aati fReri sma qa: geet Afa Adtaad ae 1231 
sTaaeatatenur fadeharardisset | athenrraararatedygaraacacar: 12¥1 
Gesamte: «6aslahit « qda:ia Bary Giseet: Gea: ae: 1241 
Ufihaant: 4 udeddfagte: firaiea: | eae gee TWelalgtaraand 1261 
Went fe dant queda: | sarqeismeist ga: ax gaa 1201 

(Out of the total number of categories into which the entire creation has been ultimately 
resolved) by teachers (of the science of the Spirit, the sage Kapila and others) eight (viz., 
Prakrti or primordial Matter, the Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic intelligence, the ego 
and the five subtle elements) have been declared to be the causes; three (viz., Sativa, Rajas 
and Tamas) are as a matter of fact only modes of Prakrti (and therefore not distinct from it); 
sixteen (viz., the five senses of perception, the five organs of action, the mind and the five 
gross elements) are modifications and the Spirit is spoken of as one because of its 
connection with all (as their witness). (22) Of course, the body, (which is) a concatenation 
of all (these), is of two kinds—mobile (animate) and immobile (inanimate). It is here (in the 
body) that discarding everything else as ‘not this’, the Spirit, should be sought for by men 
coolly reflecting on the creation, continued existence and dissolution of the universe with a 
mind purified (rendered acute) through reasoning (both) on the lines of Anvaya (the all- 
pervasiveness of the Spirit) and Vyatireka (the distinctness of the Spirit from everything 
else). (23-24) Wakefulness, dream and deep sleep—these are the (three) functions of the 


intellect. (And) he alone by whom they are (directly) cognized is the transcendent Spirit, the 
witness (of all material phenomena). (25) By means of these modifications of the intellect, 





678. | SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 


SRR RR RR RE RRR RE RE R RERER RERE RERRR RE RE BY e ER RERE E A HET BE Be Be Be Be BE RE Be Be BBE SE Be EH BSE SSE AE BY SB YB Br BY AH a a Bey, 


eee <<... ———a ee a 


(which are) products of the three Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas respectively) and the 
result of actions, and which are rejected (as attributes of Matter) one should ascertain the 
essential character of the Spirit (whichis connected with these states) through its association 
with the intellect (as the very ground of the latter), even as one comes to know (the presence 
of) the air through the (different) odours (that are borne through it). (26) In fact, metempsychosis, 
which is perpetuated by the (three) Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and actions prompted by them, 
is brought about through the intellect. Though rooted in ignorance and (therefore) unreal, it 
is postulated as a dream. (27) 


aaicake: wader ado Soren aiedeor alt: «sereroeat «feta: 1201 


aaa eo waded: aaa swtafa ae arena wa: 12e1 
Tega da Wiest Aldst Waa Alot 
Tea AMA W aida UreHdom aalerqeeadMid cAlessercomary: 1321 


ee: ada wae wand ga: i sit ant aaa Hee: Bel AMAT 1321 
wa faiiaseatt: fad afetetianed smafa aa des wher 133 1 


Therefore, the (very) seed (in the form of nescience) of actions prompted by the three 
Gunas (Sattva, Rajas and Tamas) ought to be burnt by you. This is (what they call) Yoga (the 
highest achievement), which stops the functioning of the intellect. (28) Of the thousands of 
devices helpful to it, this alone.has been recommended by the Lord, viz., the practice of 
virtues through which love may be duly and easily developed for the almighty Lord. (29) This 
can be accomplished by serving one's preceptor and by offering (to him) with devotion all 
that is got by one, nay, through the fellowship of pious devotees and worship of God, 
through reverence for stories of the Lord; by celebrating His virtues and exploits, through 
contemplation on His lotus-feet and through the sight and worship of His images and so 
on. (30-31) (Nay,) one should (as far as possible) duly gratify (the various) living beings with 
their objects of desire under the belief that the almighty Lord Sri Hari is present in all created 
beings. (32) In this way devotion to the all-powerful Lord Vasudeva is practised by those who 
have subdued the six senses (including the mind, the internal sense)—devotion through 
which one fully develops love (for Him). (33) 


Pera oat wre dai lems: nat 
aatetiqenspie Sients saa wa Fela iar 
a Tad ga wmiag¢emat welt aed AW. 
Te: wach 8 sad  aRatieemfataaa: 1341 
ae] GarqMaaatseetaMaapdrarachia: | 
fameistyzet det afar 4 anereneri36! 
BM Sse AaSal we: AT: Wa ictamanass | 
qq sel fated fagdereddt wet gat adler i3el 
AIA Re A ae fixa Ua | 
Seen: weet area: fa fae: 3c! 
Wa: Hea Uae: Yael Yet et Hercnlaeyea: | 
adsiarn: augas: dia veh frat fret wen: 1381 





Dis, [ssnseeennnannnensstnsresnnnse Oooo oN raseunanneenanannnaasennneseeteSee® 
Ua fe wren: sega: am anit afrena: afer a frien: | 
AMIegSAIsaUT uy Werchaat WsIdaAsela Xo | 
When, on hearing (accounts) of His (brilliant) achievements, incomparable virtues and 
heroic deeds wrought through His (various) forms assumed for sport, the devotee sings 
loudly with an open throat and in a voice choked with tears, shouts and dances, his hair 
standing on end due to excessive delight, nay, when he, like one possessed by an evil spirit, 
now laughs, now Weeps, now sits in meditation, now greets the people and now, devoid of 
shame, exclaims: O Hari! O Lord of the universe !! O Narayana !!!" with his mind fixed on 
the Lord (his very Self) and heaving a sigh every now and then, all his bonds get loosened 
at that time and his ignorance and latent desires are burnt; and his mind and body being 
attuned to Him through contemplation on His pastimes, the man attains to Lord Visnu (who 
is above sense-perception) by recourse to the highest device of Devotion. (84—36) The wise 
recognize (mental) communion with Lord Visnu as a (sure) means in this world of putting a 
stop to the cycle of birth and death in the case of an embodied soul of impure mind and they 
(further) recognize it as identical with the bliss of absorption into Brahma. Therefore, worship 
that Ruler of your heart in (the very lotus of) your heart. (37) What extraordinary exertion, 
O demon boys, Is involved in the worship of Sri Hari, one's own Self and friend, (nay) present 
in one’s own heart like the space there? What is to be gained through efforts for the 
acquisition of objects of senses, such efforts being common to all embodied creatures ? (38) 
Riches, wife, animals, sons and other relations, houses, land, elephants, treasury and. 
luxuries (of various kinds)—(nay,) all kinds of wealth and enjoyments are momentary and 
fleeting. What delight can they afford to a mortal? (39) Similarly the well-known (ethereal) 
worlds earned by means of sacrifices are (also) perishable and excelled by other (higher) 
worlds and are not free from impurities either (because exciting envy in the minds of others). 
Therefore, with a view to Self-Realization, worship, with absolute devotion, the supreme 
Lord, in whom no fault is seen or (even) heard of. (40) 
geez paler fagtietanat: | adam facatanar faad merixe! 
Gar gute ager se alti: | cassettes gaat: Walaa: 12! 
mara «86s lerdal GEA: 1A a eee UNA VET arti a Isat 
faq AaeAAAERMINEAAa: (TA ARPA «ANAT: 1s 1 
fates: ae eA AM: | sHewiderarceled: su 
frame wie: fearceydisqu: | Feeagaend faa wis: ive 
aula 40a (Ges RIT i edie «= ea «= fain: Iv 
 aeqreatss crass easy) ACUISTET: | UstdteaIssaale Sheaey isc 
adem wart  sfeiear: fra: | Yddeles: Ghd: Hd stadia: ive 
Sasa FAS al aal Weld Wa Al WMH AHS GRIM Ae AM aay 1401 
(Besides) a man accounting himself wise (also) invariably obtains results which are quite 
the opposite of the object aiming at which he performs actions in this world time and 
again.(41) The aim of a man given to action here is to secure happiness and freedom from 
misery. But he who was (formerly) filled with joy due to desirelessness ever reaps misery 
through desire (afterwards). (42) The very body for which the Jiva (an embodied soul) 
hankers after enjoyments through actions performed from interested motives actually 
belongs to others (in that it is sure to be devoured by dogs and jackals, crows and vultures, 
if left uncared for after death) and (is something that) hugs the soul and (having served it for 
a fixed time) departs (leaves it). (43) How much more so are one's progeny, wife, house, 


680 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 7 
RRARARAAARRRE REALE RERE SESE SRE A SSS SESS SSE A EH He ee 
a ——— 


wealth and so on or (in the case of a sovereign) one’s kingdom, treasury, elephants 
ministers, servants and friends, that are connected with the Jiva only indirectly (through the 
body) and are treated as one's own (and notthe very self) ! (44) Of what avail can these trifling 
things—which are sure to disappear with the body and are (veritable) evils, though appearing 
as something worth seeking—be to the soul, the very ocean of eternal bliss ? (45) (Just) 
consider whatinterest (enjoyment) can there bein this world, O demon boys, tothe embodied 
soul, suffering through its (past) actions in all the stages commencing from conception (till 
death)? (46) With the body as its (obedient) servant the embodied soul undertakes actions 
(of various kinds, both good and evil) and with (the aforesaid) actions moulds a (future) body 
(and the circle goes on from birth to birth) inasmuch as both (actions as well as the body) 
proceed from ignorance. (47) Therefore, worship through desirelessness the desireless and 
almighty Sri Hari, your very Self, on whom (our) riches, enjoyments and pious acts 
depend.(48) Lord Sri Hari is the (very) Self, Ruler, beloved friend and Inner Controller of all 
living beings (whose bodies have been) fashioned by gross elements evolved (in their turn) 
by Himself. (49) Taking shelter under the feet of Lord Visnu (the Bestower of Liberation), a 
god, demon, human being or Yaksa and even a Gandharva (a celestial musician) bids fair 
to become blessed as I. (SO) 


acs fara taaqfiad aMuenn: i sua YEcqe A qd A Sea 142 
4 aH a ag AM aA ae A AMA al Medsnea Vaan eieae fase 1421 
dat wi wat ahh ged aaa:isneue ada  adyeiertat 1431 
Saat aerate fea: Qal Asia: | GM AM: Wasa: Gra Weleal Wat: 1 4X 
Uda lense Ga: Wiel: Ut: Ba: | VHraaketiied Gd Aaa Adar 14! 
; sta SEP Tad AEG GRACE Sedat SHAH VelesaRa CAAA A AAAS: 19 
Neither birth as a member of the twice-born classes, god or Rsi nor character nor 
versatility nor charity nor austerity nor the performance of sacrifices nor purity (of mind and 
body) nor sacred vows are conducive to the pleasure of Lord Mukunda, O Asura boys ! Sri 
Hari is propitiated through unalloyed Devotion (alone). All else is empty show. (51-52) 
Therefore, practise devotion, O Danavas, tothe almighty Lord Sri Hari, the Soul of all created 
beings, by treating every creature as though it were your very self. (53) For there are (many) 
Daityas, Yaksas and ogres, womenfolk, Sddras (members of the labouring and artisan 
classes), cowherds, birds, beasts and those living by sin that have attained immortality 


(through Devotion). (54) Exclusive devotion to Lord Govinda (the Protector of cows)—which 


is the same as beholding Him in every creature—this alone has been declared to be the 
highest interest (goal) of man in this world. (55) 





Thus ends the seventh discourse, entitled " (Prahrada ‘S) Teaching to the Daityas’ 
sons’, forming part of the Narrative of Prahrada, in Book Seven of 
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise 
known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


DIS SE SIS 


=a 


681 


Pr Sr Br Sr Be Re BRR Be ERAT BEBE HEA 


Dis. 8 BOOK SEVEN 


eRe BARBARA RR RRR EAR RARE EBERLE RE ERE REREAD BEES 


SATA Seas : 


Discourse VIII 
Lord Nrsimha extolled on the death of the demon king 


(at His hands) 
Ke sad 
aq aaa: ad sen deqafeia wayettaeana Teafarferra | 2 | 
BATA A ACTA Seguenrdaherdn | srsed UiteaRal Ue staeate AMT | 2 | 
seat dea Sel Sad CEM alegre: Gt ed Aa ati 2 | 
Narada resumed: On hearing his (Prahrada's) exhortation all the Daityas' sons forthwith 
accepted it because of its faultlessness, but not the teaching of their preceptor. (1) Alarmed 
to perceive their mind intent on (the realization of) a single purpose (viz., devotion to the 
Lord), the preceptor's son thereupon quickly and correctly reported the matter to the king.(2) 
Hearing of that unwelcome misdemeanour on the part of his son (Prahrada), which was hard 
to bear, Hiranyakasipu made up his mind to dispose of his son, his limbs shaking under the 
impulse of anger. (3) 
fecal USeat area seleddeeur | steam: wea fait waar! x | 
wwe =a gaf@aafereaa iad: ued sa weaepfaclen: | & | 
20 eo Gfdeta ale ONE | Mel Teed TS Alel ANA & | 
PEM TA Hod Aa Slat: BeM: | dal Asvildages aed fHracisem: 1 © 1 
Reproaching in a harsh language Prahrada—who was not only (thoroughly) disciplined 
but was bent low with modesty and standing with joined palms and (as such) was (altogether) 
undeserving of such treatment—and regarding him with a wicked and crooked eye, the 
demon, who was cruel by nature, spoke (as follows), hissing (all the time) like a serpent struck 
with the foot:—(4-5) "O unruly, stupid wretch, causing discord in our family, | shall despatch 
you this (very) day to the abode of Yama (the god of death)—you, who have grown (so) 
obstinate and have slipped away from my authority ! (6) By whose might, O fool, have you 
violated, like an undaunted person, the authority of one, viz., myself, before whom, when 
angry, (all) the three worlds, including their guardians, shake (with fear)?" (7) 
Yelq sald 
I mas A waaay WH a a ae afeat amram 
mses 4 femgtt a weet Gt ast Nuit: 1 cI 
a Sat: Tle SoHUSATAT: AE: AAA sa 
a wa fag wa: waht: gama urea: 1 ¢ 1 
Wart wala ane: ad wal aaa A ata fafea: | 
masthidtteret saute akg Wide Hed AAU 1Q01 
aaa won fafa aad ard Uh aie feat carl 
fide Wa ware efeqt aren: waleruar: aa: atieei 


Prahrada replied : He is unquestionably the strength not only of mine but yours as well, 





[564] B. M. 24— 





Pibdeeee.. 





682 - SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. 8 


RRR RR RRR ER BE BER ER BBE EB BERET RE EERE ERE HB RE He BREE BAY He BEBE ESE BESET AE REE SE SERB RR RR Br BH Be BB BR Heh ee ee oy, 


O king, nay, of other powerful beings (too). It is He by whom (all) these (creatures), (both) 
high and low, animate and inanimate, commencing from Brahma (the creator), have been 
held under sway. (8) He is the (supreme) Ruler; He, the mighty Kala (Time-Spirit) and the 
(very) embodiment of organic and mental powers, physical strength and fortitude. The 
supreme Controller of the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti), itis He alone who creates, protects 
and devours (dissolves) the universe by means of His potencies (in the form of Rajas, Sattva 
and Tamas). (9) Abandon you this demoniac disposition of yours and keep your mind 
equipoised. There are no enemies other than an unsubdued and errant mind. For that (viz., 
maintaining the poise of the mind) constitutes the eminent and correct procedure of 
worshipping the Infinite. (10) Some regard the four quarters, the four intermediate points, the 
sky overhead and the subterranean regions below as conquered by themselves, without first 
having curbed the six marauding thieves (in the shape of the five senses of perception and 
the mind). (Indeed) whence can there be enemies, born of one’s own ignorance, in the eye 
of the knowing and pious soul who has conquered his mind andis (thus) alike to all embodied 


beings ? (11) 
ferrarHrerqeara 
ar a udemista aisha famed | aasun fe ware Aq Efegar fir: 1221 
ARAM WN Heal scla: | ral Sle @ Waa HSM A A saa 1231 
ase famenma fax: wrarg ainda eteate get aeoritftra sex! 
Te  0ogemdgtdaeat TTT = TE: | 
Ge weld ated eas ddisiidas: waafear ieul 
dea 0 diet «= fraeisfasitaott «9 ayet Ss AaTUSHeeAehed | 
4 a wfawaord wanes: ser were At 126! 
a famaq wags fFera felengedagay | 
aaa «= tC tC (GB CC(Gs«éfeeA—Ss TRAETTT: 1201 


HiranyakaSipu replied : "Evidently you are keen to die, now that you are bragging too 
much. For the words of those who are anxious to die, O slow-witted one, are sure to be 
incoherent. (12) Where is that Lord of the universe other than me, that has (just) been 
mentioned by you, O wretched one? If it is urged that he is (present) everywhere, wherefore 
is he not seen in the pillar (over there)? (13) | being all-in-all, here do | sever your head-from 
your trunk, a braggart that you are. Let Hari, whois the asylum sought for by you, protect you 
today.” (14) Thus tormenting again and again his son (Prahrada), that eminent devotee of 
the Lord, with abusive words (uttered) in anger, the great and mighty demon (HiranyakaSsipu) 
sprang from his exalted seat, taking his sword, and knocked the pillar with his fist. (15) That 
very moment there rose in that pillar a most terrific crash, as a result of which the shell of the 
cosmic egg cracked (as it were) and on hearing which, as it reached the spheres of Brahma 
(the creator) and others, they for their part actually suspected the dissolution of their very 
abodes, O dear Yudhisthira ! (16) Displaying his valour in his anxiety to get rid of his son 
(Prahrada), he heard that unprecedented and weird sound; but he did not descry inside the 


court the source of that sound, due to which the leaders of the Asuras (the enemies of the 
gods) had got frightened. (17) 


aa fan foyemied anti a wagiaeg aren: | 
squads, MY AM A Wt A AMNTIVZ! 


Pit rw ail 


Dis. 8] “BOOK SEVEN eee 


HAALAREBE SA SAS ASAE AERA RR RA HN BeBe Be Re BeBe Re HH RR RH RR RA AA AAA AAA ELA T 


a Wet ouftdist. asa wer ven ffs 
TH oat aft at fafa  feadagaser ies! 
TAR = aaferisadt «= aieetass «6 WEIL 
TAA TASC | RATATAT ATT | 20 | 





maar Asa «ahve «aa: walsta aaa fer 123 | 


In order to substantiate the utterance of His servant and His presence in all objects, the 
Lord appeared in the (aforementioned) pillar of the court, assuming a queer form, which was 
neither of a beast nor of a human being. (18) Thus looking intently on all sides, he 
(Hiranyakasipu) beheld a being issuing forthwith from the interior of the pillar and said to 
himself, "He is neither a beast nor a human being. Oh, what may be this strange creature, 
bearing the form of a man-lion?"(19) Before (the eyes of) Hiranyakasipu, who was (busy) 
musing on that most terrible figure, visibly stood the Lord in the form of a man-lion. It had 
fierce eyes shining as molten gold and a face swollen with its dazzling hair and manes. (20) 
lt had fearful teeth and a tongue waving like a sword and sharp as the blade of a razor, and 
looked (all the more) frightful because of its frowning aspect. It had erect and motionless ears 
and a gaping mouth and nostrils amazing as a mountain-cave, and excited terror with the 
parting of its jaws. (21) The body touched the (very) skies and it had a short thick neck, a 
broad chest and a slender waist; it was covered all over with hair white as moonbeams, was 
endowed with multitudes of arms extending on all sides and had claws that served as 
weapons. (22) Hard to approach (because of its terrible aspect), it had driven away the 
Daityas and the Danavas with all its own and other choicest weapons (such as the 
thunderbolt). "Surely enough this is (nothing but) an expedient thought out for my death by 
Hari, who is adept in many a conjuring trick. But what can be done by him, though fully 
prepared?" (23) 

Wi qaeawade weet wat af sft 9 eeepane: | 
aofadisat uUfad: ude ae qfetetsifa aisqredet 12x 
a aq fafat aa aaah adstear at J Guftad an: | 
AaISHIUEINASA HEAT ear qlee TEMA 124 | 
aq faust ame waren welet meted aoe 
a aa eeieriodeaad famed  adeafeteaa: ize! 
sTaRaaed «Rew «eT «CIN «= MATS: | 
q waa ffoddaisa ageramt yet Aerqe: | 
Weed Gat we at frat erie 
a qaqa WMda saa MAC oa IaaN aft: 1 
pase «= act «= retical «Se AaISTa: 121 


ON EE ae a a 


>. 


684 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 8° 


sunnesssacuanneneesnssnnsecsssnnnnenesnessennnnnanvosesaaannooeenennneetnnnaanie 
es , . ates a | 
SR Stara. es eteiefe «est FeTfarerT <1 
GUANA UTSoraa Sard fafwerafiear | 
aS  aaeaaet feast ae: 1R01 


TATE eT eMEAATE fagea TANTRA | 
Se | WANA arafwifeeldvegqansqrary Asa: 1321 


Thus murmuring and arming himself with a mace, Hiranyakasipu (who was a veritable 
elephant among the Daityas) rushed roaring towards Nrsimha (the Lord appearing in the 
form of a man-lion). Fallen into the nimbus of Lord Nrsimha at that time, the said demon 
vanished like a moth fallen into a flame. (24) Indeed it was no wonder that the demon (who 
was darkness personified) should have disappeared into that Embodiment of Sattva 
(unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), who had of yore (at the dawn of creation) actually 
swallowed up the darkness (in the form of Tamoguna, which was responsible for the 
dissolution of the universe) by His own effulgence. Then, coming near, the mighty demon 
angrily assailed Nrsimha with his mace of tremendous force. (25) Nrsimha (who was no other 
than Lord Visnu, the Wielder of a mace) seized him even as he paced forward, mace in hand, 
justas Garuda (the son of Tarksya, nicknamed Kasyapa) would catch hold of a huge serpent. 
At that time the demon slipped from His hand, even as a serpent would from the clutches of 
Garuda sporting with it. (26) The divinities, including the guardians of all the spheres whose 
abodes had been usurped (by him) and who stood behind a curtain of clouds, O Yudhisthira 
(a scion of Bharata), regarded this as something not good. Believing Lord Nrsimha, from 
whose hand he had (just) escaped, to be afraid of his own prowess, the great Asura, who 
knew no fatigue in battle, encountered Him with vehemence, tightly grasping his sword and 
buckle. (27) Giving forth a shrill peal of laughter, rendered (more) terrific by a roar (that 
accompanied it), Sri Hari, who was possessed of extraordinary impetuousity, seized the 
demon, who was darting up and down with the swiftness of a hawk, brandishing his sword 
in many ways so as to leave no weak point, but whose eyes had (now) closed (due partly to 
his enemy's roar and laughter and partly to His dazzling splendour). (28) Throwing down, at 
the entrance (of the hall) on His thighs, the demon—who was impatient at having been 
caught and was wriggling all over, and whose skin had remained unscratched (even) by 
(Indra’s thunderbolt)—(just) as a serpent would knock down arat, Lord Nrsimha tore him with 
His claws in (mere) sport even as Garuda (the king of the birds) would tear a most venomous 
snake. (29) Licking with His tongue the corners of His gaping mouth, the Lord, whose frightful 
eyes were difficult to gaze at due to fury and whose manes and countenance had turned 
reddish, stained as they were with drops of blood, and who wore a garland of (the demon's) 
entrails, shone as a lion would by having killed an elephant. (30) Casting off the demon, 
whose lotus-like heart had been split open by His pointed claws, the Lord, endowed as He 
was with a multitude of stout arms, slew with His nails, weapons and heels his bodyguards 
that had followed Him on every side in thousands with uplifted arms. (31) 


aeaya = eet: OR eT eg fBfaqpfae: | 
asia: seen fagauftigiesitin fafa fama: 1321 
UES SAUC IC SIG Cora Tedd «= at SCCerfaciifear 
Vor: VAG tea mia G met a W133! 





Dis. 8] BOOK SEVEN 685 


AR EREEREL LER EE EERE EA ASAE RG LL LALA LE TASER YARD LSE EES 
wd: wefasqm 8 yet aude 86 fay 
TORTI, OC HT 13% 

Shaken by His hair, clouds began to scatter away and the planets were robbed of their 
lustre by His (very) glances. Tossed by His breath, the oceans grew turbulent and, frightened 
by His roar, the elephants guarding the quarters trumpeted. (32) The firmament was 
overcrowded with aerial cars thrown up (from below) by His hair and, sore pressed by His 
feet, the earth was shaken from its foundations. Mountains flew as a result of His rapid 
movement, while the sky and the quarters were eclipsed by His splendour. (33) Nobody 
dared approach the almighty Lord, who had then taken His seat on the excellent royal 
throne in the court and had collected His (consummate) brilliance (in that person), (nay,) who 
was (yet) furious, even though no adversary was visible, and wore a most dreadful 


countenance.(34) 
wleadtetasdt «86 dated SUC (Gs 
Teta aerataa Ug: sEAadday: Othe: 1341 
qq taarafetisers «feat «age AeA 
Qa gedaisa war wedqen again: fer: 1361 
war fag  sersititenea:iaasa: foe: fag faerennetem: 1301 


Ta: SST «Uda « Teraitaranum: | aan: fees Adten: feaeglenart: 1321 
a fama: «ad qrepqcea: 1 of agefege smd dada 
Bist Aallaes Allee: YAH 1391 


Hearing that the celebrated Hiranyakasipu (the first and foremost son of Diti), the 
headache of (all) the three worlds, had been killed in a combat by Lord Sri Hari, celestial 
women, whose faces were blooming with an outburst of joy, sent down showers of flowers 
upon Him again and again. (35) At that time the sky was crammed with rows of aerial cars 
of heavenly beings eager to have a look (at the Lord). The tabors and drums of the gods were 
then sounded: while the foremost of the Gandharvas (celestial musicians) sang and their 
wives (the celestial nymphs) danced. (36) Resorting to that place (the court of Hiranyakasipu), 
gods like Brahma (the creator), Indra (the ruler of the gods) and Lord Siva (wholives on Mount 
Kailasa), Rsis (seers), manes, Siddhas (a class of demigods endowed with mystic powers 
from their very birth), Vidyadharas (heavenly artistes), mighty Nagas (serpent-demons, 
having a human face with a serpent-like lower end), the Manus (progenitors of mankind, each 
presiding over a whole Manvantara), Prajapatis (the lords of creation), Gandharvas, Apsaras 
and Caranas (heavenly bards), Yaksas (attendants of Kubera, the god of riches), Kimpurusas 
(another class of demigods), Vetalas (celestial minstrels) and accomplished Kinnaras (a 
Class of demigods witha human figure and the head of ahorse and celebrated as musicians), 
as well as ll those attendants of Lord Visnu such as Sunanda and Kumuda severally 
hymned Lord Nrsimha (the Man-Lion) of dazzling splendour, seated there, with the hollows 
of their palms joined together on the head and remaining at a short distance (from Him), O 


dear one ! (37—39) 


Senara 
Ad SGA Sedans fafandiata Ufaacndor | 
faa wikefdaa wt: wWeleat dessert ixo 


Brahma said : | bow down to please the infinite Lord of wonderful prowess and holy 
deeds, whose potency is hard to fathom, (nay,) who duly carries on by way of His sport 
through the (three) Gunas (Sattva etc.) the creation, preservation and dissolution of the 


sg 


686 ’ SRIMAD BHAGAVATA [ Dis. § 
LRAT AE ALE ELAR AREAL A ALA LT LA AALS TA LEAL AAA AAS L ATES A AR ee ee eee eee 


universe and is (yet) undecaying by nature. (40) 
Sod 


SUI GUA sdisaMEscde: AR WG Wh A Aha ive 
Sri Rudra said : The end of a Kalpa (a thousand revolutions of the four Yugas) is the 
(proper) time for (venting) Your anger and (if it was directed towards HiranyakaSipu,) this 
puny demon has (already) been slain. (Pray,) protect his son (Prahrada), a devotee of Yours, 
who has approached You (for shelter), O lover of (Your) devotees ! (41) 
| Sx Sard 


Gala: WA Aad Aa a: BUM dard wana aays wether | 
ares fmafeenet ar wayeat a afnedat a fe agae aiden: fer ie 


Indra said : It is Your own shares (in the sacrificial offerings) that have been recovered 
by You, O supreme Lord, while protecting us; (for, seated in the hearts of us gods, itis You 
who enjoy all sacrificial offerings) ! (Nay,) the lotus of our heart, which is Your abode (You 
being our Inner Controller), and which had till now been possessed by this demon, has been 
opened by You. Oh, of what accountis this (sovereignty of the three worlds)— which is (soon) 
going to be devoured by Time—in the eyes of those who are eager to serve You ? (Even) 
Liberation is not thought much of by them, O Lord Narasimha; of what use (then) are other 
objects (of human pursuit to them)? (42) 

RIT Hy: 


a qe: wae aed aAtenfegenerd Wasi 
ae faSSMAaAel AUANIS §=AeAAGST «= QATAR: 143 | 


The Rsis said : By this body assumed for the sake of protection (of Your devotees), O 
Guardian of those needing shelter, You have once more countenanced this day (the practice 
of) that supreme austerity (in the form of meditation) which You enjoined upon us, (nay,) 
which is Your own glory and by (recourse to) which, O most ancient Person, You evolved this 
(cosmos)—that lay merged in You—and which had been stopped by this fellow. (43) 

IR Hq: 
Melt Astiqyst Tad apient detarasatrad frog 
Q Mes AA AG sershasenira ix 

The manes said : This fellow forcibly appropriated and enjoyed the reverential offerings 
(in the shape of balls of boiled rice etc.) given by our sons (and their descendants) and even 
drank the water with sesame seeds offered by them at the time of bath in sacred waters. Hail 


to that Lord Nrsimha, the Protector of all righteousness, who recovered those offerings (as 
it were) from his abdomen, the omentum of which was split open by His claws. (44) 


RgT Dy: 
a ot we amisememeente  arradtacs | 
aed od aie me get som: at afte isu 
The Siddhas said : You tore with Your claws this demon, proud of his numerous 


achievements, who, impious as he was, snatched by dint of Yoga (breath-control) and 


asceticism our mystic powers acquired through concentration of mind. To You as such we 
reverently bow, O Nrsimha ! (45) 





) 687.: 
Dis. 8 ] BOOK SEVEN ok geen 


Se BBE SR aR RR Be RB RB HB RR RAR ARTA REALISE 
[FETERT HF: 
ferent RANGA Tea ATNETE aoataga: | 
4 A Fe weer oemfee som: w fremixe! 

The Vidyadharas said : Proud of his bodily strength and valour, this fool banned (the 
practice of) our art (of becoming invisible and so on) cultivated (by us) through concentration 
of mind on diverse objects. We ever bow low to the Lord, appearing in the form of a man-lion 
by way of sport, by whom the fellow has been killed in an encounter even as a beast. (46) 


WN HA: 
a Uta wiht ke ent a:lagametar came asq a Ive! 
The Nagas said : Our salutation be to You, O Lord, who have afforded delight to our 


wives (who are jewels among women) by splitting open the breast of this wicked fellow, by 
whom they had been abducted and our jewels (too) wrested ! (47) 


WAT aq: 
Tat ad aa fester festa @a ufasaaaa: | 
Wad We: A seeded: wat ram a frat faswixel 
The Manus said : We are Manus—(ever) disposed to do Your bidding—the bounds of 
morality fixed by whom were set at nought, O god of gods, by this demon. That wicked fellow 


has been made short work of byYou, O Lord! What can we do for You (now) ? (Pray,) instruct 
(us,) Your servants. (48) 


INIT Hg: 
Tse ad a Unies A aa set a germ ffea: | 
a wi waa feaa 34 Wa Wreee Uaragdsad: 1xe! 
The Prajapatis said : We are Prajapatis (lords of created beings) evolved by You, O 
supreme Ruler ! This fellow, prohibited by whom we procreate no more progeny, surely lies 


(before us) with his bosom split open by You. Your descent, O Embodiment of Sattva 
(unmixed with Rajas and Tamas), is conducive to the good of the world. (49) 


TY HY: 
ag fast & weqernaat aaa adtdacistar cat: | 
a wa aat wan aanieat fequae: peer aca i4ol 
The Gandharvas said : We, O almighty Lord, are Your dancers and singers in dramatic 


performances. This fellow, by whom we were brought into subjection by dint of valour, 
physical strength and organic power, has been reduced to this plight by You ! Can one who 


has taken to evil ways attain happiness? (50) 
ARO Hz: 
R amet  varetnire:iaen Meese: Tari: 1421 
The Caranas said : We have (once more freely) taken shelter under Your lotus-feet, 
which rid one of transmigration, now that this demon a thorn in the heart of pious souls, has 


been disposed of by You. (51) 
TE HY 


SIGE: SH Aalgtet se felrgds sie ates | 
Aq HAGA depd Sa A Atel Said: stat vafaer 1421 


The Yaksas said : We, who are well-known as the chief among Your servants by virtue 





= 


688 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


Pe Pe BRR RRR RRR RRR RR RRR BEBE R RE REE RE BEBE BE BEB HERE HEB BE BEBE He BEB He Be Be Be Ke Br Me Re HY He Be He Re Re Re He Ke er wat Dis. 8 
fee, 


of (our) agreeable actions, had hitherto been reduced to the position of mere palanquin. 
bearers by Hiranyakaégipu (Diti's son). He, however, has (now) been put to death by You, 9 
Narasimha, the Controller of the twenty-four categories* , knowing as You did the agony 


caused to the people by him. (52) 
Pye Hz: 


aa fuera gq nemes gat: 1 a qaeet at feed: arate: ua) 
The Kimpurusas said : We are Kimpurusas (insignificant creatures), while You are the 
almighty Supreme Person. This wretched fellow was no more (even) when he was 
reproached by pious souls. (53) 


aa eae a”: 
aug aay dame aa eat await vedi sume | 
Tet Sai YNAT gad fess wded WiaeenssAa: 14x 
The Vaitalikas said : Celebrating as we did Your untarnished glory in assemblies and 
sacrificial sessions, we used to receive great honours (and handsome fees). This extremely 
wicked fellow, who had stopped it, has luckily been got rid of by You, O Lord, even as a 
malady. (54) 
[ART Hg: 
aaiiat fHacuneagn festa fatsaqay cpiitn: | 
Wad RW U _iemisdaadt ade wae fava at wag 144! 


The Kinnaras said : We, hosts of Kinnaras, (who are) Your servants, O Master, were 
constantly made to do unpaid labour by this Hiranyakasipu (son of Diti). That wicked fellow, 
O Hari, has been slain by You. Make for our prosperity (henceforward), O Lord Narasimha.(55) 


froyaricl Hy: 
aq GB A: We Adela | 
asd a fafaart sa fasameee eqqaea faa: 146! 
a AMSMad ANU TRAC Ged WASH Wella cosa sseatal AEASeA: 121 
The attendants of Lord Visnu said : It is but today that this weird form of Yours, half 
lion, half man, which is a source of happiness to all the world, has been beheld by us, O Lord 


affording protection (to all) ! This demon was (none but) Your servant, cursed by the 


Brahmanas (Sanaka and others). (Hence) we know this death of his as an instrument of Your 
grace (on him). (56) 


SI 


Thus ends the eighth discourse, entitled "Lord Nrsirmha extolled on the death of HiranyakaSipu 
(the demon king)", forming part of the Narrative of Prahrada in Book Seven of 
the great and glorious Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known 
as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


SSS im ey 
Nae cena 


* Mila Prakrti (Primordial Matter), the Mahat-tattva (the principle of cosmic intelligence), Ahankara (the Ego), the five 
subtle elements, the ten Indriyas and the mind and the five gross elements: these are the twenty-four categories into which 
the whole range of objective existence has been broadly divided by the Sankhya system of philosophy. God or the Spirit, who 
controls all these, is the tweny-fifth. This classification has been followed more or less by the other systems too. 





689° 
Dis. 9 BOOK SEVEN ois eee 


gee Be RRR RRR RRR RR RRR RARER EER ARLE REBEREERER BEBEBELEBEREEBERE RE ERE IES, SE Se 
HAY Ad GS: 
f ° 


Discourse IX 
A Eulogy of the Lord (by Prahrada) 


ARG Sara 
Ui ied: wad  welesutad: | WqaaeEagel Agee | 2 | 


Marat: der eadpr aaeaga! sepyagdear at Aaa zag! 2 | 
Tee sear  seaheantahiaa seas wit aid 31 2 | 
ait We wraqumadsds: sta yfa aaa aq fagarete: | x | 

wmmreqe ould anich faster da: qua Ufa: | 

saa], Ides Ha Hietletarataat pata & | 

a AH CARAT ACTA: Aaa: | 

aaeuat «gfe )|6fdat «Set Ss ee: )«=s Fepereaqerera: 1 € | 
steaks hace Gaatfed: | VTeaT TST ATRTRAATT: 1 9 | 


Narada resumed: (Extolling the Lord) thus all the gods and other (heavenly) beings, led 
by Brahma (the creator) and Rudra (Lord Siva), dared not go near Him, possessed as He was 
by anger and (hence) most difficult to approach. (1) Sri (the Lord's own Consort and the 
goddess of beauty and prosperity) was personally sent by the gods (to appease Him). 
Perceiving that great wonder and full of misgiving (however), She dared not go near, the form 
having neither been seen nor heard of (by Her) before. (2) Brahma (then) sent Prahrada, 
standing close by, with the words; "Approach, dear one, and pacify the Lord, who has waxed 
angry at your father." (3) Uttering the words "So be it", and slowly drawing near, O king 
(Yudhisthira), the great child devotee (Prahrada) bowed down with his body (lying prostrate) 
on the ground and his palms joined together. (4) Overwhelmed with compassion on seeing 
the infant fallen at the soles of His feet, and lifting it, the Lord placed onits head His lotus hand, 
which has (ever) brought security to those whose mind is terribly afraid of the serpent in the 
shape of Time. (5) All (traces of) evil (in the shape of dormant desires or impressions left on 
the mind by good or evil actions of past lives) having been wiped out by the (most auspicious 
and sacred) touch of His hand and direct knowledge of the Supreme Spirit instantly revealed 
to him, Prahrada felt (supremely) gratified and with the hair of his body standing on end, his 
heart moistened (with love) and tears (of joy) in his eyes, he installed (an image of) His lotus- 
feet in his heart. (6) Perfectly composed, he extolled Sri Hari with a concentrated mind and 
in a voice choked with emotion, his heart and eyes fixed on Him. (7) 


Were Sara 
TMA: TON YAaisa feel: Udendaada Atal Ware: | 
ag ged fig: fe dead a A aftensa: 1 c 1 
Tat TAA TAIAT: ashes: TATA UAT: 
ante fe dat wa Gel WaT Wale Wasser | e | 
fame feuaiatteawtentaceargad afer 
aa delticattaatameiat Gait A ge A q wa: 10! 








Ti. . 





690 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


BeBe BeBe Ge Re Re Be Be BEB Be BERET BE BRE BRE ER BE Re RB Te Re Re Re AE Ae BE BAY BY Br Br BY Br By Br Be Br Br Hr Hr By Wr Br Hr Gr Br By wr Br Br seneranennmene eis: 9 
Rt 


Tae: sa fisremgul ad satefage: Heol quite | 
Gd Usml wad faced AA dae siya Aart qasit: 1eet 
aaiee fanaasa gece wale afe yore aerate 
qaissa yiaetaquas: yaa at fe garqaftiar eet 
aa et fafieaaa aan seed aafiag a alfgsra: | 
aa waa sneer are faeifst wradt Sferade: 1231 
TT GS a wea aed erent gfseadeat | 
ares fda: sfrata ad wa yfee fava sat: wathd ex 
ae fasraisia ASMA HA ™laaAYPervasqes4re | 
3Taest: AAA AA SAU aS lata TATA AAT | 8 & | 
TRISCHE PAA TueltTdaehnata AAat Nuit: | 
ag: Wadena asa sidisceiarut qaqa wel Ziel 
ae. «| frfafaarreaarrsraaienia «=6eewadtite =a: | 
qraread aa gwd yam aq A aa qearm iy 
aise fram gee: wean slernareda afae fafteritar: | 
Waka 8 ster A UTI: 1221 
gee Ae aut feat aie ade ameqedta aad at: | 
dda detdatd saeeserac fat aqyat waedfaarn ies! 
aad afé a a aa ae AS BM Bad BEAT: WT aT | 
Wa: hilt fafa gupauia: Pailfedetehas Wad: Mea 120! 


Prahrada said : Hosts of gods headed by Brahma, contemplative souls and wise men 
too, whose mind is solely devoted to virtue, knowledge and asceticism (products of Sattva) 
have not succeeded even to this day in propitiating Sri Hari through streams of prayers 
abounding in many qualities. Can He (then) be pleased with me, born of a ferocious race 
(the demon race)? (8) Wealth, pedigree, comeliness of form, asceticism, learning, keenness 
of the senses, splendour, glory, bodily strength, self-endeavour, intelligence and Yoga 
(concentration of mind or breath-control), | believe, are not sufficient for the propitiation of 
the Supreme Person. For (on the other hand) the Lord was pleased with the leader of a herd 
of (wild) elephants* through (mere) Devotion. (9) | account a pariah (a Candala)—who has 
dedicated his mind, speech, actions, wealth and life (itself) to Him—far worthier than a 
Brahmana that has turned away his face from (the worship of) the lotus-feet of Lord Visnu 
(who has a lotus sprung from His navel), though endowed with the (aforesaid) twelve 
attributes. (For) the former redeems his (whole) race, but not the Brahmana, (who is) full of 
inordinate pride (and therefore unable to redeem his own soul, much less his race). (10) This 
all-merciful Lord (present before me), who is sated with the realization of His own (blissful) 
nature, does not covet honour (worship) at the hands of His ignorant devotee for His own 
sake. (But He does it for the sake of the devotee himself.) For whatever honour the devotee 
offers to the almighty Lord redounds upon himself, (even) as the decoration of one's face IS 
(immediately) reflected on its image (in a mirror, which cannot be decorated otherwise). (11) 


Lee ee 


* Vide Disourses II to IV of Book Eight. 


| 
' 
—— 


— 


i\— 


Dis. 9 ] BOOK SEVEN oe 


BeBe Be Be Be Be RH BT Be HH LEB Be Be BEBE BER Be Re REE Re Re RRA BEBE RE RE BE BEBE REE RE Re RR RRR RE REBT ERE RE RE RE BE RE RE RE BEBE RE BEBE BEBE BEBE BEBE BEBE BEES 


Therefore, with (all) my fear completely gone, | (hereby) celebrate with all my being and to 
the best of my understanding the greatness of the almighty Lord, by which, when praised, 
(even) a mean fellow, who has fallen into (the whirlpool of) mundane existence (a product 
of the three Gunas or modes of Prakrti) by force of Avidya (Nescience), is undoubtedly 
purified. (12) Indeed all these (gods), Brahma (the creator) and others, are Your devotees 
(who remember You with faith and love)—although (at present) they are afraid of You, the 
embodiment of Sattva (unmixed with Rajas and Tamas)—but not like us (demons, who 
though constantly thinking of You, look upon You as their enemy), O Lord ! (Besides,) the 
sport of the almighty Lord (in You) through (various) delightful descents (manifestations) is 

(only) conducive to the well-being and prosperity of this world as well as to final beatitude. (13) 

Therefore, be pleased to hold Your anger, now that the demon (who excited it) has been slain 

by You (for the gratification of pious souls); (for) evenaholy man rejoices over the destruction 

of a scorpion or a snake (which is conducive to its welfare). Nay, all the worlds, relieved as 

they are (at the death of Hiranyakasipu), await the withdrawal of Your anger. People will recall 

this form of Yours, O Nrsimha, for being rid of fear (so that there is no more need of Your 

retaining this angry mood even for ridding Your devotees of fear hereafter). (14) (As for 

myself) | am not (at all) afraid, O invincible Lord, of Your (weird) form with a most frightful 

countenance and tongue, eyes (dazzling) like the sun, an overbearing frown and fierce teeth 

(jaws), Manes crimsoned with blood, ears erect as wedges and claws that tear the enemy— 

the form which is adorned with a garland of intestines and whose roar terrifies the very 

elephants guarding the four quarters. (15) | am (certainly) afraid, O Lover of the miserable, 

of the formidable and terrible suffering involved in the cycle of transmigration, bound as | am 

with (the fetters in the shape of good and evil) actions of my own and thrown (as a 

consequence of such actions) in the midst of devouring (blood-thirsty) demons, O most 

shining One ! Pleased with me, when will You call me to the soles of Your feet, the abode 

of final beatitude? (16) Since, O infinite Lord, | have been wandering through all wombs 

(forms of birth), identifying myself with the body and other meterial sheaths (which are other 

than the Self) and scorched with the fire of grief born of separation from one's beloved objects 

and being placed in unpleasant situations, and since that too which is (universally) regarded 

as a cure for misery entails suffering, (pray,) tell me the method of serving You (which is the 

only means of ridding oneself of sorrow and of which | am utterly ignorant). (17) Thus 

instructed (in the art of service and blessed by You with the rare privilege of serving You) and 

enjoying the fellowship of enlightened souls that have taken shelter in Your feet, and 

completely and finally rid (through such fellowship) of attachment and other evils (the 

products of the three Gunas or modes of Prakrti), | shall easily tide over (make light of) 

obstacles (in the form of worldly calamities), constantly repeating, O Nrsimha, the (soul- 

enthralling) stories—sung by Brahma (the creator himself)—of the (innumerable) sports of 

my beloved Friend and the Supreme Deity in You. (18) The parents are no protectors to a 

child in this world, O Nrsimha ! a medicine is no remedy for an ailing person; and a vessel 

iS no protection to a person drowning in the ocean (inasmuch as they are all seen to fail in 

numerous cases). Whatever is approved of here as an easy Cure against some evil for an 

afflicted person proves effective only for the time being (and not forever), O Lord, in the case 

of embodied beings neglected by You. (19) Whatever being, high or low, and possessing a 

distinctive nature (Sattvika and so on), produces or transforms a thing; wherever, 

from whatever motive, whenever, with whatever instrument, from whatever source and 

howsoever he does it; (nay,) whatever he produces or transforms, whosesoever the thing 

(produced or transformed) is and by whomsoever he is prompted (to do so)—alil that is You 

(and nothing other than You). (20) 





<a 


692 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA 


BeBe Re Be Re Re Re Be Be REA Rr Ree eB Be BERT BEE BE Be BT BERT Br Re BeBe RE Re Be Be Be Be We Hr Hr Wr Be Br Be He Br Br Br Ke We Kr Ke We Kr Sr Ke He Mr Br He Kr We Kr Kr Ke Hr Kr IS. ) 
a SSS SSS SSS SSS 


BBR ABR RRR He He 9, 


Sekar Te Tee 
Wea HA: Bait Hadad acta: ale alleaquTqady ya: 1 
Sand Ganadasleat  daneasat alsitatd Aad: 1221 
aa fe Rafa: aa aret aritediageafaatatke: | 
de fagsasae seat freitemmaqued fad saa 1221 
aI Hal fefa fartishanfawagrmag: frat fava gasit arerttsay | 
Asai: Hiudetaqtayfaeghiar God: A _ a fre: 1231 
qaqa a arg: fret fasadtseaafatter 
Tee @ faaieageant arene at Paryaord ex 
Saere: sarge yndferen: we Aeamewestt facta: 
fiided A qd sat aetiia fase MMe Weed: Wage: 1241 
mle Tisaa sa anistiensea A: Ait wH Aaa | 
A cao A qd Waa aA a Tarn asia: farefa aalent: Wee: 121 
qa | Wtawaiddadl «Aq Mierddenssmgect weenie | 
aaa oumifta a wee: Aaeaqet A Wad 1201 
Wa wa fofad svatfend armiiteraq a: sod Sagi! 
PaASSHAM GUN Was Weld: ASE HA J fage qa yearesanrey 121 
WSN 4s wa wya wiNaaaqd faa 
Gg We aearcasaqeandiat vemisad cm wire 
Weedha SedeHe ad ANd: yanaefa easy i 
Gel uretiat «Sra SaaS Geafeaeeafap: 1301 
a al sa ead Valedisat ara aeraurafeshta waren | 
aq aa sa fet fertiact a aq a aca aqaieadivdal: 1321 
Maya (Prakrti or primordial Matter) with her attributes (in the shape of Sattva, Rajas and 
Tamas) thrown into activity by Kala (the Time-Spirit), representing the creative will of the 
Cosmic Being (a part manifestation of Yours), evolves the subtle body (chiefly consisting of 
the mind), which is a product of Karma (activity), is exceedingly powerful (hard to conquer) 
and full of (endless) latent desires, and constitutes the wheel of transmigration with sixteen 
spokes (in the shape of the mind, the ten Indriyas and the five subtle elements) provided by 
Nescience (which has no beginning). Who thatis averse (not devoted) to You can cross over 
this wheel, O birthless One ? (21) As such You, who have by Your own energy (in the shape 
of Consciousness) ever kept under full control the properties of intellect (e. g., joy and sorrow, 
attachment and greed and so on) nay, who as Kala (the Director of Maya) have exercised 
full sway over the powers of both the effects and the causes, may (kindly) draw me, O 
omnipotent Lord, .close to You—me who have been thrown by Nescience into this wheel of 
sixteen spokes and am being crushed thereby (as a sequel), and who have (now) sought 
Your protection.(22) The (inordinately) long life, riches and glory in heaven of all the 
guardians of the (different) worlds—which these (earthly) people (generally) crave.for, and 
which were swept away by a mere play of my father's eyebrows, knit in the course of an angry 


laugh—have been seen by me. But (even) he has been disposed of by You. (23) Therefore, 
| do not covet those blessings, sought for by embodied beings—tong life, wealth, glory and 





: 693 
Dis. 9 BOOK SEVEN ee Retr Be Re Ae REBATE BE AE 


see Be Be Be He Be Be Be Be He Ge Be He He Ke Me He Ke Re Me Ke He Re Br Be Be Me Re eRe Re Re Me Re Re Re RR BER A Re AEH Re ERE RE RE BER ERE RE Me Re He Re Bt BECHER BE BEEBE 


sensuous pleasures, including those enjoyed by Brahma (the creator)—not even mystic 
powers, crushed by You in the form of the mighty Kala (Time-Spirit), knowing as | do their 
real worth. (Only be pleased to) place me by the side of Your servants. (24) How 
unsubstantial are the enjoyments (of this world), which are (only) pleasant to hear of and are 
of the nature of a mirage (tantalizing in character); and on the other hand, how frail is this 
body, the hotbed of all (kinds of) diseases ! (It is absurd to think of enjoying such pleasures 
through such a body.) Though knowing this, people do not feel disgusted with them, busy 
as they are quenching the fire of desire with drops of honey (in the shape of trivial and 
momentary pleasures), (so) difficult to procure. (25) How undeserving of compassion, O 
Lord, am I, a creature of Rajas, born in this race of demons, characterized by an excess of 
Tamoguna; and how unsparing (on the other hand) is Your mercy, prompted by which You 
have placed on my head as a token of favour Your lotus hand, placed (heretofore) neither 
on Brahma’s nor on Siva's nor again on Laksmi's head. (26) Surely such a notion of 
superiority and inferiority as that found in a worldly creature could not exist in You, the 
(disinterested) friend, nay, the very Self of the (entire) universe. Yet Your grace, like that of 
a celestial (wish-yielding) tree, could be secured only through devoted service; and the fruit 
(enjoyed by Your devotees) varies according to (the measure of) the service rendered by 
them, superiority or inferiority (of the devotee) having nothing to do with it. (27) Indeed how 
can | (afford to) give up the service of Your servants (devotees)—the self-same I, who was, 
O Lord, favoured by the celestial sage (Narada), after being accepted as his own, in this way 
(So as to ensure Your grace even during the period of my gestation) while | was about to fall 
headlong through excessive fondness into the (deep) well of metempsychosis inhabited by 
a (deadly) python (in the shape of Death), following the example of people hankering after 
the pleasures of sense (generally sought after) and (already) fallen into it (in quest of such 
pleasures). (28) The act of rescuing of my life as well as the slaughter of my father was done 
by You, O immortal Lord, in order to vindicate the words of the sages (Sanaka and his three 
brothers), Your devotees, when, taking up his sword, my father (Hiranyakasipu), who sought 
to do violence (to me), said, "If there is any God other than me, let him save you; | (hereby) 
sever your head !" (29) Indeed You alone constitute this universe, since it is You who exist 
apart (from the world) at its beginning (before its creation) as well as at its end (after its 
dissolution) and (hence) at the middle (in the form of the universe too). Having evolved by 
Your Maya (creative will) this cosmos (which is a modification of the three Gunas or modes 
of Prakrti—viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas), and forthwith entered it (as its Inner Controller). 
You appear as many (as its Creator, Preserver and Destroyer) through (association with) 
these Gunas. (30) This universe, consisting of (both) causes and effects, O Lord, is as a 
matter of fact the same as You; while You are different from it (existing as You do even before 
and after it). Because it is so, the notion that he is one’s own and he is another is indeed 
meaningless and illusory. A thing is actually the same as that from which it originates and 
comes to light, in which it lives and into which it gets dissolved, just as a tree is essentially 
the same as its seed and a seed is identical with (its cause) earth (which is a product of and 


therefore identical with odour). (31) 
Ween se fasaranet stissamar fstqearaqual frie: | 
ana Medeneariiatiada fer aq at a Wis gee 13et 
waa & auke frorreaa wanfeasepiaerint sranjer 
sistearte. «ss fae cHfUeHTacateton 133 1 
aaa: mlawdsaeuarea amma dd wafeldta-c | 
Treg «| Rast Siisgt  SaageEAa «ater 1 3x1 


ore ae. 
Ve... rovmKerKe€r— -_ = 


- 





QW Be Br BrP Re Be Be BeBe Be BBY HT Re Be eR BP RR BeBe RT RT BE BERET Be Re Be BY Ae Br He Be Be Hr Be Mr Br Be Hr Br Hr Kr Sr Br Sr Br Wr Br Hr We Kr By Kr Br Br Sr Hr SeRES Re Be Re Be Be Pe He Re He Hy He 9, 
LI OE EEE EEE. ee, 


GQ aicaiatakaa suferisst area daca aftaegura: | 
ameria fa wefiarftget yarsarrea fadd caat aut 
Ua ACAACTSAH AN: HUA ARAH AAA ALOT STA | 
mama aguefaddfast «apt | eTgesATa eS fafa: 1381 
TH Tare ai fave aagafaet aehenret | 
Sessa CPTI weg wa da Hadat aqamara ize 
Su oafdyfeasmanicien faeraafa da saTeritor. 
mi duet ule ange oa: Hol aavafaaqnsa a AIRC! 


Withdrawing (dissolving) this cosmos into Yourself by Yourself (of Your own free will), 
You repose in the Deluge water, enjoying the bliss which is Your very nature, and devoid of 
(all) activity. Having closed Your eyes (in that state) through Yoga (Self-absorption) and set 
aside sleep by Self-illumination, and existing in Your absolute nature (transcending the three 
states of wakefulness, dream and deep sleep), You cognize neither Tamas (ignorance, 
which is characteristic of deep sleep) nor the objects of senses (which are presented to one's 
mind during the states of wakefulness and dream). (32) This cosmos is an embodiment of 
that very Lordin You, who spurred into activity, by Your own energy in the shape of the Time- 
Spirit, the (three) modes of Prakrti (viz., Sattva, Rajas and Tamas, which combine to produce 
this universe). (For) from Your navel—(even) as You reposed in water on the (cosy) bed of 
Ananta (the immortal Sesa, the serpent-god) and when Your trance came to an end—sprang 
up, like a banyan tree from a tiny seed, a huge lotus that had lain hidden in You (till then).(33) 
Sprung from that lotus, Brahma (the seer)—who failed to perceive anything other than that, 
and thought You, the seed, though pervading himself, to be outside his body—could not 
discover You, although he kept diving into the water for a hundred (celestial) years. Oh! how, 
on a sprout having shot forth, could one get at the seed ? (34) Utterly amazed (at not finding 
You) and perched on the lotus (once more), Brahma (the self-born), whose heart had been 
thoroughly purified in course of time through intense meditation, eventually discovered You, 
O Lord, in a most subtle form as pervading his own being—consisting of the (five gross) 
elements, the (ten) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action) and 
the inner sense—even as a Yogi would perceive the most subtle odour pervading the 
earth.(35) Brahma (the creator) experienced (great) joy on seeing the Lord (in that subtle 
form) and in the same way on beholding the Supreme Person (the Cosmic Being), a 
manifestation of His own Maya (creative will), (who was) endowed with innumerable faces, 
feet, heads, hands, thighs, noses, mouths, ears, eyes, ornaments and weapons, (and) the 
disposition of whose (different) limbs was symbolized by (the various spheres of) this (visible) 
universe. (36) Assuming the form of Lord Hayagriva (who was endowed with a horse's head) 
and having slain the two mighty enemies of Veda, Madhu and Kaitabha by name, the 
embodiments of Rajas and Tamas respectively, (who had snatched away the Vedas and 
were bent upon killing Brahma,) You restored to Brahma the Vedic texts, (which are asymbol 
of Sattva or enlightenment and which taught to him the means of pushing the work of 
creation). (For) they declare Sattva to be Your most beloved body. (37) In this way You 
protect the (different) worlds and destroy the enemies of creation through Your (numerous) 
descents in the form of human beings (such as Sri Rama and Sri Balarama), beasts (such 
as the divine Boar), seers (such as the sages Nara and Narayana), gods (such as Vamana, 
the divine Dwarf), and the (divine) Fish, and maintain (the standards of) virtue prevalent in 





Dis. 9 ] BOOK SEVEN oc 


Bir Br Br Br Hee Be BeBe Be He HEME HE Ge He He Be He He Pe Ke Gre Ke Re Re Be Be Ke Be He Ge Ge He AER Be Me Re Re Re eRe he Re A Be Re Re Re Re BAER RR Re REA REEERE br Be Br Be Be Be Be Re He Be Be HEH 





the various Yugas, O supreme Person ! (And) because You remain hidden (unmanifest) in 
the Kali age, hence You as such are called Triyuga (the Lord manifestin the first three Yugas, 
viz., Satya, Treta and Dwapara only). (38) 


Area a faguos wafea eftagerera diem 
AG wien diercne da ula fagenfr da: 13 
Rieatisat feet ufiqa firettsaeaqet sacl qatar 
MUNsatdseeR HU atghndies: wer ga Teal Gad ixol 
wa Wandatad Wa AA UA AAT AAA MA aA 
Rast afaseaeas eit SCS «Ss ete xe 
at waa asfeert wana amiss waesacaedl: | 


a 


Wei a neq ade fe aw a frasaqdadt 7: 1%21 
aattest Wz Katad waaay = 1 
art oad faqedaa shsaredtereaa waged faqerix3 
sau 2a Waa: wiaqkearn at utha faad a cues: | 
adage uonbaqya unl ARI Waa AO wadlsqusa ixx 
This mind (of mine), O Lord of Vaikuntha, does not find sufficient delight in Your stories, 
vitiated as itis by sins, (nay,) grossly wicked, morbid due to lust and afflicted with joy and grief, 
fear and (the threefold) craving (for progeny, wealth and fame). With such a mind how can 
|, a wretched creature, contemplate on Your essential nature ? (39) Not fully gratified, the 
palate pulls me, O immortal Lord, in one direction (towards dainties); the generative organ 
drags me in another direction (towards sexual gratification); the tactile sense, the (empty) 
stomach and the sense of hearing pull me in other directions (viz., towards objects that are 
pleasant to touch, substantial food and a melodious sound or voice respectively); the 
olfactory sense drags me in a quite different direction (towards sweet-smelling flowers, 
scents and so on); while the eyes, which are (very) restless, and the faculties (organs) of 
action pull me in yet other directions (viz., towards things of beauty and the objects to be 
attained through the various organs of action). (All) these tear me (even) as a number of co- 
wives wrench a householder (each to her bedroom). (40) Perceiving (all) these foolish 
creatures fallen thus in consequence of their own (evil) actions into the Vaitarani* of 
metempsychosis and exceedingly afraid of birth, death and suffering proceeding from one 
to another and making friendship with the bodies of their own people and enmity with the 
bodies of others, (pray,) protect them this very day (by ferrying them across), feeling 
compassion for them, O Lord (ever) staying on the other side (of that river) ! (41) Oh! What 
exertion can there be, O Lord, the Teacher of all, in this work of lifting up (rescuing) these 
people, to You, who are responsible for the birth, existence (continuance) and dissolution of 
this universe? Indeed, it is on the ignorant that the grace of the exalted ought to descend, 
O Befriender of the afflicted ! Such grace will be superfluous to us who are busy serving Your 
beloved devotees (and will cross the ocean of metempsychosis by serving them). (42) lam 
not at all afraid, O Supreme, of the (aforesaid) Vaitarani—which is (so) difficult to cross—My 
mind being immersed in the songs of Your prowess, which are like an extraordinary nectar. 
| lament (only) those deluded persons whose mind is turned away from such nectar and who 
Seis i.e ee 


* Vaitaraniis the name ofa river marking the boundary of the realm of departed spirits, presided over by Yama (the god 
Of retribution). It is described as rushing with great impetuosity, hot, fetid and filled with blood, hair and bones etc. 








| 


696 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA : 


aes esas casas SAL AERGABSAEENNERARDAD ROSS RERSRE ERS REEEAHEEeD Oo! 


are carrying (on their shoulders) the burden of maintaining their family etc., for the illusory 
delight proceeding from the objects of senses. (43) Ascetics desirous of their own liberation 
O Lord, generally practise silent meditation in solitude. They are (however) not devoted to 
the interest of others. | (of course) do not long to be liberated alone, leaving behind these 
miserable creatures. (For) | find no haven of rest other than You for these people wandering 
in the forest of transmigration. (44) 


agate yeatiqa fe de wogam aweifia gga! 
qara we pu seas: aught fased efit: 1wul 
AAA AAA SATA TATA sara: 
Ta: Ut Gee a ahidhsaU al Vara A aa _ ais xa 
ea sa weed da adage shnguiaa 3A araqedad | 
Ga: aiaquad fafaad al arm afafta deg ard: Bid ive 
a amimamidacgue: suifsaft ea  faaquesr 
aad waa aun faqs wa ard aaeata walacreat Prem isc 
aa WN A Wut weet a ad wauyda: ecana: | 
Bdad seme facta fe ama fagea agfear farsa aeaie se! 
dd. aseda Aa-etaedgen: wad alas: saul Hara | 
aaam aia feat wee fe uf wa: aden od iho! 


That which goes by the name of pleasures enjoyed by ahouseholder, such as copulation, 
is trivial; for it results in suffering after suffering akin to that caused by the scratching of one 
(itching) hand with another. (But) though undergoing a lot of trouble, the wretched people 
(given up to sensual gratification) do not feel sated with these pleasures. (Only) some wise 
man is able (by Your grace) to curb passion like the itching sensation. (45) A vow of silence, 
fasting, the hearing of scriptures, asceticism, the study of sacred books, discharging one's 
sacred obligations, exposition of the scriptures, living in seclusion, the muttering of prayers 
and concentration of mind, conducive as they are to final beatitude, O Inner Controller, 
generally only prove to be the means of livelihood of those who have not yet been able to 
conquer their senses (and are prone to sell these for base gain in the shape of money and 
sensuous pleasures); whereas they may or may not be so in the case of hypocrites (whose 
pietism may or may not succeed). (46) Like the seed and the sprout (following in unbroken 
succession), the Unmanifest (primordial Matter) and the manifest (the visible universe)— 
these are (but) Your two forms (symbols) made known by the Vedas; (for there is nothing 
other than You, who are devoid of (a material) form. Through Yoga (the process of Devotion) 
men who have controlled their mind are directly able to perceive You in both these (forms), 
as fire in pieces of wood (through attrition), which is not possible by any other means. (47) 
You are the air, fire, earth, ether and water, the (five) objects of senses (viz., sound, touch, 
sight, taste and smell), the (five) vital airs (viz., Prana, Apana, Vyana, Udana and Samana), 
the (ten) Indriyas (the five senses of perception and the five organs of action), the mind, the 
intellect and the ego (or, according to another interpretation, the deities presiding over the 
Indriyas and the mind). That which is qualified (gross or material) and that which is 
unqualified (subtle or transcendental)—everything is You and You alone, O infinite One ! 
Whatever is revealed by mind or speech is no other than You. (48) Neither these Gunas 
(modes of Prakrti, viz., Sativa, Rajas and Tamas) nor the deities who preside over the (three) 
Gunas (viz., Visnu, Brahma and Siva) nor the categories commencing from Mahat-tattva 





Dis. 9] BOOK SEVEN 697° 


Be Be Be Be Ke He Kr Br Ke Br 
HBr or Fr SR RRR BB RGB RRR RRL A ARLE BR Be BERRA A BER AAA RELL AALS 


(and ending with the Indriyas, that is to say, Mahat-tattva or the principle of cosmic 
intelligence, Ahankara or the ego, the five subtle and the five gross elements and the ten 
Indriyas), nor the mind etc. (viz., the mind, intellect and reason), nor (the various) living 
beings including the gods and human beings, all of whom have a beginning and an end (too), 
are able to know Youin truth, O much-praised One! Thinking thus, men of good sense desist* 
from the Study of the Vedas and other Scriptures (and devote themselves exclusively to 
meditation). (49) Therefore, cana man develop devotion to You, the goal of ascetics of the 
highest order, except through whole-hearted service to You, O most worshipful One— 
service consisting of (the following) six limbs, viz., salutation, glorification, worship in the form 
of offering one s actions to You, waiting on You, concentrating one's mind on Your feet and 
listening to Your stories? (50) 
Rg sad 
UMagtingn weet wba nf: isge sod wal aaeRET 1421 

Narada resumed : The Lord, who is beyond the three Gunas (modes of Prakrti) and 

whose So many (transcendental) virtues were celebrated with reverence by His devotee 


(Prahrada), and who had not only controlled His anger but was (highly) pleased (with the 
latter), spoke (as follows) to Prahrada, who was bent low (with respect). (51) 


were Uk A aA sidlsse Agi at guighiad wmMseas FMT I4?! 

arsed angered gest fe Migs at a gistgquend agedla gat 

Mora wa at eit: adsnda Mea: | ATH ASAEM: Pararanfarat alae 1 GX | 

Wa osehaarist  atefaseta: | wehatate watt Aad AAAI: 144 

Sit SMAEMad AGU URAC Seda THA Neleaha Wracedal AA AaHISeATA: 19 | 

The Lord said : O noble Prahrada, may good betide you ! | am pleased with you, O chief 
of the demons ! Ask any boon liked by you; | am wont to gratify the desires of men. (52) To 
him who is unable.to propitiate Me, O long-lived one, | am difficult of perception. (And) having 
beheld Me (once), a living being has no longer any reason to bewail itself (to grieve). (53) 
It is for this reason alone that enlightened and pious souls, who are highly fortunate and 
desirous of blessedness (endeavour to) propitiate Me, the Lord (bestower) of all boons, with 


all their being. (54) Even on being thus tempted with boons that are so alluring to the world, 
Prahrada (the best of the Asuras) did not hanker after them, exclusively devoted as he was 


to the Lord. (55) 
Thus ends the ninth discourse entitled "A Eulogy of the Lora", forming part 


of the story of Prahrada, in Book Seven of the great and glorious 
Bhagavata-Purana, otherwise known as the Paramahamsa-Samhita. 


GS SSeS 


ee a Te 


* This is borne out by the Lord Himself when He says in the Bhagavadgita:— 


wer 3 treaferel afecifeatteata | tar rents free HAA Ate Il (II. 52) 
“When your mind will have fully crossed the mire of delusion, you will then grow indifferent to what has been heard and 
What is yet to be heard about this world and the next.” 


ie 
: 








698 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 10 


BeBe We Re Re We Re Be Ke Ke Ke Ve Ke Be ee Br Bee Vee eee Ree Be Bee We We Bee eee ee Be Be We We Br Be Me We Bee We We We We We Be We We We Be Br We We Br Be Ar Se MESES Be Be He Re Ke Ke Hr He Be rw, 
Lif 


BIN SaANSeaTA: 
Discourse X 


(The story of) the conquest of Tripura 
ARG SATA 
akan Cs ATI: | AT eaichet HA Sarat F118 


Narada began again : Regarding all that (asking boons and so on) as an impediment 
to the practice of Devotion, the infant (Prahrada) smilingly addressed Lord Nrsimha (the 


Ruler of the senses) as follows. (1) 
Yele Sard 


TW Hl yedarraissah BMG dat: | dager ffaoonr Aqarearqurista: 1 2 1 
FAGAN AA Ah eMyaead| Ta, daNeisty easy WAT 3 | 
aan» aSRaer «Fed «| HOU: | Ted STARTS STM AT Ye: Wa aforeR |X | 
SAMA AS Ya: MUA SAA: | A AM Yera: AAs A Ula ATTA: 1 
3 Matwdehed DU MMA: | Aaa Tedaaiha 1 & | 
af wae A HAM ated ACUI GMM Be Nada QI ami | 
sfsaritt aa: sor siren eat epfadia: | St: sitet: Bla: Aa A ASA AAT | Cc 
faysia adel armamiaal vata fereidda qustiaa waa mead @ | 
TH Wad Ga YSNd Ae! Masada AT ACAI ol 





Prahrada said : Pray, do not tempt me, attached as | am to the pleasures of sense by 
birth, with boons in the form of those (very) pleasures. Afraid of attachment to them and fed 
up with them, | have approached You for protection, anxious to secure freedom (from the 
shackles of birth and death). (2) Eager to ascertain (make known to the world) the 
characteristics of a (true) devotee, You directed me to the pleasures of sense, the seeds of 
transmigration, serving as so many knots to bind the heart, O Lord ! (3) Otherwise such a 
thing would not be possible for You, who are (so) kind-hearted, O Preceptor of the universe! 
He who seeks (worldly) blessings from You is no servant (of Yours). He is only a business 
man. (4) One desiring blessings for oneself from a master is no servant in the true sense 
of the word. And (likewise) he is no master, who grants (such) gifts expecting the recognition 
of his mastership from his servant. (5) |, however, am Your devotee without any craving; 
while You are my master having no axe to grind. Unlike the interests of a king and his servant 
here, Our interest (in each other) is not governed by any other (selfish) motive. (6) If You (are 
inclined to) bestow on me, O Lord, boons sought after by me, O Chief of the bestowers of 
boons, | solicit from You this boon alone that no more desires may (ever) sprout in my 
heart.(7) With the (very) appearance of desire the Indriyas (the senses of perception as well 
as the organs of action), the mind, vital energy, the body, righteousness, firmness, 
understanding, modesty, wealth, glory, memory and truthfulness disappear. (8) (On 
the other hand,) when a man gets rid of the desires rooted in the heart, then alone, O lotus- 
eyed One, he becomes qualified for (attaining) divine glory.* (9) Hail to You, the almighty and 


* This is corroborated by the following Sruti text:— 


Dis. 10] BOOK SEVEN oe 


Sr Br Br Br Br Br Br Be Br Hr Br Sr Gr Br Br Br Ke By Kr br hr Hr Hr Litt tt sis bs an 


Ls Br Br Br Be Hr Be Be Rr Bee BeBe Rr Re Re BeBe Be Be ORCL BER Be Be Re Be LEAL Be EHTS Rr Br Br Be Be Be BL ee E AE Be 


high-souled Sri Hari, the Inner Controller, the Absolute, the Supreme Spirit, appearing in the 
form of an extraordinary lion ! (10) 


vert 8 ufe onfaefare sradsaa a a wafgen: | 
state Tarttet =| STUTITYySet TIL 1821 
ear Adit wea: fara unneaht aaa 
adq opiate oar «(Otte Ola fea 1221 
we owe geet um aéat aeaar frat 
cltt fat geteiat far aera Wma: 123 1 
a Ud eka aa afte a: 1 aia at a wae SAS TSA 12x 
Lord Nrsimha replied : Those like you, who are exclusively devoted to Me, never seek 
(even) from Me benefits in this or the next world. Nevertheless enjoy here during (the whole 
of) this Manvantara continuously the luxuries of the lords of the Daityas. (11) Taking (great) 
pleasure in My delightful stories and enthroning in Your heart Me, the one Lord presiding over 
sacrifices and (equally) present in all creatures, worship you Me, renouncing (all) action by 
offering it to Me. (12) Exhausting (your) merit by means of enjoyment (of pleasures) and sin 
by meritorious actions and casting off (your) body in course of time and spreading (in this 
world) an unsullied fame which will be sung (even) in the celestial regions, you will 
(eventually) attain to Me, all your bonds being loosened. (13) A man who recites this hymn 
addressed to Me by you, thinking of you and Me as well as of this narrative will in course of 
time be completely freed from the bondage of actions. (14) 
Yelq sara 
a ama Wad aA aegraeat! ached fa a amass Bazieu 
fagrastga: alent, adeteqs WPL welt yeaa Al area 126! 
ae, frat A wad Bele GAIEa| WARIS HEsRTaT FUTTACS 1219 | 
Prahrada submitted: | solicit this boon from You, the Ruler of (all) bestowers of boons, 
O supreme Lord, that inasmuch as my father, who was ignorant of Your divine glory and 
whose heart was stung with indignation, spoke ill of You—who are no other than the 
almighty Lord, the Preceptor of the whole universe—labouring under the false notion that 
You had been the slayer of his brother (Hiranyaksa), and (further) bore ill-will to me, a 
devotee of Yours, he, my father, may (kindly) be absolved from that sin, which is so difficult 


to get rid of and so difficult to cross over, although (I am sure) he was purged (of it) the 
moment he was compassionately regarded with the outer corner of Your eye, O lover of 


the afflicted | (15—17) 
; ! gare 

fisaafa: fier ga: figs: ae asta fac Mesa Ye Set Aart Houta: 1221 

aq aa aw Weel: Weed: aati: | area: Ader Garay ale: 12<1 
ae aL ERIRSE TTT RAEN ae ae 

WySra Prat: | 1a ARASH WaAGA Al AAA Il | 

SISA aR URES (Kathopanisad II. iii. 14) . 
"When all the desires rooted in one's heart are got rid of, a mortal forthwith becomes immortal and attains oneness with 


Brahma (the Absolute) in this (very) life.” 








700 SRIMAD BHAGAVATA Dis. 10 


BERR RRR RE RRR REE EER Re HER BH BREA Ee AER RE HB HE HE ESTHER HE SESE BER Be EBT SER SEH Re He He BEM Be BeBe HEH Be BH, 
————E—E——_rE-eeeN( wo a a a ae ee f 


Gale 3 fara seams fesaisaady ete Ae Tae: 120) 
Wad YET Sle Asleaaqad: | art UG AHM ada sieaeyy 129 
He A Nawal fiq: qa ada: i aagerite clereata IT: 1221 
fot a wratas adhe salalefi: | weanaea AE He Hale wae: 1231 


The Lord said : Your father, O sinless one, was purified along with (as many as) twenty- 
one past generations* by the very fact that you, the sanctifier of your race, were born in his 
house, O pious soul ! (18) Wherever there are My devotees, perfectly tranquil, pious and 
extremely noble in character, viewing all with the same eye, (all) those tracts of land 
get hallowed, (the desecrated land of) Kikata (and other such territories including their 
- inhabitants) not excepted. (19) Those whose hankering has (totally) disappeared through 
devotion to Me, Oruler of the Daityas, persecute none among the multitudes of living beings, 
high and low, by any means (whatsoever). (20) (Even) persons following your way of life in 
this world will become My devotees. Indeed you will serve as a model for all My devotees. (21) 
(Now) perform you the obsequies with respect to your father (F iranyakasipu), though he has 
been purified in everyway by the touch of My Person, O beloved one. Having been blessed 
with a noble son (like you), he will attain to the higher worlds. (22) (Also) occupy the throne 
of your father (as the ruler of the Daityas) and, fixing your mind on Me, dear son, and 
(completely) devoted to Me, perform your duties as directed by the exponents of the 
Vedas.(23) 

AIMRg Sa 
serest det ash faqedcaroufen aaisse smareeafatant fei: 12x! 
Taga spl sal Ate sfeli er ate: afaate: oe daniels: 1241 
Narada continued : Prahrada too did what was due to his (deceased) father by way of 
funeral rites in the same way as the Lord had commanded him (to do), O king (Yudhisthira)! 
He was (then) crowned (as king) by the foremost of the Brahmanas. (24) Finding Sri Hari, 
who was disguised as a man-lion, wearing a serene look as a token of grace, Brahma, who 


was surrounded by gods and others, (first) extolled Him by means of sacred hymns and 
(then) submitted (as follows). (25) 


eae  WMat  yost fepat a fea: ural MlHearaoaisa: 1261 
asa wala Al A aeat WA Bist: | aaclas: SAMA ATAMEL | 29 | 
eae: TM eratacissie: | aan fantfadt qeilepan at AfaalseeAT 12C1 
Wie AUR Wad Malad: Wadler: | Adar Tq Parargqenta feared: 12¢ 1 


Brahma said : O god of gods, supreme Ruler of all, Protector of (all) created beings, my 
Father ! fortunately (for us) the wicked demon (HiranyakaSipu), the tormentor of the world, 
has been slain by You. (26) He is the same fellow who having secured a boon from me (to 